
Exploding The 
Creativity Myth

Related Titles
The Poetry Toolkit, Rhian Williams
Writing Your Self, John Killick and Myra Schneider

Exploding The 
Creativity Myth
The computational foundations 
of linguistic creativity
Tony Veale
LONDON • NEW DELHI • NEW YORK • SYDNEY

Bloomsbury Academic
An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
	
50 Bedford Square	
175 Fifth Avenue
	
London	
New York
	
WC1B 3DP	
NY 10010
	
UK	
USA
www.bloomsbury.com
First published 2012
© Tony Veale, 2012
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted 
 in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,  
recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without prior  
permission in writing from the publishers.
Tony Veale has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and  
Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as Author of this work.
No responsibility for loss caused to any individual or organization acting  
on or refraining from action as a result of the material in this publication  
can be accepted by Bloomsbury Academic or the author.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN: HB: 978-1-4411-6637-1
PB: 978-1-4411-8172-5
e-ISBN: 978-1-4411-5516-0
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Veale, Tony, 1967–
  Exploding the creativity myth : the computational foundations  
of linguistic creativity / Tony Veale.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4411-6637-1 (alk. paper) – ISBN 978-1-4411-8172-5 (pbk. : alk. paper) –  
ISBN 978-1-4411-5516-0 (ebook pdf : alk. paper) – ISBN 978-1-4411-8868-7  
(ebook epub : alk. paper) 1. Creativity (Linguistics) 2. Generative grammar.  
3. Grammar, Comparative and general–Coordinate constructions. I. Title.
P37.5.C74V43 2012
401’.9–dc23
2012005160
Typeset by Deanta Global Publishing Services, Chennai, India

For Hyesook

vi

Contents
Preface  ix
1	 Creation myths  1
2	 Enigma variations  15
3	 Shock and awe  37
4	 Round up the usual suspects  61
5	 Pimp my ride  87
6	 Six ridiculous things before breakfast  109
7	 Think like an investor  133
Notes  155
Bibliography  169
Index  179

viii

Preface
C
reativity touches almost every aspect of our daily lives. Linguistic creativity 
is especially pervasive, both in our communication with other people and 
in the constant stream of media to which we are continuously exposed. This 
pervasiveness has lead to creativity being studied in a multitude of forms and in 
a wide array of disciplines by scholars and practitioners alike. Thus, creativity has 
been studied not just by psychologists, neuroscientists, linguists and cognitive 
scientists, but by critics, historians and even management theorists, while 
creators themselves, whether writers, artists, musicians or entrepreneurs, 
frequently offer us their own field-tested insights into the creative process. But 
even in this all-embracing swirl of disciplines and viewpoints, the perspective 
we apply in this book – the algorithmic perspective of Computer Science – can 
stick out as something of a gatecrasher to the party.
This is a natural reaction, since we are far more likely to associate compu-
tation and algorithms with the rigid, pre-programmed behaviour of machines 
than with the adaptive, freewheeling behaviour of real human beings. Yet, as 
I show in this book, the computational perspective is very much suited to the 
study of creativity. For this to be so, we must simply assume it is possible 
to meaningfully generalize over specific instances of creativity to arrive at a 
schematic understanding of what happens when and in which order, and of 
what resources are used in which stages of the process. This is an assump-
tion that is made in almost every practical study of creativity; just think of 
all those books and self-help manuals that attempt to explain creativity with 
anecdotes, or that aim to improve your creative potential by generalizing over 
case-studies. But this is more or less what we mean when we talk of an algo-
rithmic process: a well-defined sequence of tasks and sub-tasks that allows 
us to achieve a complex goal in a somewhat orderly fashion. There may well 
be a great many algorithms that lead to creative results in different contexts, 
and we should not caricature the computational perspective by assuming that 
there is a single grand algorithm that reduces the whole of human creativity to 
a few simple functions and procedures. Rather, we may have to explore many 
specific forms of creativity before we can arrive at any substantial high-level 
understanding of the phenomenon. By focusing on novel variation at the level 
of words and phrases, this book represents just one expedition of the many 

Preface
x
that will be needed to fully explore linguistic creativity in algorithmic terms. 
I hope readers will find the journey to be both rewarding and fun.
Because creativity is so often used to produce surprising results, there is 
a natural tendency to expect the workings of creativity to be equally surpris-
ing and perhaps even mysterious. But we must dispel the myths if we are to 
see creativity with a clear eye. The real surprise, if we can call it a surprise, is 
that the algorithmic mechanisms of creativity all follow from a common-sense 
understanding of how best to maximize the utility of our frequently incom-
plete knowledge of a topic or domain. This knowledge, in turn, is surprising 
only in its lack of mystery: as we’ll see in this book, linguistic creativity does 
not rely on privileged sources of knowledge that must be acquired through 
intense scholarship, but on the kind of mundane, everyday knowledge – of 
clichés, stereotypes and conventions – that we all possess in abundance and 
which we all take for granted. We use this familiar knowledge to create famil-
iar surprises for an audience, to concoct novel uses of language that depart 
from the familiar yet which are understandable only in relation to the familiar. 
We use linguistic creativity to re-invent and re-imagine the familiar, so that 
everything old can be made new again.
This constant churn of re-invention in language is nowhere more apparent 
than on the World Wide Web (WWW). With the aid of a web-browser, we can 
explore the old and the new and every shade of variation in between. We all 
rely on intuitions about what is familiar and what is novel to guide us in our 
explorations of the world, but when our intuitions concern language, a good 
linguist will seek empirical evidence for these intuitions in a corpus. A corpus 
is a representative (and usually quite large) body of text from which we can 
derive quantifiable observations about the likelihood and frequency of differ-
ent kinds of linguistic phenomena. As a vast and continuously growing body of 
text and other media, the web certainly meets some of the requirements of a 
corpus, though it is far from ideal. Nonetheless, in an exploration such as ours, 
the positives do out-weigh the negatives, not least because readers can easily 
test the observations in this book for themselves, by firing up their favourite 
search-engine and then following their own noses on the web.
However, as I show in this book, it is not just humans that can learn about 
language by browsing the web. Search engines like Google, Yahoo and Bing 
are designed for human users, but they can also be used by computers to 
acquire targeted texts for their own purposes, on a much larger scale and in a 
much shorter time frame. We’ll see here how computers can acquire from the 
web the familiar knowledge of language and the world that we humans take 
for granted, so that we in turn can gain a broader appreciation of the founda-
tional role of the familiar in the creative.
Novelty only ever makes sense in relation to the familiar, and as will become 
clear in the chapters to follow, many familiar influences have inevitably left 

Preface
xi
their mark on the substance of this book. In particular, the algorithmic view 
of creativity presented here has been shaped and enriched by many conver-
sations and debates with colleagues and friends in the field, such as Simon 
Colton, Kurt Feyaerts, Geert Brône, Charles Forceville, Patrick Hanks, Bipin 
Indurkhya, Marc and Tim DeMey, Bob French, John Barnden, Mark Keane, 
Diarmuid O’Donoghue, Pablo Gervás, Amílcar Cardoso, Francisco Pereira, 
Geraint Wiggins, Graeme Ritchie, Tim Fernando, Josef van Genabith and my 
students Guofu Li and Yanfen Hao. My editor at Bloomsbury, Gurdeep Mattu, 
has also been a constant source of encouragement and sound advice. I am 
indebted to them all for their insightful comments and suggestions, which 
have helped to make the book much clearer in purpose and sharper in execu-
tion than it would otherwise have been. Finally, I am grateful to the readers of 
this book for joining me on this computationally-minded exploration of creative 
language; I hope that in the process you will gain a new appreciation for the 
familiar and often disdained elements of language – from clichés to stereo­
types to dead metaphors – and see in these habitual forms the means to 
re-invent the familiar for yourself.
October 2011
KAIST, Daejeon, Korea

xii

1
Creation myths
Separating poetic fiction 
from prosaic fact
Creativity is a topic that delights in mystery and which invites 
myth-making at every turn. Our popular conception of creativity 
is not shaped by any formal definition, but by hand-me-down 
metaphors and historical anecdotes. It’s easy to see why: 
creativity exists in the interstices between our definitions, 
where it can circumvent rules and overcome constraints. As 
soon as we think we’ve hemmed it in with a tight, rule-based 
definition, creativity is already hard at work on an escape plan. 
Our myths and metaphors may be the only constructs that are 
stretchy enough to keep pace with this restless, genre-bending 
phenomenon. Yet we must handle these appealing ‘creation’ 
myths with caution, for their purpose is not so much the 
illumination of creativity as the enhancement of our appreciation 
of it, by emphasizing effect over cause, perception over process 
and mystery over method. We thus begin our exploration of 
linguistic creativity by roasting a few popular chestnuts, to find 
some facts behind the convenient fiction.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
2
Elementary myths
Like the pointy-hatted wizards of children’s storybooks, hidden from the world 
in high towers, modern-day stage magicians have every reason to jealously 
guard the secrets of their trade. Naturally they possess a strong commercial 
motive for this secrecy, for a loose-lipped magician can easily put himself, 
and his colleagues, out of a job. Yet the best magicians have a more profound 
reason to maintain their silence: magic evokes wonder through illusion, and 
illusion requires an equal measure of curiosity and ignorance if it is to suc-
ceed. All of a magician’s virtuosity and training are for naught if their trickery 
fails to generate wonder.1 Unless one has a professional interest in the craft, 
there is no bargain to be had in trading an outsider’s wonder for an insider’s 
knowledge.
Creative thinking can generate as much wonder and awe in an audience 
as a magician’s best illusions. It too can be diminished by explanations that 
emphasize what seems obvious and simple after the fact. In trivializing the 
creative process, such post-hoc explanations can make soft-focus myths seem 
far more preferable to hard facts, as even Sherlock Holmes learns to his cost 
in the tale of The Red-Headed League.2 In this short story by Arthur Conan 
Doyle, the great detective is engaged by Mr Jabez Wilson to investigate the 
titular league. On first meeting, Holmes performs his usual cold-reading of 
his new client, to note that ‘Beyond the obvious facts that he has at some 
time done manual labour, that he takes snuff, that he is a Freemason, that 
he has been in China, and that he has done a considerable amount of writing 
lately, I can deduce nothing else’. This is false modesty, naturally, for Wilson 
is suitably amazed (Watson, for his part, knows better by now). But Holmes 
then makes the mistake of explaining his conclusions, noting for instance that 
the tattoo of a pink-scaled fish on Wilson’s wrist is very much in the Chinese 
fashion. ‘Well, I never!’, replies Wilson,3 ‘I thought at first that you had done 
something clever, but I see now that there was nothing in it, after all’. Holmes 
ruefully sums up this lesson with the motto ‘Omne ignotum pro magnifico’, 
remarking to Watson that ‘I make a mistake in explaining . . . and my poor 
­little reputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if I am so candid’. Why seek 
to provide a factual explanation of the creative act, when what an audience 
really wants is wonder and illusion?4
Jabez Wilson is hardly qualified to judge the merits of Holmes’ tech-
nique, and Holmes is being kind when he later describes his client as ‘not 
­over-bright’.5 Yet Wilson’s response echoes popular sentiments about our 
appreciation of creative insights. Our most enduring myths suggest that truly 
creative thinkers should distinguish themselves as very different and unusual 
kinds of people, with very different ways of thinking about the world. But as 

Creation myths
3
demonstrated in the work of creativity theorists such as Margaret Boden6 and 
Keith Sawyer,7 scholars must look past the myths and metaphors to see the 
mechanisms that lie behind the popular rationalizations. Sawyer, for instance, 
identifies a wide range of popular misconceptions that only serve to keep 
creativity at arm’s length, from the mystifying belief that creativity emerges 
from the unconscious to the romantic notion that children are inherently more 
creative than adults. Our metaphors of creativity are even more numerous 
and deeply entrenched in our everyday language. To list just the most popular 
ones, we like to think of creative people as rule-breakers, groundbreakers, 
pathfinders, trailblazers and revolutionaries, as child-like and eccentric as they 
are gifted. These people do not employ linear thought processes, but exploit 
quick-witted mental agility to pursue a non-linear path to a solution. They do 
not ploddingly converge on a solution by following rules, but divergently juggle 
a host of possibilities at once. Last, and definitely least, these people grasp 
the big picture, see the woods for the trees, think outside the box and colour 
outside the lines. Some metaphors have more substance than others, but 
all are perhaps more useful than the historical anecdotes that have assumed 
mythic status in the study of creativity. In spite of the most appealing legends, 
one does not need to be an opium fiend, an absent-minded streaker, an infan-
tile vulgarian or an ear-lopping manic-depressive to be creative; neither does 
one need to be anti-social, unconventional, a high-functioning autistic or an 
alcoholic. Yet these are the kind of hooks on which – aided by the narrative 
demands of TV dramas and Hollywood biopics – we so often hang our appre-
ciation of the creative individual.
Of course, if Holmes does suffer reputational damage for a willingness 
to reveal his methods, he is himself partly to blame, for his explanations are 
not as revealing as he likes to think. Wilson is right to conclude that there is 
no real magic in how Holmes arrives at his impressive conclusions, but he is 
wrong to claim that there is ‘nothing in it’, just as he is wrong to suggest that 
it isn’t clever. While Holmes’ inferences are far from miraculous, they certainly 
deserve to be called ‘clever’. As the detective is always at pains to point out – 
especially to the long-suffering Dr Watson – his is a technique that anyone 
can emulate, with the proper dedication and attention to detail. Yet for all that, 
Holmes offers a most unhelpful account of his reasoning. Despite what he 
tells Wilson, he does not simply pay attention to the details of a scene to truly 
see where others merely look. It is more accurate to say that he sifts the mass 
of available sense data to determine the most telling details from which the 
most informative inferences can be drawn. What his explanation fails to make 
clear is how he determines which details are salient and which are not. When 
Holmes lists the few specific details that lead him to his conclusions about his 
new client, he makes it seem that the only details are the salient details, and 
so it seems that every detail is a salient detail. He does not list, or even hint 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
4
at, the preponderance of other details from which no useful inference could 
be drawn. It only seems ‘there is nothing in it, after all’ because Holmes fails 
to communicate the most demanding part of the trick.
If Holmes is seen as a producer of creative inferences, and Wilson and 
Watson are seen as admiring consumers, then Holmes does a very poor job 
indeed of explaining the producer’s perspective, for this is very different to 
that of the end consumer. A producer starts from the beginning – a blank 
page, an empty canvas or an unresolved situation – and must reach an as-yet 
unseen end through a process of creative sense-making. A consumer has the 
luxury of starting from this now-achieved end, while also possessing a clear 
view of the beginning. So what seems like a straight line to a naïve consumer 
like Jabez Wilson can seem more like an arboreal tangle of branch-points, 
dead-ends, retreats and re-starts to a producer. Were the consumer to truly 
put himself in the position of the producer, and set aside the benefit of hind-
sight, a very different view would present itself. As Watson tells us midway 
through The Red-Headed League, ‘I had heard what he [Holmes] had heard, 
I had seen what he had seen, and yet from his words it was evident that 
he saw clearly not only what had happened and what was about to happen, 
while to me the whole business was still confused and grotesque’. The real 
story of creativity then, the story that the enduring myths and metaphors so 
conveniently overlook, is the story of how creative individuals navigate this 
frustrating thicket of potentially overwhelming choices. It is this story that will 
chiefly exercise us here in this book.
Despite his inability to replicate Holmes’ results, Watson offers more insight 
into the detective’s methods than Holmes himself can provide. Holmes, he 
tells us, makes such great leaps of deduction by chaining small-scale insights 
into a compelling large-scale interpretation: ‘It is so long a chain, and yet every 
link rings true’,8 Watson notes admiringly. Holmes is so practiced at build-
ing these impressively long chains of deductions that ‘his brilliant reasoning 
power would rise to the level of intuition, until those who were unacquainted 
with his methods would look askance at him as on a man whose knowledge 
was not that of other mortals’. This is an intriguing description, since in the 
popular imagination the notions of intuition and reason are ­generally defined 
in sharp opposition to one another. Intuition is driven by feelings, hunches 
and gut instincts and is for the most part an ineffable phenomenon. When we 
invoke intuition as a rationale for anything, we wield it as a black box whose 
inner workings are largely beyond our understanding or our scrutiny. Reason, 
in contrast, is driven by rules, laws and logical models of cause and effect, and 
reasoned arguments stand or fall on our ability to openly scrutinize their inter-
nal consistency. Artists and poets rely on intuition to communicate profound 
feelings and to explore an emotional truth that lies beyond the realm of objec-
tive facts. Scientists and mathematicians can also exploit intuition, but only as 

Creation myths
5
a means of speculation; the results of intuition cannot stand on their own in 
science, but must be buttressed with logical proofs or empirical demonstra-
tions. In spite of such deep differences, the good doctor offers a means of rec-
onciling these two competing modes of thought. Holmes is so practiced and 
assured at using logical reasoning to build complex chains of cause and effect 
precisely because the process has become internalized and automatized, so 
that it can operate without the need for constant, conscious control.
If we cast intuition in the central role in our account of creativity, our account 
becomes little more than a vague hunch about how other vague hunches 
might achieve creative ends. Yet if we cast logic in this role, we lose sight of 
what makes creativity so special, or at any rate feel so special. Sensations 
and emotions undoubtedly have as much a part to play in our understanding 
of creativity as in our appreciation of creativity. By reconciling these comple-
mentary forms of thought – opaque hunches and transparent deductions – we 
can allow that intuition plays a significant role in the creative process without 
conceding the ability to explicate this process in logical terms. Watson’s belief 
that ‘brilliant reasoning power’ can be based on chain-building logical deduc-
tion yet still – with sufficient skill and automatization – ‘rise to the level of intui-
tion’ is thus an appealing means of shifting the focus from intuition to reason, 
while casting aside all of the myth-making baggage that intuition brings with 
it. Moreover, Dr Watson’s diagnosis also allows for the possibility of creative 
computers in the not-too-distant future. We’ll see hints of what those comput-
ers might look like throughout this book.
Old chestnuts and new speak
Whether it is used to solve a crime or simply to impress Watson, Holmes uses 
his logical technique for essentially creative ends. By linking small but tell-
ing details into a coherent big-picture perspective, Holmes creates sense and 
imposes meaning where previously there was confusion and misunderstand-
ing. His reputation for intellectual wizardry is built on the twin pillars of disci-
pline and automatization: Holmes applies his methods rigorously in a largely 
automatic manner that is not slowed or interrupted by the dictates of self-
conscious, rule-following thought. In the words of contemporary psychologist 
Mihály Csíkszentmihályi,9 Holmes achieves a state of flow, immersing himself 
in a challenge without self-conscious concern for how it is to be resolved.
Automatization can lend our actions the assuredness and speed of second 
nature, yet it does not always lead to creative ends. In the realm of language, 
for instance, it is possible to write fluently and prolifically while operating 
entirely on automatic pilot, to produce texts that appear to promise much 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
6
more than they deliver. In a state of flow, a challenging task can be accom-
plished with an almost joyful feeling of effortlessness, yet a creative result 
must nonetheless bear the fruits, if not the signs, of effort. However one 
measures ‘effort’ in creative writing, whether real or simply perceived, the 
reader expects to see ample evidence of the writer’s conscious engagement 
with the text. Automatization can lend us speed and even fluidity, but it must 
serve the larger goal of successful communication if it is to produce creative 
results in language.
Automatic language is often unthinking language, and a sign that words 
have been chosen more for how well they influence our view of the writer 
than for how they influence our appreciation of the writer’s meaning. This 
question of whether lazy language promotes lazy thinking, and vice versa, is 
one that greatly exercised the writer and political thinker George Orwell. In a 
famously polemical essay from 1946 titled Politics and The English Language,10 
Orwell notes that ‘[language] becomes ugly and inaccurate because our 
thoughts are foolish, but the slovenliness of our language makes it easier for 
us to have foolish thoughts’. English, for Orwell, was a language in decline, 
­especially in political circles, but it was a decline that Orwell believed could be 
halted and even reversed. His well-meaning and entertaining essay presents 
a ­prescription – and a few proscriptions – for achieving this reversal, but not 
without burnishing a few ill-founded myths in the process. Orwell’s essay is 
at its best when it shows us how to write, and at its worst when it tells us 
how not to write. He rails against the use of verbal padding and pretentious 
synonyms for commonplace words, and waves a banner for little England with 
his plea that we disdain the false grandeur of foreign imports in favour of the 
‘homely’ Anglo-Saxon word-stock. Orwell’s distaste for fashionable metaphors 
is even more caustic, reflecting his suspicion that metaphors like ‘toe the line’ 
and ‘ring the changes’ are popular precisely because they are fashionable, and 
not because they have proven themselves as effective carriers of meaning. 
Canute-like, Orwell hopes to rid the English language of the baleful tides of 
fashion, as though he believed language could be frozen in a golden age, and 
not allowed to evolve to suit the needs and tastes of its users.
What seems to irk Orwell most about these currents of linguistic fashion is 
that they rob English of its Englishness. In promoting the use of plain, unshowy 
Anglo-Saxon language that carries its meaning clearly, Orwell’s protectionist 
instincts extend even to language that is ostensibly creative, albeit at a minor 
level. He notes that finding the right word in the right context can be difficult, 
as any writer can attest, and suggests that lazy writers who are unequal to the 
task are sometimes more inclined to invent foreign-sounding new words – like 
‘de-regionalize, impermissible, extramarital, non-fragmentary’ – than to ‘think 
up the English words that will cover one’s meaning’. Yet it would be wrong 
to suggest that Orwell has set his face against linguistic creativity. It is more 

Creation myths
7
accurate to say that Orwell has disdain for showy language that sacrifices clar-
ity to fashion, but that he sees no inherent tension between plain language 
and creative language. Indeed, for Orwell, creative language is plain language 
that is made to order, more like a fresh loaf of bread or a homemade stew than 
a pretentious ready-made meal that comes in a can. In contrast, uncreative 
language is larded with stale metaphors that have lost not just their freshness, 
but also their power to evoke vivid imagery in the mind of the reader. Orwell’s 
claims regarding metaphor are supported by some of the most appealing and 
memorable examples in the essay, where he shows how potent images can 
be wrung from the apt juxtaposition of the even most mundane objects. Yet 
it is in his discussion of metaphor that the essential incoherence of his argu-
ments about language becomes most apparent.
Orwell divides metaphors into three distinct-seeming categories – living, 
dying and dead – though the boundaries between these categories are not 
as sharp as he seems to believe. A living metaphor is a bespoke construction 
that is freshly minted by a speaker for a particular communicative purpose. 
A dead metaphor, in contrast, is a fossilized pairing of words and meanings 
that has become accepted as part of the normal fabric of a language. Such 
metaphors have earned their own place in the dictionary, and speakers may 
not even be aware of their frequent uses of dead metaphors. If the ‘leg’ of a 
table, the ‘neck’ of a bottle and the ‘body’ of a wine are all dead metaphors, 
then everyday language can be seen as a graveyard for the linguistic creativity 
of previous generations of writers. As one might expect, Orwell encourages 
the creation of fresh, bespoke metaphors wherever possible and is even toler-
ant of dead metaphors, though given their pervasiveness in language he could 
hardly do otherwise. It is to the immense rump of stale and dying metaphors 
that lie between these two extremes, neither fresh nor entirely dead, that 
Orwell most directs his ire.
Politics and the English Language sparkles with metaphors and similes 
that are fresh and vivid, such as when Orwell frets that ‘prose consists less 
and less of words chosen for the sake of their meaning, and more and more 
of phrases tacked together like the sections of a prefabricated henhouse’. 
The image of a ‘prefabricated henhouse’ seems wonderfully old-world to a 
modern reader, and certainly quainter than it would have seemed in 1946. 
If writing today, Orwell might instead use the metaphor of a superstore flat-
pack for some self-assembly coffee table, and rail against the IKEAification of 
language. But it takes effort to concoct your own metaphors, just as it takes 
effort to build your own coffee tables or, more realistically, to bake your own 
bread. Only the most zealous amongst us would have the time and energy 
to make everything ourselves, even in language, and we all rely on the occa-
sional re-use of other people’s metaphors. But these re-used metaphors are 
already in the process of becoming stale, and like a fish plucked from the 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
8
sea or a flower picked from the garden are already dying. Of course, the area 
marked out by metaphors that are fresh and alive on one hand, and dead and 
buried on the other, is vast: Orwell describes it as ‘a huge dump of worn-out 
metaphors which have lost all evocative power and are merely used because 
they save people the trouble of inventing phrases for themselves’. By the time 
a new metaphor becomes fashionable, it has already been allocated a place in 
Orwell’s junkyard of old clunkers.
Choosing an apt metaphor is not like buying fruits and vegetables in the 
grocery store, and we can’t simply prod and squeeze a metaphor to test for 
over-ripeness, as we would a melon. If you don’t grow it yourself, how can 
you be sure of its freshness? Orwell has the answer: ‘Never use a meta-
phor, simile, or other figure of speech which you are used to seeing in print’. 
The printed media contain a wealth of commonly occurring dead metaphors, 
which we can scarcely avoid re-using, so Orwell is really advising against the 
re-use of metaphors that are still living but which are over-used and stale. But 
how are living metaphors ever to become dead metaphors if they are not first 
worked to death? Metaphors rarely suffer a quick death, but age slowly in a 
process of familiarization and conventionalization that the psychologists Dedre 
Gentner and Brian Bowdle11 have memorably named the career of metaphor. 
As we’ll see later, metaphors take on new characteristics as they age, and the 
way they are processed in the brain most likely changes too, as they become 
more familiar.
Languages grow and evolve by acquiring new words and new word-
senses, and so the English we speak today is very different from the Eng-
lish that was spoken in Shakespeare’s time. Rather like a garden whose soil 
is continuously nourished by the re-absorption of dead plants, language is 
immeasurably enriched by the constant absorption of newly conventionalized 
senses from once-fresh metaphors. When linguists and lexicographers and 
even casual dictionary users employ ‘sense’ to refer to the established, enu-
merable meanings of a word, they are using a dead metaphor that shares a 
common lineage with ‘common sense’ and our ‘sense’ of touch, sight, smell 
and so on. For the purposes of this book and others like it, we can all be glad 
that this once-living metaphor had the decency to die and leave its body to lin-
guistic science. Though Orwell’s essay is aimed at all readers who care about 
English, he seems content to assume that the job of working a metaphor to 
death is best left to others; we can benefit from the added richness after the 
metaphor has died, but on no account should we dirty our hands with this 
unseemly job ourselves.
Orwell believed that English was a sick language that needed to be made 
healthy again, but his essay conflates the symptoms of this disease with 
its cause. Yes, lazy writers over-use fashionable metaphors, reach for ready-
made canned phrases rather than taking the time to concoct their own, and 

Creation myths
9
choose words for how they make themselves sound rather than how well 
they communicate their meanings. But the converse is not also true: re-use 
is not always lazy or bad, and if done properly it can even be creative. Nei-
ther is a desire to save time and mental energy a bad thing, either for the 
writer or the reader. Creative writers often harness constructive ambiguity 
for their own ends, to create texts that reward repeat visitors and which yield 
something new with each successive reading. The most effective means of 
communicating a complex idea may involve the re-purposing of familiar meta-
phors and tired figures of speech – as when Christopher Hitchens said of the 
late reverend Jerry Falwell: ‘If you gave Falwell an enema, he’d be buried in a 
matchbox’12 – rather than the novel construction of entirely new metaphors 
and conceits. Lazy writers use clichés as though they were something to be 
proud of, yet clichés are not in themselves shameful, and an appropriate cliché 
can effectively frame the received wisdom that a creative writer wishes to 
subsequently undermine or subvert.
Orwell is scathing about over-familiar language because he also conflates 
semantic meaning with pragmatic intent. Writers use familiar phrases to 
evoke familiar meanings, yet these meanings can still be stretched to achieve 
creative ends. A recent legal case argued before the U.S. Supreme court dem-
onstrates this point nicely, by showing that conventional metaphors can have 
very unconventional ramifications. In a case resolved in March 2011,13 AT&T 
had argued that since corporations are viewed as legal persons under US law, 
AT&T is also entitled to the personal privacy protections that the law extends 
to real persons. The nub of AT&T’s argument is a linguistic one: ‘personal’ is 
the adjectival form of ‘person’, hence AT&T is as entitled to ‘personal’ rights – 
as entrenched in familiar phrases like ‘personal privacy’ – as it is to ‘person’ 
rights (AT&T was seeking protection against ‘disclosure of law enforcement 
information on the grounds that it would constitute an unwarranted invasion 
of personal privacy’). The court unanimously rejected this argument, and it did 
so on linguistic grounds. In a unanimous decision that recognizes the dangers 
of making blanket statements about language, Chief Justice Roberts wrote: 
‘We disagree. Adjectives typically reflect the meaning of corresponding nouns, 
but not always. Sometimes they acquire distinct meanings of their own’.14 In 
rebutting AT&T’s person/personal link with the counter-examples corn/corny, 
crank/cranky and crab/crabbed, the court was adopting a subtly un-Orwellian 
stance: re-use enriches a language by turning the novel and creative into the 
familiar and conventional, so one cannot presume the existence of a ‘gram-
matical imperative’ between words that are related in form yet which are free 
to grow along their own creative trajectories. As if to remind the plaintiffs that 
familiar language should not always be taken at face value, Justice Roberts 
concludes the court’s decision with an ironic clip across the ear: ‘We trust 
AT&T will not take it personally’.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
10
Goodthinkful languagecrimes
The themes of Orwell’s essay echo throughout each of the chapters of this 
book, sometimes in resonance with Orwell’s views, but more often in jarring 
dissonance. For instance, the next chapter, Enigma Variations, explores the 
creative benefits of engaging directly with clichés and other over-familiar fig-
ures of speech. These much-derided linguistic forms are just another resource 
in the writer’s arsenal, one that the thoughtful writer should not be afraid to 
use merely because they are so often abused by others. It is because we 
expect so little from clichés, and hold their conventionalized insights in such 
low regard, that the cliché and the worn-out figure of speech are the ideal 
vehicles for creative variation. For the myth that clichés embody the antithesis 
of creative thinking is itself a cliché, one that leads Orwell to a truly sense-
defying diagnosis when he argues for a closed-mind approach to good writing: 
you can ‘shirk’ the responsibility to write well, he says, ‘by simply throwing 
your mind open and letting the ready-made phrases come crowding in’. In 
Chapter 3, Shock and Awe, we argue that a creative writer is better served by 
an open-minded approach to the expressive possibilities of language, and so 
the more phrases that crowd in, the better. Clichés may have expected mean-
ings, but good writers can choose to use them in ways that creatively exploit 
the expectations of the audience. In fact, this power of selectivity is the chief 
advantage that the creative producer wields over the consumer of the creative 
act, and in Chapter 3 we show how a producer can squeeze maximal surprise 
value from this simple act of selection.
In language, that which is timeworn is time-tested. A great deal of what 
we know (or think we know) about the world is acquired through language, so 
while individuals can afford to be snooty about timeworn figures of speech, 
communities cannot. Chapter 4, Round Up The Usual Suspects, explores the 
value of proverbial similes and other familiar figures of speech as inter-genera-
tional repositories of cultural knowledge. Far from being the dumping ground 
of language, as Orwell would have it, these forms collectively preserve and 
perpetuate a great deal of conventional wisdom that can be exploited in fresh 
new metaphors. Chapter 4 considers the wealth of stereotypical knowledge 
that can be harvested from similes on the World Wide Web, and shows how 
this knowledge can be put to work, on a computer no less, in producing new 
metaphors.
Orwell appears deeply suspicious about the ability (and inclination) of 
speakers to package ideas into neat, reusable chunks of words and meanings. 
He worries that a flood of ready-made phrases into our unguarded minds ‘will 
construct your sentences for you – even think your thoughts for you’, but as 
argued above, this presumes that writers exercise no power of selection over 

Creation myths
11
the diversity of options at their disposal. Were we to apply these suspicions 
to all levels of language, our speech would be denuded of all but the sim-
plest words, and Orwell’s huge dump would overflow not just with idioms, 
but with multi-morpheme words, compound nouns, phrasal verbs and all the 
other reusable chunks of language we take for granted. Chapter 5, Pimp My 
Ride, explores the means by which creative writers introduce new chunks 
into a language. All linguistic creativity uses language, but the most enduring 
creativity adds to language too.
Dictionaries, style manuals and old-fashioned grammarians strive to be 
definitive about language, but the only definitive statement that can be made 
about creative language is that one cannot be definitive, at least in any non-
trivial and non-circular way. As George Bernard Shaw put it, ‘the only golden 
rule is that there is no golden rule’.15 Each of Orwell’s pronouncements about 
good writing is thus easily falsified by a simple consideration: How might a 
creative writer subvert this injunction in meaningful ways? Take, for instance, 
Orwell’s principled stance against disingenuous language. He argues that ‘The 
great enemy of clear language is insincerity. When there is a gap between 
one’s real and one’s declared aims, one turns as it were instinctively to long 
words and exhausted idioms, like a cuttlefish spurting out ink’. Orwell does not 
explicitly consider creative language here, but he does it no favours by using 
propagandist language (‘the great enemy’) to denounce one of the most play-
ful aspects of creative interaction. Creative speakers often use superficially 
insincere forms to more effectively communicate a meaning that is deeply 
felt and sincerely held. After all, most metaphors are demonstrably false in a 
literal sense, and exploit a gap between one’s apparent and one’s real mean-
ing, while irony also requires a speaker to create a discernible gap between 
a statement’s real and declared aim. In both cases, however, the sincerity 
gap is carefully calibrated so as to be recognizable to a discerning listener. 
In the words of researcher Sam Glucksberg,16 the insincerity here is real, but 
it is a ‘pragmatic insincerity’ that aids rather than hinders communication. 
Chapter 6, Six Ridiculous Things Before Breakfast, explores the ways in which 
creative writers exploit insincerity and absurdity to get their meanings across 
in the sharpest ways possible.
A more productive way to view Orwell’s ‘huge dump of worn-out meta-
phors’ is to see it instead as a vast flea market of second-hand language. 
Most things for sale in a flea market are so old and tatty that we could never 
give them as gifts, and this informs Orwell’s intuition that the use of second-
hand language is fundamentally disrespectful to an audience. Yet there are 
real bargains to be had in such markets, for shrewd buyers who are choosy 
about what they buy and inventive in how they subsequently use it. In our 
final chapter, Think Like an Investor, we examine the true second-hand value 
of all those timeworn and ready-made phrases. Building on Robert Sternberg 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
12
and Todd Lubart’s investment theory of creativity,17 we explore the range of 
creative options that exist for writers who invest in second-hand language, 
from value investors to who re-invest in old-fashioned values to short-sellers 
who profit from the inadequacies of conventional wisdom. eBay exploited the 
World Wide Web to become the global flea market of choice, and we conclude 
Chapter 7 by showing how computers can likewise be used to wring maximal 
creative value from the language of the Web.
I want to believe
Arthur Conan Doyle, creator of the world’s greatest detective, and Harry 
Houdini,18 the greatest magician of the golden age, were contemporaries and 
one-time friends. Each in his own way was caught up in the wave of enthu-
siasm for all things mystical and spiritualistic that swept through the early 
decades of the twentieth century. Each had a similar deeply-felt reason for 
wanting to believe that the spirits of the dead could be summoned to walk and 
talk among the living: Conan Doyle had lost his son Kingsley during the Great 
War, while Houdini was adrift after the loss of his mother. Yet Conan Doyle, 
whose creation demonstrated the powers of reason and deduction to dispel 
any mystery and see through any fraud, was an avid and unshakeable believer 
in spiritualism and spiritualists, while Houdini, the show-man who specialized 
in miraculous, death-defying escapes, was equally unshaken in his belief that 
spiritualists were purveyors of trickery and illusion.
In fact, Conan Doyle was convinced that Houdini was himself a spiritualistic 
medium, who used supernatural powers to perform his feats of stage magic. 
‘Why go around the world seeking a demonstration of the occult when you 
are giving one all the time?’,19 he wrote in one of his many letters to Houdini. 
If the mediums that Conan Doyle had recommended had failed to impress 
Houdini, then it was because the magician was sub-consciously causing 
them to fail with his own superior powers. Doyle believed that Houdini used a 
‘dematerializing and reconstructing force’ to escape from his various shackles, 
­hand-cuffs, milk-cans and water tanks, which allowed him to pass through ‘the 
molecules of that solid object toward which it is directed’.20 How could the 
creator of Sherlock Holmes believe such nonsense? Perhaps he equated his 
own mental acuity with that of Holmes, so that his failure to see through the 
trickery of mediums was merely proof that there was no logical ­explanation, 
and that supernatural deeds were indeed afoot? Conan Doyle appealed to 
reason, not to belief, when he wrote to Houdini that ‘my reason tells me that 
you have this wonderful power, for there is no alternative’.21 Yet this was the 
same reason that allowed him to believe not just in fairies, but in photographic 

Creation myths
13
evidence for fairies, of a kind that would not convince Jabez Wilson, never 
mind Sherlock Holmes.
George Orwell closed his mind to the most productive techniques of crea-
tive language, for fear that their abuse would allow a ‘catalogue of swindles and 
perversions’ to be perpetrated upon the unsuspecting reader. In his dystopian 
novel Nineteen Eighty Four,22 Orwell shows how the techniques of linguistic 
creativity can be used to cover up the foulest persecutions. For instance, the 
creatively named ‘Miniluv’, or ‘Ministry of Love’, instills love of the state appa-
ratus through torture, while ‘Minipax’, or ‘Ministry of Peace’, preserves public 
order by maintaining a state of perpetual war. Yet the insincere inventiveness 
that Orwell condemns in Nineteen Eighty Four provides what are perhaps the 
most creative and enjoyable parts of a justly celebrated novel. Arthur Conan 
Doyle, in contrast, opened his mind to the most far-fetched interpretations 
of creative trickery, and became prey in turn to the swindles and perversions 
of unscrupulous mediums. Orwell and Conan Doyle thus represent extreme 
points in the understanding of creativity: The former was over-cautious and 
given to proscription, the latter was over-trusting and given to mystification. In 
many ways, Harry Houdini23 offers a better touchstone for linguistic creativity 
than either one of these professional writers.
Though Houdini concealed his methods as diligently as any professional 
magician, he made no secret of the fact that he was a skilled performer of 
clever illusions, and not a true magician in the occult sense. He saw his trade 
as requiring a mix of ‘mechanical perfection’24 and theatrical ‘self-exploitation’. 
The latter is the theatrical equivalent of Glucksberg’s ‘pragmatic insincerity’, 
in which magicians use the trappings of magic to inspire wonder in an audi-
ence, but calibrate their performance so that the end result is appreciated as 
an ingenious trick rather than a supernatural feat. We know we’ve been hood-
winked, as we are supposed to know, and so we ask ‘how did he do it?’ rather 
than ‘why can he do it?’. While Houdini’s tricks relied on his remarkable ath-
letic ability, combined with an expert knowledge of the locksmith’s trade, his 
most astounded admirers still wanted to believe in more. His wife Bess knew 
better, noting ‘it was Houdini himself that was the secret’.25 Conan Doyle and 
his contemporaries believed in the supernatural – even in the face of protes-
tations from informed practitioners – because they wanted to believe, and 
perhaps even needed to believe, and not because logical reason dictated that 
they believe. Yet in the end, whether on stage or in language, creativity relies 
on a mix of very human qualities that are not so mysterious after all: playful-
ness, risk-taking, discipline, deft unselfconscious execution, and above all, a 
willingness to exploit and leverage the expectations of an audience. These are 
the themes that we pursue in the rest of this book, as we attempt, Houdini-
like, to wriggle free from the myths and misconceptions that constrain our 
understanding of linguistic creativity.

14

2
Enigma variations
Why it pays for words 
to occasionally take leave 
of their senses
An inventive turn of phrase can lend colour and intensity to 
the monochrome conventionality of everyday language. These 
occasional flashes of linguistic Technicolor appeal not just to the 
ear but to the eye – the mind’s eye, that is – by placing words 
in surprising combinations and novel contexts to convey more 
resonant images than conventional language alone can muster. 
Yet, as we’ll see in this chapter, a mastery of creative sense-
making requires, first and foremost, a mastery of everyday 
language, with all its conventions and hackneyed turns of 
phrase. We thus begin our exploration of creative language 
by wholeheartedly embracing the value of novel variation on 
a familiar theme. Even in the most creative language, there is 
no place like home.
Oh, we’re off to see the Wizard
The creators of Technicolor could not have asked for a better showcase for 
their invention than 1939s The Wizard of Oz. This film, a cinematic treatment 
of L. Frank Baum’s classic children’s novel,1 demonstrated the wonders of the 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
16
new technology by integrating it side-by-side with the monochromatic world it 
was created to supplant. While Technicolor was used to depict the most fantas-
tical and dream-like elements of the story, plain old black-and-white was used 
for the drab world of rural Kansas, where Dorothy Gale, the heroine, begins 
her exciting journey. But the story really takes off when Dorothy is knocked 
unconscious and dreamily awakens in Oz, where Technicolor brings the world 
of munchkins and witches and flying monkeys to vivid, colour-saturated life. 
Everything in Oz seems new and fresh and even a little dangerous. Yet, at the 
same time, it all seems strangely familiar. When Dorothy finally awakes from 
her Technicolor dream to find herself back in sepia-toned Kansas, she groggily 
casts an eye over the familiar faces of her friends and exclaims ‘you, and you, 
and you, and you were there’. The audience happily concludes that Dorothy’s 
creative adventures were just a flight of fancy, but one nonetheless grounded 
in a world of very familiar ideas and experiences.
The cinematic creativity of The Wizard of Oz suggests a simple but help-
ful analogy for the workings of creativity in language. We can think of the 
monochromatic world of rural Kansas as the world of conventional language, 
populated by hard-working, plain-speaking people with straightforward and 
uncomplicated values. In contrast, the colourful world of Oz represents a crea-
tive departure from the norm, a flight of the imagination that reassembles our 
familiar experiences of the workaday world in a way that is fresh and striking, 
yet not so new and unusual that it cannot be fully understood or appreci-
ated. Ludwig Wittgenstein, the enigmatic twentieth-century philosopher of 
language, argued that philosophers constantly get themselves into termi-
nological muddles by using words like ‘truth’ or ‘knowledge’ (or ‘creativity’) 
­outside of the workaday contexts in which their meanings are grounded.2 As 
­Wittgenstein memorably put it, ‘philosophical problems arise when language 
goes on holiday’.3 Befuddled philosophers don’t do this deliberately, but when-
ever we engage in linguistic creativity, this is exactly what we do: we know-
ingly take our words on vacation, yanking them out of their everyday contexts 
to plonk them down in new and exotic settings. In these far off worlds, our 
words are more relaxed and more playful in what they convey, and show sides 
of themselves we do not normally see.
The meaning of words when ‘on holiday’ must share many commonalities 
with the meaning of words ‘at home’, much like the characters in Oz share 
many similarities with the characters back in Kansas. Otherwise, we could 
not relate their meanings and identify the holiday version as a more colourful 
and creative variation of the workaday version (and philosophers would not 
get themselves into such referential tangles). So, for instance, when fashion 
designer Karl Lagerfeld describes his sunglasses as ‘a Burqa for my eyes’,4 
we know that the word ‘Burqa’is definitely on holiday, and that its vacation 
meaning must be related to its everyday meaning in some easily recoverable 

Enigma variations
17
way. In this case, the similarities are both deep and superficial: Lagerfeld’s 
perpetual sunglasses, like the conventional Burqa, are black, and hide what 
they cover from outside view. Both shield their wearers from the unwanted 
gaze of others. Sunglasses cover a small part of the human body, while burqas 
cover the whole face, yet because the eyes are so revealing about a person, 
each preserves the privacy of the individual. Figure 2.1 offers a simplified view 
of the salient conceptual landscape before it is reshaped in Lagerfeld’s com-
parison.
In his Poetics,5 Aristotle argued for a taxonomic approach to metaphor pro-
duction and comprehension. The name or label for one idea, he said, can be 
applied to another, more distant idea, if each is organized under a common 
abstraction. We thus understand the metaphor by identifying this generaliza-
tion and seeing the two ideas as interchangeable specializations with their 
own distinct associations. In the Aristotelian view, since sunglasses and bur-
qas are both wearable objects, the pair are potentially interchangeable. The 
conceptual organization that arises after Lagerfeld’s metaphor is shown in 
Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.1  The category of wearable objects, imagined as a child’s ‘mobile’. 
Lagerfeld’s comparison effectively moves two superficially different objects closer 
together.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
18
English doesn’t provide us with a simple way for saying ‘dark things that  
you wear to protect your privacy’, or with a word for denoting this mental 
category of things, but it does provide words for a range of its most evocative 
members, such as ‘veil’, ‘burqa’ and ‘sunglasses’. Lagerfeld effectively uses 
the name of one such member to denote the category as a whole. In the 
process, Burqa and Sunglasses come to be seen as members of the same 
implied category, one defined by the specific features they have in common. 
These shared features are key to the success of the metaphor, for we cannot 
meaningfully describe X as Y just because they share a common generaliza-
tion. As Cicero tells us in Book III of his De Oratore, a treatise in which the 
Roman orator fuses rhetorical technique with moral philosophy, ‘a metaphor 
is . . . contracted into a single word . . . put into a position not belonging to it 
as if it were it’s own place, and if it is recognizable it gives pleasure, but if it 
contains no similarity it is rejected’.6
A pleasurable metaphor exploits the fact that Y has obvious qualities that 
are also present in X, but in a less obvious way. In a relationship that has been 
memorably characterized as salience imbalance by the psychologist Andrew 
Ortony,7 the comparison to Y helps to make these qualities more apparent 
in X. When words go on holiday in creative metaphors and similes, they go 
where they can make a salient contribution to our sense of another concept. 
Figure 2.2  Objects in mirror are closer than they appear. When two dissimilar 
objects reveal deep similarities, we may propose a new explanatory category to 
house them both.

Enigma variations
19
No matter how exotic the new locale, it is a working holiday that our words 
enjoy whenever we dispatch them on flights of metaphorical fancy.
Lagerfeld is following in the footsteps of Aristotle and Cicero, as are we all, 
when he takes ‘burqa’ on holiday, leaving it to us as listeners to appreciate its 
relaxed meaning in its new setting and its new category. For the most part we 
do this naturally, without ever being told how. Our secondary goal in this book 
is to explore the linguistic cues that let us know when, and why, our words 
and phrases have taken leave of their workaday senses.
Because of the wonderful things he does
There are no wizards in the real world, or no genuinely magical ones at any 
rate. Dorothy also seems to have brought this subconscious nugget of back-
water wisdom with her to Oz, for when her dog Toto pulls back the curtain, 
the wizard of Oz is revealed to be a fake. ‘Pay no attention to that man behind 
the curtain’ he bellows in vain, as all the apparent manifestations of his pre-
sumed powers are shown to be the simple products of pulleys and levers, a 
box of cheap carnival tricks operated by a crystal-gazing charlatan. Lacking the 
power to offer real solutions to his supplicants’ problems, the wizard instead 
palms them off with purely symbolic trinkets: a diploma for the scarecrow 
who wanted a brain, a ticking watch for the tin man who wanted a heart, and 
a medal of valour for the lion who wanted courage.
Looking for the roots of creativity can seem like a journey into the strong-
hold of a powerful and mysterious wizard. It is a journey that is bound to dis-
appoint. Rather than genuine magic, we are likely to find a collection of ropes 
and pulleys that, when operated in the right sequence, produce creativity-like 
effects. Like Dorothy and her friends, we may feel cheated by the discovery, 
and imagine that the real magic lies elsewhere. Or we might feel that the 
creativity resides in some deeper and inaccessible part of the person who 
pulls on the levers and tugs on the ropes, rather than in these simple mecha-
nisms themselves. Our search for concrete answers is just as likely to yield 
symbolic IOUs. Not a watch, or a diploma, but terminology and jargon and 
metaphors and myths that are intended to serve as placeholders for the real 
feeling of understanding that never arrives. We have been culturally trained to 
view creativity as a mysterious process, a force of nature or even a divine gift 
that is both a blessing and a curse for those it touches. Artists are supposed to 
suffer for their art, following their passions to the detriment of their health and 
social well-being. We encourage and are encouraged by the myth that crea-
tive geniuses necessarily flirt with madness, and if we don’t seem especially 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
20
­creative ourselves, we can comfort ourselves that it is because we are too 
sane and well-balanced.
There are many reasons to be suspicious of these cultural myths and 
metaphors of creativity, not least because we are all creative when it comes 
to language. Everyone is linguistically creative to a different degree, per-
haps, at least in ways that are socially prized by our peers. But you don’t 
need to be mad to make an inspired wisecrack, or starve in a garret to 
construct a good joke, or spend a lifetime in self-imposed exile to formu-
late a witty rejoinder. Rather, these examples of linguistic creativity are an 
organic part of everyday language use. Only a small number of speakers 
go on to become professional poets, authors or comedians, and an even 
smaller number receive any kind of widespread appreciation for their efforts. 
Yet we are all inspired amateurs when it comes to language, and we are all 
capable of seasoning our speech with occasional witticisms, puns, word 
blends, comic metaphors, colourful similes and cheeky analogies. No one 
goes to galleries or museums to see classic witticisms hanging framed on 
the walls, but some witty epigrams can be as conceptually subversive and 
challenging as the kind of idea-driven art installations that one often finds in 
museums of modern art.
A well-turned phrase can often appear magical, and elegant authors are 
sometimes said to ‘write like an angel’. But there is more trickery and tech-
nique than genuine magic in linguistic creativity. Though he affected an air of 
what the Italians call Sprezzatura, the appearance of doing everything with 
a natural grace and nonchalance, Oscar Wilde worked hard at his craft, pol-
ishing and reworking his witticisms until each became a delightful linguistic 
confection. Each seems as light as a soufflé yet each is dense with meaning. 
Wilde preferred to have this hard work go unnoticed,8 so that his pearls of 
humorous wisdom took on the natural lustre of the real thing rather than the 
artificial shine of the man-made ‘cultured’ alternative. If given the choice, 
who wouldn’t prefer to be considered a sublime talent for whom everything 
comes naturally, rather than a disciplined craftsman who has to work hard and 
occasionally even break a sweat? (In this vein, consider Wilde’s ­judgement 
on the dubious virtue of plain speaking: ‘the man who would call a spade 
a spade should be compelled to use one’). Wilde’s witticisms have justifi-
ably stood the test of time, but consume too many of them in one sitting 
and you may feel like you’ve eaten a whole box of éclairs. Moreover, when 
consumed en masse, we begin to see the unifying conceptual and ­linguistic 
patterns that lie behind each distinctively phrased aphorism. The patterns can 
­charitably be considered the application of a Wildean technique, or unchari-
tably dismissed as superficial trickery. In either case, the curtain is pulled 
back and an array of levers and pulleys is partially revealed. Wilde was a 
­talented man who developed that talent through the disciplined application of  

Enigma variations
21
­technique and hard work. Like the Great Oz, or Harry Houdini, he burnished 
his image through theatrical self-invention, but was no less creative for being 
less than a wizard.
If I only had a brain
When philosopher Daniel Dennett proposed a new theory of consciousness 
in his 1991 book Consciousness Explained,9 sceptical wags re-christened his 
efforts Consciousness Explained Away.10 Dennett’s challenge was to provide 
a persuasive explanation of how physical brains can give rise to conscious-
ness by appealing to the workings of lower-level processes that are not 
­themselves conscious. At some level in the hierarchy of mental processes 
a qualitative transformation must occur, and consciousness must simply 
emerge out of unconsciousness. Creativity poses an analogous philosophi-
cal conundrum, and exposes our potential solutions to the same damning 
­critique, insofar as any formal attempt to explain creativity in terms of the 
combined workings of specific, lower-level un-creative mechanisms might 
just as easily be dismissed as Creativity Explained Away. No matter how 
specific such an explanation might be, it will inevitably demand the same leap 
of faith: that the creative devil will somehow emerge from the non-creative 
details. In fact, the more specific the account, the less wiggle-room it can 
offer for this transformation to occur. Accounts that are so unambiguous that 
they hint at algorithmic realization on a computer will additionally require a 
leap of faith that only the most zealous advocates of Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
are willing to entertain.
An algorithm is any ordered sequence of detailed instructions for achiev-
ing a specific, well-defined goal, and the word ‘algorithm’ can be applied to 
any such sequence of instructions, from a recipe for Eggs Benedict to the 
best way to balance your chequebook. An algorithm can be as simple as 
the one we learn for doing long division in primary school, or as powerful as 
the PageRank algorithm that Google uses to order its search results so that 
the most authoritative sites (as measured by the number of other sites that 
lend credence to them by explicitly linking to them, among other factors11) 
are pushed to the top of the list. The execution of a mere algorithm is widely 
held to be the very antithesis of acting creatively, since algorithms typically 
allow no freedom of choice as to how, or in what order, their component 
instructions should be obeyed. This view is not so very modern as it sounds, 
and can be traced back to Lady Ada Lovelace, daughter of the poet Byron 
and notionally one of the world’s first computer programmers. Lovelace was 
a computing enthusiast before computers were a practical reality, having 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
22
designed algorithms for an early mechanical computer that was, unfortu-
nately, never built in her lifetime, Charles Babbage’s Analytical Engine. Yet 
Lovelace was also one of the first to articulate a strong creative prejudice 
against algorithms: ‘The Analytical Engine’, she said, ‘has no pretensions 
whatever to originate anything. It can do whatever we know how to order it 
to perform’.12
Lady Lovelace’s objection to the very possibility of an algorithm exhibiting 
creativity continues to reverberate in the sentiments of contemporary think-
ers. The psychologist Teresa Amabile, who has extensively studied human 
creativity in an industrial setting, puts it most bluntly: for her, an algorithm can 
only be applied to a problem when the ‘solution is clear and straightforward’,13 
while creativity is generally reserved for those tasks that lack ‘a clear and read-
ily identifiable path to a solution’.14 So algorithms are fine for robotic vacuum 
cleaners that follow a preordained path around your house, but don’t expect 
them to get creative when they come upon your sleeping cat. However, while 
computers are algorithmic machines, and a large program like Microsoft Word 
is certainly an algorithmic system, there is no such thing as the Microsoft 
Word ‘algorithm’. Rather, Word is a large accretion of many different algo-
rithms for achieving many different goals. Word is an often unpredictable 
piece of software that has undergone continuous development by a myriad 
developers for decades. It is not a single algorithm in the Amabile sense, but 
a whole army of algorithms, with its own arcane chain of command and rules 
of engagement.
The stereotypical algorithm is neat and orderly, with a logical purpose that 
is readily grasped by the domain specialists who apply it. In this neatness 
there is no scope for whimsical behaviour and no possibility of doing the 
unexpected or the unplanned. Most simple algorithms that can be applied by 
a human exhibit these stereotypical traits, but when the stereotype is used 
to suggest that computers cannot be original, it becomes a straw man. What 
is true of simple programs may not be true of large unruly programs that 
grow in scope and complexity as they interact with the world and acquire 
their own knowledge from the web. These complex programs are certainly 
algorithmic, but they are not ‘algorithms’ in the sense employed by Love-
lace or Amabile. Their complexity makes their behaviour in context difficult 
to predict, and in this difficulty lies their ability to surprise us. Most people 
think of creativity as a distinctly human trait, which is why we find it hard to 
cede the possibility of creative behaviour to a machine. Yet, as we gradually 
accept these increasingly complex and stereotype-defying programs as intel-
ligent and unpredictable in their own non-human way, we may also begin to 
acknowledge a nascent form of non-human creativity in the originality of their 
behaviour.

Enigma variations
23
If I only had a heart
For those who grant the possibility of an intelligent computer, most often it 
is a distinctively cold and alien intelligence that is ceded, one that is utterly 
lacking in human warmth and empathy. Some may find comfort in this lack 
of emotional intelligence as computers gradually chip away at our intellec-
tual sense of selves, from beating human world champions at progressively 
harder games of intelligence to finding proofs that have eluded our sharpest 
mathematical minds. Computers may have the smarts, but humans still have 
the hearts.
This debate about emotion is both profound and simplistic, profound 
because it goes to the core of what makes us human, and simplistic because 
it rapidly descends into self-serving Star Trek clichés about superior human 
­qualities. As so dramatically played out week after week on the U.S.S. Enter-
prise, these ineffable qualities make humans superior to computers,15 androids, 
Vulcans, or to anything at all that prizes logic and calculation over empathy and 
intuition. The Star Trek worldview has even found its way into serious aca-
demic discourse, as typified by The Emperor’s New Mind, the 1989 book in 
which the physicist Roger Penrose sets out his anti-AI stall and argues that it 
is quantum mechanics, and not mechanical quantification, that provides the 
key to human intelligence.16 Penrose’s book opens with a fictional prologue 
in which mankind has, in the future, built a full-blown artificially-intelligent 
computer named The Ultronic. A young man named Adam (a not-too-subtle 
nod to the divine origins of man, perhaps?) gets to ask the first question of 
this supreme mechanical intellect: ‘how does it feel to be a computer?’. The 
Ultronic is Penrose’s Tin Man, and Adam his Dorothy, though a name like The 
Ultronic is surely the sci-fi equivalent of a black hat and a dastardly moustache, 
so this unfeeling computer is just as surely poised for a fall. While Penrose 
stops short of having the Ultronic spout steam from its ears while babbling 
‘does not compute’, Adam’s question hits its mark in a way that allows the 
human audience to howl with superiority-tinged laughter.
The cliché of the logical computer that excels in the intellectual realm but 
stumbles badly in the emotional realm is an entertaining if dated sci-fi trope. 
Many computer scientists are actually very interested in affective emotional 
computing,17 and conduct research into allowing computers to better under-
stand the moods of their users so that they may ultimately serve them better. 
This work has several interesting dimensions, from recognizing the mood of 
a user in real-time as he/she bangs the keyboard in frustration or fires off an 
email in anger, to recognizing the sentiment of an incoming email or an on-line 
product review. This latter dimension is a linguistic one, and does not require 
cameras or biometric sensors to evaluate. Rather, the sentiment of a text can 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
24
simply be considered as a function of the sentiment of the emotive words 
and phrases that it contains.18 In many cases, the goal is to assess the gross 
sentiment of a text – is it broadly positive or negative overall? – rather than to 
arrive at a nuanced understanding of its content. But research in sentiment 
analysis is also beginning to consider more creative carriers of affect in a text, 
such as humour, metaphor, sarcasm and irony (all topics we’ll return to later). 
Computers need not always show a tin ear to the feelings of others, if those 
feelings are expressed – even creatively – in words.
If I only had the nerve
The Scarecrow and the Tin Man each lack a vital part of the human body, 
leading each to sadly conclude that they also lack the human qualities that 
correspond to those parts. The lion too is missing some vitals, though Baum 
departs from his anatomical metaphor to directly tell us that the lion is lacking 
in courage. The Wonderful Wizard of Oz is, after all, a children’s book, and is 
no place for certain anatomical metaphors of an adult nature.
Linguistic creativity can be an especially risky form of creative endeavour, 
and humour, in particular, requires the courage to offend. When a young Mus-
lim stand-up made her debut in late 2001, she opened her act with the line 
‘I’m Shazia Mirza. At least that’s what it says on my pilot’s licence’.19 To be 
humorously creative is to be brilliantly cruel, to use knowledge for the seem-
ingly perverse ends of identifying and exploiting the logical weaknesses and 
prejudices of a topic or an opponent. Aristotle described wit as a kind of edu-
cated insolence,20 in which a speaker is knowingly and creatively disrespect-
ful. It takes nerve to stick your neck out, to laugh at power or to make fun of 
convention and those that adhere to it. Though cultural taboos make for easy 
targets, especially the big ones like Religion, Sex and Death, it takes bravery, 
or recklessness, to knowingly violate a taboo in a context that holds it sacred. 
Jokes about child abuse, rape or the Holocaust are much more likely to pro-
voke a disgusted wince than a howl of laughter. Embassies have been burned 
and cartoonists have been forced into hiding because newspapers have pub-
lished cartoons deemed offensive to the figureheads of certain religions. Less 
offensive jokes can also misfire, or even perilously backfire, since the most 
creative witticisms achieve concision at the cost of increased ambiguity. This 
is especially true of irony, which, at its most daring, is a linguistic high-wire 
act without a safety net. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 6, speakers can employ 
a range of subtle cues to communicate their ironic intent to an audience, and 
thereby reduce the risk of being misunderstood. Nonetheless, irony remains 
a high-risk strategy for off-the-cuff creativity.

Enigma variations
25
Gossip is intriguing and titillating, and sometimes shocking, because it tells 
us something we didn’t already know. In contrast, creative language often 
shocks by reminding us of something we do already know, or could have 
worked out for ourselves. Formalists have the luxury of stipulating new labels 
for concepts, but creativity doesn’t work by stipulation: a new way of saying 
something must yield its meaning in a self-evident manner, without explicit 
dictats from the writer. So creative speakers often use our prior knowledge of 
a topic to surprise and even shock us, by focusing on little used associations 
or valid but unconventional perspectives. The knowledge exploited in this way 
can be acquired from a formal education, but is just as likely to come from 
direct experience of the world, or from observation of how others use lan-
guage to convey meaning. Creative insolence arises from how this knowledge 
is used. It can be used gratuitously, to suggest much more than the writer is 
willing to say openly, or it can be used contemptuously, to dismiss or subvert 
a jaded convention that may once have been fresh and creative but is now no 
more than a descriptive crutch.
Where troubles melt, like lemon drops
As discussed in the first chapter, creativity is a vague and amorphous concept 
whose boundaries are always shifting, from one culture to another and from 
one historical era to the next. As Keith Sawyer has pointed out, the word 
‘creativity’ has not always meant what we assume it to mean today, and its 
meaning may continue to change in tandem with ongoing changes in society 
and technology.21 It seems easier, and perhaps more helpful, to point to ingre-
dients that are prized in many different forms of creativity than to try and hem 
all of creativity into a single all-encompassing definition. Thus, Beth Hennessy 
and Teresa Amabile note that a ‘combination of novelty and appropriateness 
is found in most conceptual definitions of creativity’,22 which seems an emi-
nently sensible response to the clear presence of novelty and appropriateness 
in the most obviously creative products. But ingredients alone do not separate 
a creative success from an abject failure; consider how little separates the 
world’s best crème brûlée from the world’s worst scrambled eggs. The real 
challenge lies not in identifying the key ingredients of creative behaviour, but 
in specifying precise thresholds and meaningful ratios for combining these 
ingredients, as well as a principled means of integration. Just how much nov-
elty and appropriateness should a product possess, and how should they be 
realized, for it to be deemed creative? In turn, the means by which novelty 
and appropriateness are realized in a product raises a host of additional proc-
ess-related issues, of which technique, finesse and concision are just a few. 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
26
We return to the means of integration in Chapter 5, when we explore the 
dominant integrative frameworks in linguistic creativity.
Even if we limit ourselves to issues of linguistic creativity, as we do in 
this book, the intersection of language and creativity leaves a vast territory 
to explore, and its boundaries are not always sharply drawn. This territory not 
only includes meanings that are given creative linguistic expression, but also 
includes creative insights that are expressed linguistically, which may be quite 
different things altogether. For instance, is John Lennon’s observation ‘Life 
is what happens to you while you’re busy making other plans’ a true act of 
linguistic creativity, or does the creativity reside wholly in an insight about 
life which is then given a rather straightforward linguistic expression? A per-
suasive argument can be offered for either perspective; though not obviously 
figurative, Lennon’s remark is pithy, witty and eminently quotable, and thus 
has many of the qualities we typically associate with creative language. But 
if we allow that linguistic creativity can cover any act of creative insight that 
is then given a convenient linguistic form, we are forced to incorporate a gen-
eral theory of what it means to be creative into our specific perspective on 
linguistic creativity.
To avoid circular boundary disputes, our primary focus in this book is a 
sweet-spot in the space of creative language called creative linguistic varia-
tion. This sweet-spot contains all those expressions that are playful in their 
use of words, that stretch words or familiar phrases to fit novel (but apt) mean-
ings, and which can be seen as pleasurable variations on a familiar conven-
tion, an entrenched stereotype, or an existing turn of phrase. We have thus 
exchanged one problem word, ‘creative’, for three slightly less troublesome 
words, ‘pleasurable’, ‘variation’ and ‘novel’. Fortunately, this exchange does 
not require any semantic sleights of hand. Variation of a familiar form has 
long been a useful strategy for producing clever but understandable novelty. 
But novelty alone is not the purpose of creativity: one can generate random 
numbers with a set of dice, or a list of random words with a pin and a diction-
ary. Neither is novelty  appropriateness the whole story. A writer of fiction 
can name her characters by simply taking a pin to a telephone directory: one 
random jab for a first name, another for a surname, and in this way a novel but 
sensible character name is generated. A truly creative variation is a delicate 
balance of the novel and the familiar, of the appropriate and the inappropriate. 
If words seem to be in the wrong place, then they are in the wrong place at 
the right time. A creative variation is not just any novel combination of familiar 
elements, but a deliberate departure from a convention that is given a distinc-
tive and knowing twist.
In essence, a linguistic variation is creative if it exploits knowledge of words 
(or phrases) and their meanings to shoehorn additional meaning and reso-
nance into a tired form. Both the listener and the speaker must be party to the 

Enigma variations
27
­variation, for one must have the knowledge to know that the other intended (or 
can recover) the additional layer of meaning that is communicated. Remember 
Cicero’s injunction that ‘if it is recognizable it gives pleasure’, otherwise ‘it is 
rejected’. To be deemed clever, the effect of this additional meaning should be 
disproportionately larger than the effort needed to communicate it. For exam-
ple, an early-riser is one who is ‘up at the crack of dawn’, so a late-riser can be 
said to be ‘up at the crack of noon’. The variation here is simple – one time of 
day, ‘noon’, is substituted for another time of day, ‘dawn’ – and the description 
is more or less funny depending on the context in which it is used and the kind 
of person it is used to describe. Since ‘up at the crack of dawn’ is a cliché, the 
familiar norm underlying the ‘noon’-variation is easily recovered by a listener. 
With this norm comes the stereotype of the early-riser, a hard-working person 
who seizes the day with zest. The sharp contrast between ‘dawn’ and ‘noon’ 
suggests the received meaning of the variation should also undermine the 
norm; we thus construe it as a sarcastic description of a slacker who sleeps 
the day away, the very opposite of a hard-working early-riser. Likewise, the 
variation ‘carpe per diem’ only makes sense if one is familiar with the say-
ing ‘carpe diem’ from the poet Horace,23 and its common translation ‘Seize 
the day’. Only by considering the former as a playful variation on the latter do 
we see its inherent cynicism, and arrive at the intended meaning ‘seize the 
expense account’. The insertion of an innocuous-seeming ‘per’ changes the 
tone of the idiom completely, tainting the pure optimism of Horace and Walt 
Whitman (and Robin Williams in Dead Poets Society) with the grasping avarice 
of a Gordon Gekko.
The lexicographer Patrick Hanks describes variations such as these as 
exploitations of a recognizable norm. In his Theory of Norms and Exploitations 
(TNE),24 Hanks outlines how a great many creative acts in language, includ-
ing metaphors, can be understood as a controlled departure from a linguistic 
norm. Hanks’ term ‘exploitation’ is especially apt here, since the speaker not 
only exploits the norm as a vehicle for a new meaning, but also exploits the lis-
tener’s knowledge of this norm, as well as the listener’s ability to reconstruct 
the speaker’s newly-minted meaning. In her theory of Optimal Innovation, 
the humour theorist Rachel Giora champions a somewhat similar something 
borrowed something new view of linguistic creativity.25 For Giora, an optimally 
innovative stimulus is one that induces a novel meaning (or ‘response’) in the 
recipient, while allowing for the recovery of a more typical response. She and 
her colleagues have collected persuasive evidence for the claim that listeners 
find these optimally-innovative stimuli (such as ‘crack of noon’) more pleasur-
able than similar stimuli that are much more familiar (e.g. ‘crack of dawn’) or 
much less familiar (e.g. ‘break of noon’).
Hanks and Giora provide nicely complementary views on the workings 
of creative variation. For Hanks, exploitation is a means of revitalizing tired 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
28
­language, of stretching the meanings of familiar words and phrases to accom-
modate new but related situations. For Giora, we do this primarily because we 
find it pleasurable to be stimulated by novelty and variety. Familiarity can cer-
tainly breed contempt, not just for other people but for the over-used words 
and phrases whose habitual meanings encourage lazy, unthinking language 
use. But an exploitation can inject new life into an old saw, and make us think 
again about the relationship between words and their meanings. Whereas 
routine over-use can calcify these relationships, and make us feel that we as 
speakers have no say in how words get their meanings, innovative exploita-
tions allow us all to put our own stamp on language, and to influence, in our 
own small way, the daily course of its development.
Simple variations
In the HBO drama The Sopranos, gangsters who become FBI informants 
earn the contempt of every right-thinking family member. The label ‘Judas’ is 
reserved for the most egregious of these turncoats, but The Sopranos gives 
us the following creative riff:
What kind of person does that? It’s like Judas or something. Eating that 
last supper with Jesus and the whole time he knows they’re gonna crucify 
him. I mean, at least Judas didn’t go into any apostle protection program. 
He hung himself. He knew what he did. (The Sopranos, episode 54, ‘Rat 
Pack’)
Though scripted by a talented screenwriter (Matthew Weiner, creator of 
Mad Men), the angry humour of these lines has a natural feel, and even the 
­stand-out variation, ‘apostle protection program’, seems spontaneous and 
uncontrived. We can tell immediately that the variation is a play on ‘witness 
protection program’, an oft-whispered topic in The Sopranos, and a convenient 
cover-story for the disappearance of sundry villains that Tony, the mobster-in-
chief, has surreptitiously done in. In any case, ‘witness’ is by far the most com-
mon word that can precede the pairing of ‘protection’ and ‘program’. Looking 
to the web, most other words that can take this position convey a related 
perspective, such as ‘informer’ and even ‘victim’, but no other wording has a 
web-frequency that even comes close to that of ‘witness protection program’. 
Intriguingly, the conflation of witnesses and apostles has a Biblical resonance: 
apostles are, after all, witnesses to a divine truth who go forth to bring this 
truth to others, while informants ‘swear by almighty God’ to tell the truth 
about a criminal conspiracy. So in a sense, apostles are evangelical witnesses 

Enigma variations
29
of a sort, and the two ideas are largely interchangeable in a religious context. 
Indeed, if we again look to the web, we see that the conjunction ‘apostles 
and witnesses’ has a web-count of over 70,000 hits. Since ‘apostle protection 
program’ is sound on a semantic level, and purposeful but anachronistic on a 
pragmatic level, the variation seems both silly and clever, and prompts us to 
laugh at its silliness even as we admire its cleverness.
Some words, like the ‘sleight’ of ‘sleight of hand’, or word combinations like 
‘protection program’, are so distinctive that they are rarely found outside the 
confines of specific stock phrases. This distinctiveness makes these phrases 
an ideal basis for simple and recognizable creative variation. Take ‘sleight of 
hand’, a phrase that literally denotes the kind of fleet-fingered prestidigitation 
practiced by magicians whenever they palm a coin or deal a card from the bot-
tom of the deck. More generally, however, ‘sleight of hand’ has come to mean 
any kind of deft trickery or skilful deception, as in the following headline from 
the Guardian newspaper in April 2010: ‘David Cameron accused of sleight of 
hand over “magic” £12bn cuts’. A magician’s hands are his most important 
assets, but different kinds of non-magical trickery can exploit different parts of 
the body, metaphorical or otherwise. It can be jarring to hear ‘sleight of hand’ 
used to describe acts of trickery that have nothing at all to do with manual dex-
terity, such as the verbal trickery of a politician or the nimble-footed trickery of 
a football star. Simple substitution, however, can be used to fold a more apt 
body-part into the familiar phrase, to yield a mildly creative and easily under-
stood variation. Consider the following possibilities:
sleight of hand	
(923,000 hits)	
sleight of mind	
(821,000 hits)
sleight of foot	
(79,800 hits)	
sleight of wing	
(16,500 hits)
sleight of word	
(482,000 hits)	
sleight of tongue	
(64,700 hits)
sleight of mouth	
(27,300 hits)	
sleight of pen	
(60,900 hits)
The Google web-counts for each phrase (as of April 2010) are shown in paren-
theses. Unsurprisingly, ‘sleight of hand’ has a higher web-frequency than any 
variation that replaces ‘hand’ with another word, making this familiar phrase 
an easily recoverable home-base for understanding each variation. When it 
comes to making sense of creative variations, there is certainly no place like 
home. It’s also worth noting that, at 644,000 hits, the common misspelling 
‘slight of hand’ has a lower web-frequency than not just the correct spelling, 
but the semantic variation ‘sleight of mind’ as well. This variation is commonly 
used to describe various kinds of mental deception or mind control, but has 
also come to denote the specific kind of stage magic performed by mental-
ists. Footballers and dancers can likewise be said to practice ‘sleight of foot’, 
though the phrase has also found gainful employment in describing magic 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
30
tricks that, oddly, make use of the feet. The variation ‘sleight of word’ is usually 
reserved for those writers whose work requires them to torture words into 
becoming double-agents, duplicitously appearing to say one thing while actu-
ally suggesting quite another. Poets, philosophers and politicians are all fre-
quently accused of playing shell games with language, of skilfully using words 
more for misdirection than for clarity. When the critic H. A. Maxson accuses 
the poet Robert Frost of a ‘constant sleight of word – his seeming to say one 
thing firmly and absolutely but saying something very different, something 
vague and general and ungrounded’,26 his critique is itself a kind of creative 
variation on a variation, since we owe the variation ‘sleight of wing’ to Frost’s 
poetic description of a thrush’s grace in his poem Come In.27
Successive variations on the same familiar form make it easier to gener-
ate even more novel variations. For instance, ‘sleight of mind’ makes it seem 
less of a stretch to coin ‘sleight of brain’ (over 1,000 web-hits) and ‘sleight of 
thought’ (about 200 web-hits), while ‘sleight of tongue’ makes ‘sleight of eye’ 
(over 2,000 web-hits) more plausible. In general, any new twist is grist for 
further elaboration in the variation mill, and if the change introduced by a novel 
variation is suggestive of yet another familiar expression, it may even be pos-
sible to merge both forms at the point of variation. When magician Harry Allen 
wrote his self-help guide to humorous stage patter for wannabe magicians, a 
combination of ‘sleight of tongue’ (a double allusion to magic and language) 
and ‘tongue in cheek’ (a double allusion to language and humour) provided the 
perfect title for his book, ‘sleight of tongue in cheek’ (a multi-faceted allusion 
to magic, language and humour). Allen offers another title, ‘sleight of foot 
in mouth’, for tongue-tied magicians with a sillier sense of humour. Other 
double-edged variations on ‘sleight of hand’ are also possible. For those who 
would trick their bodies into ignoring pain, author Tess Lea offers the variation 
‘sleight of mind over matter’, while for those more interested in self-defence, 
a news release from the Russian Ministry of the Interior offers the variation 
‘sleight of hand-to-hand’ to describe how one citizen used some deft moves 
to disarm an armed robber.28 Other variations that are, as yet, still looking for 
a good home include ‘sleight of word of mouth’ (might this describe the way 
studios create buzz for new movies?) and the surprisingly overlooked ‘sleight 
of brain over brawn’.
Simple variations on a familiar phrase are easily understood in terms of 
the more familiar meaning, or the ‘more salient response’ in the words of 
Giora and her colleagues. Though often straightforward, this process of crea-
tive sense-making is not a deterministic one. The ‘sleight of [hand]’ varia-
tions above each allow for a spectrum of possible meanings, ranging from 
more literal ‘stage magic’ interpretations (using hands, mouths, tongues and 
so on to perform tricks for an audience) to looser interpretations suited to 
more general contexts of use, in which any kind of skilled misdirection or 

Enigma variations
31
seeming deception is considered to be a kind of metaphorical wizardry. The 
intended meaning of each variation will vary from context to context and 
suggest different qualities whether one is talking of politics, poetry, sport 
or professional stagecraft. So the context of use, rather than any formal 
characteristic of the variation, is the final arbiter of what is actually meant. 
Indeed, some creative variations on a familiar phrase make no change at all 
to the original wording.
When Irving Berlin sang ‘There may be trouble ahead, but . . . let’s face the 
music and dance’,29 he employed the familiar phrase ‘face the music’ in two 
different senses at once. The first conveys the conventional meaning of ‘face 
up to the negative consequences of one’s actions’, while the second conveys 
a more upbeat message of ‘enjoy the moment’ or even ‘seize the day’. The 
variation here arises not through formal modification of the phrase itself, but 
through the way it is embedded in a context that draws out the melodic mean-
ing of the word ‘music’. Berlin doesn’t perform any word-switching in this lyric, 
but does perform some skilful sense-switching, by fusing the oddly idiomatic 
sense of ‘music’ with its more general meaning, that of a pleasurable tune. 
The simplest variations are often the most subtle, refusing to draw attention 
to themselves as they gently work their magic on us. More than any other, 
these are the truest sleights of word and tongue in our repertoire of linguistic 
trickery.
Enigmatic variations
Sleight of hand is not the showy, applause-winning part of stage magic, but 
the set of subtle skills that allow a magician to secretly manipulate his props. 
Though perhaps deserving of our most sincere applause, these sleights of 
hand are precisely the part of a magician’s act that a professional least wants 
us to see. In contrast, the most ostentatious acts of magical skill are called 
‘flourishes’, visual displays of technical virtuosity that are designed to grab our 
attention and make us gasp with envy. Each is important, but a good magic 
act relies on both skill-sets working together in harmony. Similarly, in linguis-
tic creativity, a grand flourish is far more likely to grab our attention than an 
altogether more subtle sleight of hand. While an eye-catching flourish, such 
as a one-handed cut of the deck, is often just a superfluous gimmick, such 
flourishes are entertaining to behold, and provide a magician with an opportu-
nity to show-off the technical mastery that otherwise goes unseen in the real 
workings of a trick. So it is in language, where creativity can be found in the 
low-key variation of a norm, or in an ostentatious flourish that stops us in our 
tracks and prompts us to look and wonder at its sense-making virtuosity.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
32
Stupidity and pain are, from a humour perspective at least, the gifts that 
keep on giving, and so the state of being hung-over presents a great many 
opportunities for creative schadenfreude. Unsurprisingly, the adjectives most 
commonly used to describe a hangover significantly overlap with the words 
used to describe its main symptom, a headache, and include ­throbbing, 
­raging, blistering, thumping, cracking, splitting, excruciating, crippling, blind-
ing, screaming, stonking, pounding, banging and crushing. The adjectives 
convey, in rather direct terms, the perceived physical effects of the hango-
ver on our heads, skulls and brains. Yet, though effective at evoking different 
kinds of pain, these adjectives lack novelty and mystery. In his autobiography 
Hitch-22, Christopher Hitchens recounts a tale of being dragged to a ‘mas-
sage’ parlour by the author Martin Amis in the 1970s, as part of the latter’s 
research for a novel. Already sceptical, his enthusiasm for the expedition was 
further dented, he tells us, by a ‘paint-bubbling hangover’30 born of the previ-
ous night’s alcoholic excesses.
That a well-turned phrase can appear so effortless in form yet require such 
effort to understand only enhances the audience’s appreciation for the writ-
er’s apparent ingenuity. Paint fumes can cause nauseating headaches, while 
‘painting the town red’ is a common euphemism for a drinking binge, and 
cheap alcohol is often compared to paint-thinner, but these resonances are a 
mere bonus. The key to resolving a ‘paint-bubbling hangover’ lies in identifying 
the more familiar phrase on which it enigmatically plays. Here is just one pos-
sibility. Hangovers, like severe headaches, are often described as blistering, 
perhaps because we imagine the throbbing inside our heads to be so power-
ful that it can actually raise blisters on the outside of our heads. Blisters are 
painful in themselves, but can also be symptoms of a deeper and more worry-
ing affliction. Paint, like skin, can also develop blisters, especially if subjected 
to the intense heat of a paint-stripping31 device. These blisters are raised by 
pockets of hot air, which causes the melted paint to bubble. A ‘paint-bubbling’ 
hangover is therefore a hangover that is so blisteringly intense that the equiva-
lent intensity would cause dried paint to bubble and blister. When the curtain 
is finally pulled back, as Hitchens intended it to be, ‘paint-bubbling hangover’ is 
seen to be a creative variation on the much more familiar ‘blistering hangover’, 
one that paints a vivid mental image for a phrase and a meaning that have long 
lacked any visual potency.
These enigmas are not intended to remain enigmas, but are designed 
to be solved. Like the joke riddle in a Christmas cracker, or the free gift in 
a box of breakfast cereal, these linguistic puzzles often seem like cute little 
presents from the author. They are difficult to decode by design, but not so 
difficult that they frustrate the reader, or so cryptic that that they fail to con-
vey their intended meanings. In The Book of Tea, Kakuzo Okakura observes 
that the real power of suggestion is not economy, where more is expressed 

Enigma variations
33
with less, but ­engagement, so that the reader is invited to collude with the 
author in the construction of a creative meaning. Okakura puts it as follows: 
‘In leaving something unsaid, the beholder is given a chance to complete the 
idea and thus a great masterpiece irresistibly rivets your attention until you 
seem to become actually a part of it’.32 Michael Chabon uses this technique 
on a smaller scale in his 1995 novel Wonder Boys, when he describes the 
preferred substances of his narrator as ‘whiskey, cigarettes, and the various 
non-Newtonian drugs’.33 This enigmatic description evokes Albert Einstein’s 
merging of space and time into a single relativistic notion, Space-time, which 
is often called ­‘non-Newtonian’ because it argues, counter to Newton, that 
space is curved and the perception of time is relative. We can thus decode 
a ­‘non-Newtonian drug’ as a reference to the kind of mind-bending hallucino-
genic drug, such as LSD, that can seriously alter the taker’s perception of space 
and time. Chabon’s phrasing casually suggests that the reader possesses the 
same intimate knowledge of controlled substances, allowing us to ground his 
metaphor in our own knowledge of this somewhat sordid topic. The effect, as 
Okakura puts it, is that we do seem to ‘become actually a part of it’.
Both ‘paint-bubbling hangover’ and ‘non-Newtonian drug’ appear enigmatic 
at first, yet are ultimately understood as creative variations of a more familiar 
expression. In the simplest bean-counting terms, ‘blistering hangover’ finds 
over 2,000 hits on Google, while ‘blistering headache’ finds over 10,000. The 
conjunction ‘bubbling and blistering’ appears in over 3,000 web-documents, 
over 1,000 of which explicitly mention ‘paint’. Similarly, the conjunction ‘bub-
bles and blisters’ has more than 16,000 web-hits, suggesting that bubbles and 
blisters are conceptual soul mates in a painting context. This further suggests 
that ‘blistering’ can be replaced with ‘bubbling’ if ‘paint’ is also baked into the 
replacement as a modifier. Thus, ‘paint-bubbling’ is born of ‘blistering’ by way 
of ‘paint blisters’ and ‘paint bubbles’. In the case of Chabon’s ‘non-Newtonian 
drugs’, ‘space-bending drug’ appears in just a handful of web-documents, 
while ‘time-bending drug’ is much more frequent with over 10,000 web-hits. 
This is not to suggest that Hitchens and Chabon use Google as a thesaurus (or 
as an anti-thesaurus, for that matter, to avoid overly frequent phrasing), or that 
writers like Chabon and Hitchens are knowingly algorithmic in their writing 
processes. Nonetheless, these raw numbers capture an essential truth about 
creative writing: even the most strikingly creative variations can only convey 
ideas that the reader already knows how to understand.
This is not to say, however, that creative communication is a deterministic 
process, for when an artist leaves something unsaid, an audience may fill 
the gap in unexpected ways. A puzzle may have more than one solution, and 
allow for more solutions than its creator could ever anticipate. Even in a tightly 
constrained cross-weave of linguistic expressions like a crossword, a solver 
can sometimes find alternate ways of plausibly answering some of the clues 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
34
while still satisfying the inter-locking constraints of the puzzle grid. In such 
a case, where some of the answers diverge from the official solution, we 
would still consider the alternate solution to be valid. Indeed, we might even 
consider it more creative than the official solution, insofar as it represents a 
departure from the tightly scripted expectations of the author. Unlocking the 
meaning of an enigmatically original use of language has much in common 
with the solving of a crossword puzzle, but we should be careful to allow for 
the possibility that there is no single, definitive solution. An artist’s primary 
goal in using creative forms may be to goad the consumer into a compara-
ble act of intellectual engagement. When the Irish playwright Brendan Behan 
was asked by an interviewer to talk about the ‘message’ of his latest play, he 
angrily retorted ‘what the hell do you think I am, a bloody postman?’.34 There 
is more to creative language than the delivery of messages in a novel form, 
and it is often a convenient fiction to talk of these forms as having a definitive 
interpretation. Nonetheless, while we can accept some variability in how a 
message is received, and even accept that a creative writer does not always 
seek to communicate a specific message, it still falls to us to show how writ-
ers imbue words with meanings so that an audience can then unpack some-
thing like those meanings at the other end.
It’s not too much of a leap to suppose that as writers try to put their ideas 
on paper, the most familiar expressions are usually the first ones to come 
to mind. Orwell cautions us to avoid the easy temptations of overly ­familiar 
phrasing, yet an opportunistic writer may recognize in this familiarity the seed 
of an optimal innovation, an imaginative new way of evoking the same idea 
that exploits the familiar form as a convenient stepping stone. When the 
Irish farmer-turned-poet Patrick Kavanagh wrote accusingly of his native land, 
‘O stony grey soil of Monaghan, You burgled my bank of youth!’,35 he used 
poetry to refashion a more searing indictment from the familiar metaphor ‘you 
have stolen my youth’. Expressions like Kavanagh’s do not spring fully formed 
from the mind of the poet, like Athena from the forehead of Zeus, but must be 
worked and polished, often via a process of deliberate variation on less crea-
tive forms. The first words to a writer’s mind need not be the ones that end up 
on the page, but they can serve as a vital bridge between what is written and 
what is evoked in the reader’s mind.
Creative insolence
So, we can be creative with language by knowingly sending our words on 
holiday, to shake them out of their routine contexts where their meanings are 
habitual and virtually automatic, and to relocate them to new contexts that 

Enigma variations
35
highlight and exploit selected aspects of these meanings. The word ‘know-
ingly’ is important here, as important as the word ‘educated’ in Aristotle’s view 
of humour as educated insolence. The history of invention contains many 
happy accidents that have made their lucky discoverers rich and famous, but 
in linguistic creativity, luck alone doesn’t cut it, unless the speaker is quick 
enough to recognize and take ownership of the serendipitous potential of 
a mistake. Our words are encumbered with a great many associations and 
expectations. It takes knowledge and insight to recognize that many of these 
associations can be downplayed, and others temporarily magnified, so that 
a word can be creatively used as a colourful means of denoting just a small 
shard of its habitual meaning. Recall Karl Lagerfeld’s comparison of his sun-
glasses to a burqa. Though our understanding of the word ‘burqa’ is encum-
bered with a great many stereotypical associations about the role of women 
in Muslim societies, Lagerfeld’s remark casts all of these aside, to temporarily 
accentuate the role of a burqa as a dark shield against prying eyes. Of course, 
listeners don’t just forget that ‘burqa’ has all those awkward religious associa-
tions as well. Rather, they simply acknowledge that those associations are 
not part of the baggage that the word takes on holiday. Nonetheless, they do 
come to mind, perhaps not as facts but as feelings, and inevitably impart a 
frisson of creative tension.
Linguistic creativity allows us to fashion new and insolent meanings from 
the most unlikely sources, and words which seem perfectly innocuous in one 
setting can be cutting and cruel when on vacation in another. It is not a ques-
tion of the words we use – the same words can be monochromatically dull in 
an everyday context, and alive with insolent meaning when taken on holiday 
to another. Rather, it is a question of spotting the opportunity to imbue our 
words with new meanings and new emotions, and of having the nerve to 
take these opportunities as they arise. It takes a brain and a heart, and nerve 
too, to bend language to our surprising new uses and meanings. Indeed, the 
perceived creativity of a new variation, whether to the meaning of a familiar 
word or to the content of a familiar expression, is often a function of its sur-
prise value. The more familiar the expression, the more likely we are to jump 
to conclusions about its meaning, and so the greater its potential to really 
surprise us. Some variations – especially the humorous ones – are not just 
unexpected, but truly shocking. In the next chapter, we consider the different 
ways in which we might pack a surprising punch into our novel variations.

36

3
Shock and awe
Creating a disruption on the 
road more (or less) travelled
Creativity is surprising and refreshing and sometimes even 
shocking1 because it is a fundamentally disruptive phenomenon. 
Creative thinkers achieve outcomes that often seem obvious 
after the act of creation, but these outcomes are far from obvious 
before the creative act. Producers and consumers thus play very 
different roles in linguistic creativity. A consumer comprehends a 
finished product, and works backwards from there to appreciate 
the creative choices that informed its production. In contrast, 
producers start with an empty page or blank screen, and must 
identify and pursue those choices for themselves. To understand 
the relative complexity of the tasks faced by the producer and 
consumer, we now consider the intricacies of the abstract 
search undertaken by each.
Hits and misses on the road to creativity
Our popular creativity myths have become the worst kind of clichés – the 
self-hating kind. Turncoat clichés like ‘thinking outside the box’ urge us to 
­disavow the clichéd and the over-familiar on our path to innovation, linguistic 
or ­otherwise. Yet thinking in clichés is not always the same thing as writing 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
38
in clichés, and the creativity myth that ‘originality is all’ should not lead us 
to stifle the natural impulse to be reminded of the familiar whenever we 
try to imagine the novel. Rather, the most productive creators make this 
impulse work for them, seeing in it a steady supply of material for creative 
variation.
Andrew Lloyd Webber was certainly treading on very familiar ground when 
he decided to write a follow-on to his hugely successful musical The Phantom 
of the Opera, and must have hoped the result would be seen as a new lease 
of creative life for this now clichéd love story. However, the ill-fated sequel, 
Love Never Dies, was damned both by stinging reviews and by very faint 
praise of the ‘not quite as bad as the reviews suggest’ variety. We have all 
been bored by movies or stage plays or musicals that have failed to deliver 
on their promise to entertain. Besides a contemptuous yawn, we have many 
familiar phrases for conveying our boredom in these situations: we might say 
we are ‘bored to tears’, ‘bored to death’, ‘bored out of our minds’ and ‘bored 
beyond belief’, or claim that the experience is ‘like watching paint dry’. One 
influential theatre blog, West End Whingers, responded with a creative vari-
ation of its own, by suggesting a more apt name for Webber’s new musical: 
Paint Never Dries.2
It’s probably fair to say that more people have heard and enjoyed this crea-
tive play on Webber’s title than have heard and enjoyed the musical itself. 
The phrase ‘Paint Never Dries’ is found over 160,000 times by Google, and 
at least 10 per cent of these hits are about Webber’s production. (The other 
90 per cent are about real paint and D.I.Y. Some even allude to hangovers.) 
Each creative variation is a linguistic blend of sorts, a mixture of the familiar 
and the unfamiliar that conveys a new yet recognizable meaning, but the vari-
ation ‘Paint Never Dries’ is actually a novel blend of two very familiar clichés. 
Webber’s own title, ‘Love Never Dies’ was a cliché before it ever graced the 
marquee of the Adelphi theatre in London’s West End, and even served as 
the tag-line on Francis Ford Coppola’s 1992 vampire remake, Bram Stoker’s 
Dracula. That too was a tale of deathless love tinged with elements of gothic 
horror and the supernatural. As much as we might like to open their skulls and 
root about in their brains, there is no obvious way to retrace the mental proc-
esses that led the wags at West End Whingers to come up with their parody. 
Nonetheless, we can ask ourselves which of the following scenarios sounds 
most plausible. Did they start with the title, Love Never Dies, and from there 
explore the space of possible linguistic modifications until they arrived at a 
phrase that aptly and satirically expressed their critical viewpoint? Or did they 
start with the familiar phrase ‘like watching paint dry’, which surely came to 
mind as an immediate expression of their boredom, and from this visceral but 
unoriginal phrasing seek to find a more creative variation that was also a vari-
ation of the musical’s own title?

Shock and awe
39
To a computationally-minded thinker, such as a computer scientist, a cogni-
tive scientist or anyone with a passing interest in algorithmic complexity – let’s 
call these people computationalists – these two scenarios are worlds apart. In 
the former, we imagine the creative producer wandering around a large con-
ceptual space, each step yielding new avenues to explore and new choices 
to consider, all the while looking for the switch to that AHA! lightbulb. In the 
latter, we imagine the creative producer wandering around the same concep-
tual space, but this time the producer has a well-defined starting point (strong 
feelings about the play and the familiar phrases that these feelings evoke) and 
a well-defined end point (the play and its title). If it were a race, as it so often 
is in quick-draw wit, a producer who framed the problem in terms of the latter 
scenario would surely be the odds-on favourite.
We frequently think of creative behaviour using search metaphors. When 
seeking a creative solution, we prefer to not ‘follow the herd’ but to ‘explore 
new avenues’ and take ‘the road less traveled’. While ‘looking for answers’, 
we frequently say that we are ‘searching for a solution’ or ‘exploring new 
options’. When a search goes badly, we may feel that we’ve ‘hit a dead-end’ 
and need to ‘find a work-around’, or feel ‘lost’ and ‘need to backtrack’. But 
if creativity involves search, metaphorical or otherwise, what exactly are we 
searching for, and in what terrain do we search? The most compelling answer, 
it turns out, is offered by computer science, where the search perspective 
offers a solid foundation for automated problem-solving. Indeed, the search 
metaphor is so conventionalized in Artificial Intelligence (AI) that it is often 
derisively referred to as good old-fashioned AI, or GOFAI. As conceptualized 
by AI pioneers such as Allen Newell, Herbert Simon and Cliff Shaw,3 the ter-
rain that is searched in GOFAI is not a physical terrain, naturally enough, but 
a conceptual state space. Each problem gives rise to its own state-space, 
where each space is an inter-connected topology of conceptual possibilities 
(or states) that a problem-solver can traverse from an initial problem descrip-
tion (called the start state) to an acceptable solution state (often called the 
end or goal state). Viewed through the prism of GOFAI, the key to intelligent 
behaviour in humans or in machines is an ability to quickly find a cost-effective 
path from the start state to a goal state. The GOFAI search paradigm, most 
famously associated with grandmaster-toppling advances in computer chess,4 
is thus viewed by AI researchers as the epitome of rational intelligence in 
humans and computers.
Though state-spaces are not conventional 3-D spaces, it helps to visual-
ize them as such. In Figure 3.1, we see a somewhat whimsical state-space, 
visualized as a 3-D surface, with a signposted start state (e.g. Love Never 
Dies) and a variety of goal states, depicted as flowers. The footprints scattered 
hither and thither show the wanderings of a creative agent, human or other-
wise, as it searches for a viable goal state (e.g. Paint Never Dries).

Exploding the Creativity Myth
40
Each footstep corresponds to a different cognitive action, such as pun sub­
stitution (e.g. Dies → Dries), and yields a successively different partial solu-
tion. Only those sequences of actions that lead to a viable goal state are ­ 
considered to be well-formed solutions. Note that the conceptual space in  
Figure 3.1 has a rather uneven distribution of goal states. For many problems, 
viable high-quality solutions tend to cluster together in conceptual space, 
while great swathes of the space remain barren areas for search. Elaborating  
the AI search metaphor into a gold prospecting metaphor, the creativity 
researcher David Perkins pithily refers to these fertile search areas as Klond-
ike spaces.5 As with the discovery of real gold along the Klondike river that 
precipitated the Yukon gold rush of the nineteenth century, the discovery of 
a Klondike space for a given problem can attract a great many prospectors to 
the same part of the search space, to discover a succession of valid but rela-
tively homogeneous solutions to the same problem. As we’ll see in Chapter 7, 
original thinkers often move on to new uncharted territories when a creative 
sweet-spot has become too crowded and too fashionable to support genu-
inely novel creativity.
A flat and featureless space offers little or no scope for intelligent 
­decision-making, creative or otherwise. Without discernible features to guide 
the search, our explorers are reduced to fumbling in an undifferentiated concep-
tual space. Fortunately, interesting problems have interesting search spaces. 
Though still a highly stylized depiction, Figure 3.2 presents a more structured 
search-space with an intriguing geometric quality: the space appears to fold 
Figure 3.1  A problem solver explores a space of different possibilities and 
­solutions. The shoeprints show the path of an explorer wandering through the space. 
The flowers are valid end-points of acknowledged value, such as creative linguistic 
expressions.

Shock and awe
41
over onto itself, like a kinked sheet of paper. Such a discontinuity or kink can be 
viewed in two different ways by two different kinds of explorer. The first views 
the discontinuity as an obstacle to exploration, and effectively goes around 
it, charting the circuitous course represented by the shoeprints of ­Figure 3.2. 
The second considers the nature of the discontinuity, recognizes that it is not 
a hard obstacle but a potential shortcut, and ­formulates a means of exploit-
ing this shorter route. The path of this more nimble thinker is depicted by the 
barefoot trail in Figure 3.2, while the thinker’s creative approach to the discon-
tinuity is depicted as a simple ladder. As a result of this insight, the second 
explorer traverses the space more quickly and efficiently, and as shown in 
Figure 3.2, is even capable of identifying solutions that a more conservative 
thinker might miss.
It’s worth noting that each of the explorers depicted in Figure 3.2 acts 
in an entirely rational manner. Each is an intelligent explorer that reaches a 
­viable goal using a well-informed search process. However, only one of these 
­explorers – the nimbler, barefooted one – deserves to be considered creative, 
for only this explorer engages with the conceptual space to identify a novel or 
unconventional route to the goal. We whimsically represent this thinker’s crea-
tive approach to the discontinuity in the space with a ladder, in part to suggest 
that this new route remains in place for future explorers. Those who follow 
in this explorer’s creative footsteps will find a shorter path to the goal, but 
successive uses of this shortcut diminish its status as a creative insight. With 
continuous use, the ladder may even become an integral feature of the space, 
every bit a fixture as the discontinuity itself. We’ll return to the mathematical 
Figure 3.2  Different problem solvers explore a structured space of conceptual 
possibilities.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
42
qualities of this discontinuity later, when we consider its subversive role in the 
workings of narrative jokes.
For now, why should we care what computationalists think? The com-
putational approach is reductive, to be sure, but it is the best approach we 
have for cutting through the mythology that pervades our thinking about 
creativity. Though readers and listeners (the consumers) must engage with 
speakers and writers (the producers) in the construction of creative mean-
ings, the producer and consumer play very different roles under very different 
computational conditions when engaging in a creative act. Production is not 
simply consumption in reverse, and the processes employed to understand 
and appreciate linguistic creativity provide only part of the answer as to how 
that creativity is produced. After the fact, a creative insight can usually be 
explained as a collection of simple actions, knowingly performed in the right 
sequence to go from an intended meaning (and little more than a blank page) 
to a finished form, such as a pithy text. The consumer’s task is to find the 
most sensible way of re-imagining these steps from a given text back to the 
producer’s intended meaning (‘so long a chain, and yet every link rings true’, 
as Dr Watson might say). Though non-trivial, this task is heavily constrained 
by the consumer’s expectations, not just of the text, but of the producer and 
of the world. In contrast, the producer’s task is to find a sequence of steps 
from the intended meaning to a final linguistic form that has not yet been iden-
tified. The producer may well be guided by unstated constraints that derive 
from an understanding of what the consumer expects and of what the con-
sumer can realistically comprehend, yet even when this sequence is short, 
the space of possibilities is still huge. In computational terms, the producer 
faces a vastly more complex search problem than the consumer.
While GOFAI search is inherently algorithmic, creativity theorists such as 
Margaret Boden and David Perkins have nonetheless embraced the notion 
that creative behaviour can emerge from the exploration of an abstract con-
ceptual space. However, Boden argues that the most striking creativity arises 
whenever a producer transforms the space itself, to effectively change the 
rules of the game. For instance, Arnold Schoenberg’s development of his influ-
ential twelve-tone technique challenged the convention that well-composed 
classical music must be played in a specific key.6 In fact, Schoenberg created 
a novel system of tone rows to ensure that all twelve notes are given equal 
importance in a composition, so that none is so prominent as to be consid-
ered primary or key. Schoenberg’s innovations were considered radical in their 
day, and were classified by the Nazis – along with jazz, of course – as degener-
ate art. In a very real sense, Schoenberg created a new conceptual space for 
musicians to explore, by transforming a space that had been so thoroughly 
explored by more traditional composers. Boden gives the name transforma-
tional creativity to this kind of game-changing innovation.7

Shock and awe
43
Figure 3.3 offers a visual metaphor for Boden’s notion of transformational  
creativity.8 A creative explorer, unwilling to explore the conceptual space as 
conventionally defined, decides to climb outside this space, in the hope of find-
ing viable solutions of even greater novelty and value beyond the ­presumed 
limits of the conventional space. The solutions that one finds outside the 
conventional space may have markedly different qualities than the solutions 
explorers have traditionally found inside the space. As in Schoenberg’s case, it 
then becomes necessary to ‘sell’ these new kinds of solutions to a skeptical 
audience. We’ll consider such a buying and selling model of creativity in the 
last chapter.
Of course, non-transformational exploration, or what Boden calls explora-
tory creativity, can also yield very satisfying results. A gifted chess player, 
for instance, can formulate creative strategies without changing the rules of 
chess, and we owe the music of Mozart to his relatively narrow but wonder-
fully productive exploration of the space of tonal music. However, given the 
immensity of the search space for even simple-seeming problems, producers 
cannot afford to be ploddingly exhaustive in their search, and must bring as 
many constraints to bear on their explorations as possible. It is in the use of 
such constraints to cut away great swathes of the search space and to iden-
tify other areas as potential sweet-spots (or Klondikes) for creativity, that the 
computational perspective comes closest to providing a concrete basis for 
such metaphysical notions as insight and inspiration. For linguistic producers 
do have one key advantage over linguistic consumers: they know before the 
Figure 3.3  A transformational thinker re-imagines the defining constraints and 
conventions of a genre, to create a new search space, rich in untapped possibilities.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
44
creative act the meanings they want to communicate, and also appreciate the 
full range of feelings and resonances that their linguistic forms are intended to 
evoke in the consumer. This diverse collection of conflicting constraints may 
well fight each other for dominance, but if properly harnessed, these con-
straints can collectively exert a coherent influence on the choice of conceptual 
and linguistic pathways that are explored by the creative producer.
The key to cooperation lies in viewing constraints as soft preferences rather 
than hard demands. In this way, conflicting constraints can avoid deadlock by 
nudging the producer’s exploratory processes towards those paths of least 
resistance where the smallest number of constraints are violated. Such a view 
of creativity – which can aptly be described as the ‘constraints welcome!’ 
view – has been championed by Douglas Hofstadter, a physicist turned cogni-
tive (and computer) scientist who argues that the interaction of competing 
pressures and constraints is the means by which creativity produces such 
diverse and unexpected results.9 Robert Frost compared the disorientating 
lack of formal constraints when writing free verse to playing tennis with the 
net down,10 while Orson Welles once described the absence of constraints 
as ‘the enemy of art’.11 Hofstadter would surely agree; he has argued, from a 
literary and a computational perspective, that the interlocking constraints of 
metre and rhyme allow both humans and computers to more effectively navi-
gate the space of creative poetic expression.12 Constraints are a necessary 
part of any satisfying challenge, and though they may often seem a nuisance, 
in creativity they are a blessing: not only do they help us negotiate immense 
search spaces, they can make the results of our explorations seem rich with 
secondary meanings, clever resonances and semantic tension.
When solving a problem, it is reassuring to have a time-tested plan of 
attack as well as an agreed definition of what constitutes a good or even 
optimal solution. Nonetheless, exploration of a complex search space can be 
a divergent process, much like beheading a Hydra: each head we cut off may 
lead the beast to grow several more in its place. Should we choose not to 
embrace this divergence, we can instead attempt to constrain it, by pursuing 
a divide-and-conquer strategy that successively narrows the search space and 
forces the search to converge towards a single possible solution. But if we 
want a diversity of solutions that exhibit a range of complementary strengths, 
we should use what the psychologist J. P. Guilford has called divergent think-
ing.13 Guilford argued that this ability to generate a diverse range of different 
solutions, or to pursue a diversity of different search avenues at once, is a 
key enabler of creative behaviour. In practice, however, truly divergent think-
ing in a large search space is not sustainable if each of the divergent paths 
that we pursue branches and forks into combinatorially more avenues and 
laneways. Computers cannot handle the ensuing combinatorial explosion, 
but neither can humans, creative or otherwise. Creative people instead seem 

Shock and awe
45
to select a ­manageable number of different pathways through a conceptual 
space. So while a chess-playing computer will crunch millions of different posi-
tions and possibilities to arrive at a move, a human grandmaster considers a 
much smaller basket of options. The trick is to know which avenues to pursue 
and which to avoid. In the end, it is not how many avenues we search, but 
the novelty of our trajectory that makes the difference. So to the extent that 
a producer can reconcile different constraints and conflate different search 
avenues into a path less travelled, the result can seem quick-witted, novel and 
insightful.
Two conflicting constraints or search avenues can often be reconciled with 
great concision in a single linguistic form that combines elements of two dif-
ferent solutions. Remember the variations ‘sleight of tongue in cheek’ and 
‘sleight of foot in mouth’ in the last chapter? The cognitive linguists Mark 
Turner and Gilles Fauconnier describe this kind of combination as blending.14 
Blending is an integration of two or more sources of knowledge, whether 
linguistic or conceptual or both, to achieve a combined result that is novel yet 
familiar. So governor Ann Richards of Texas used blending when, in 1988, she 
described George H. W. Bush as a poor little rich-boy who ‘was born with a 
silver foot in his mouth’.15 This much-quoted phrasing is a clever combination 
of two idioms that often come to mind when thinking of politicians in the 
Bush clan. Rather than rejecting either for its over-familiarity, Richards sim-
ply conflated both to cut short the divergent search for an equally concise 
replacement. In a memorable Garfield cartoon – how often do we get to say 
that? – the fat tabby passes a dog with a sign that says ‘Will eat homework 
for food’. Both dogs and hobos beg for food, yet we rarely view one in terms 
of the other. Blending not only allows us to conflate the two, it produces a 
hybrid result that is more than a dog and more than a hobo. Though quite a 
sophisticated blend, it is motivated by an overlap in two familiar phrases, ‘will 
work for food’ and ‘the dog ate my homework’.
Most non-trivial blends, and virtually all of the clever ones, involve some 
degree of compromise. Fauconnier and Turner describe blends as selective 
projections from two or more knowledge sources: some elements get high-
lighted, and perhaps even exaggerated, and others get cast aside so that the 
grand combination can actually work. This kind of semantic compromise has 
been given the name slippage by Douglas Hofstadter and Melanie Mitchell.16 
When we, as producers, encounter something that just doesn’t work, it is 
slippage that allows us to transform the troublesome element into something 
more accommodating. But once again, slippage is a divergent phenomenon, 
since we can often transform a blocked constraint or a violated expectation in 
a variety of meaningful ways. Thus, if Hillary Clinton were to become US presi-
dent, we could refer to Bill Clinton as first lady, or first man, or first husband. 
If Bill were to balk at ‘first lady’, Hillary could still keep this title for herself. 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
46
She would, in a strong sense, truly be first lady, but many of our expectations 
of what the title means would have to slip away. Hofstadter’s notion of slip-
page plays an important role in the production of any creative variation. When 
we replace ‘dies’ with ‘dries’ or ‘love’ with ‘paint’ in ‘Love Never Dies’, or 
‘witness’ with ‘apostle’ in ‘witness protection program’, we are engaging in 
slippage at a phrasal level. These replacements are not arbitrary but governed 
by an intuitive sense of what can be substituted with what. In Hofstadter’s 
terminology, the space of slippage possibilities can be captured by a SlipNet, a 
network of terms and ideas in which those that have the potential to slip into 
one another are explicitly connected by weighted links.
So a mastery of slippage allows for a mastery of creative variation. In gen-
eral, one idea can slip into another to the extent that both are similar, while 
two words can slip into each other if both denote SlipNet-related ideas. Some 
slips have more semantic support than others, as reflected in the observa-
tion that witnesses and apostles are more similar to each other than hands 
are to wings or burqas are to sunglasses. But semantic similarity alone is no 
guarantee of slippage potential, and for slippage to work gracefully, we should 
intuitively feel that one word or idea can sensibly be compared and contrasted 
to the other. Burqas and sunglasses are both items of clothing; witnesses and 
apostles are different kinds of informer; hands and feet are each a kind of body 
part and so on. In a good pun, a rare thing indeed, the slippage of one word 
into another is based on phonetic and semantic similarity, or is motivated by 
strong conceptual grounds (as in Paint Never Dries). In the very worst groan-
ers, violence is done to the structure of a larger word to shoehorn a weak 
phonetic substitution into place. Even creative slippage has limits that must 
be respected, though it takes insight to know exactly what those limits are. 
When we stretch the slippage potential of a word or idea too far, as in a dread-
ful pun or a lame substitution, that groan we hear is the sound of elastic about 
to snap.
Many creative linguistic blends stretch the slippage elastic half-way, to 
identify a noteworthy midpoint between two conceptual positions. A 2008 
cover story in Esquire magazine17 described the bodybuilder-turned-politician 
Arnold Schwarzenegger as ‘the President of 12 per cent of Us’. At the time, 
Arnold was riding a wave of voter satisfaction as governor of California, before 
the state was to become bogged down by serious financial difficulties. Late-
night comedians had often joked about the prospect of Arnold actually becom-
ing president of the United States, though the Austrian-born politician would 
be ineligible to run without a prior change to the constitution. Nonetheless, 
Arnold surprised many by winning the governorship of California in a recall 
vote for the monochromatic incumbent, Gray Davis. His early successes as 
governor also surprised a great many political commentators, who found it 
odd to imagine this likeable but wooden star of the Terminator and Conan 

Shock and awe
47
movies suddenly wielding so much power in America’s largest state. The label 
‘Governator’,18 coined as a blend of Governor, his new job, and Terminator, 
his iconic role, quickly stuck. Arnold may not have become president of the 
United States, but he became the next best thing: leader of the US state with 
the largest population and the biggest economy, contributing 12 per cent of 
the nation’s GDP. We see here two acts of creative slippage: governors are 
like presidents at the state level, so ‘president’ can slip into ‘governor’ and 
vice versa with little semantic resistance; and California is a microcosm of the 
United States, and can accurately be described as ‘12 per cent of the US’ (or 
‘12 per cent of Us’ if you are American). This slippage allows us to stretch the 
elastic half-way, to the point at which the most optimal innovation is produced. 
Because Arnold is governor of California, he is also – with a generous pull on 
the elastic – ‘President of 12 per cent of the US’.
Creativity is a restless patient that vigorously resists the straitjacket of 
formal definition, especially the one-size-fits-all variety. The most that any 
formal perspective can do for us is shed light on just one aspect of this multi-
faceted phenomenon. J. P. Guilford was right to emphasize the importance 
of divergent production in creativity, and the need to reward both fluency 
(the ability to generate many different ideas) and flexibility (the ability to 
generate different kinds of ideas), yet Guilford’s is just one valid perspective 
among many.  The pioneers of good old-fashioned AI (GOFAI) alternately 
emphasized the  importance of intelligently navigating a complex space of 
solution possibilities, while Margaret Boden has emphasized the sometimes 
transformative role of creativity in redrawing the boundaries of these spaces. 
For his part, Douglas Hofstadter has emphasized the importance of compromise 
and slippage when dealing with the many interacting soft constraints of a 
challenging problem, and even goes so far as to view constraints as welcome 
grist to the creative mill. John McCarthy, one of the founders of modern AI – 
he and ­Marvin Minsky first coined the term Artificial Intelligence back in the 
1950s19 – has argued that a solution to a problem is creative if it employs a 
concept that is not explicitly mentioned in the specification of the problem.20 
In other words, McCarthy emphasizes the role of insight in creativity and even 
provides a rather good working definition for this often mysticized notion. 
Arthur Koestler had earlier suggested that the roots of scientific, artistic and 
humorous insight lie in a single cognitive process called Bisociation.21 His 
ideas, which were to be greatly elaborated and reworked by Gilles Fauconnier 
and Mark Turner in their model of conceptual blending, view creativity as 
emerging from the reconciliation of very different mental representations, or 
in Koestler’s own rather quaint terminology, matrices.
There are also shades of Koestler in what has become the dominant 
­theory of verbal humour, the General Theory of Verbal Humour, or GTVH,22 of 
­Salvatore Attardo and Victor Raskin, just as there are shades of the GTVH in 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
48
­Fauconnier and Turner’s blending theory. As we’ll see next, the GTVH views 
the humour of jokes as arising from the bisociative friction between, and logi-
cal reconciliation of, similar but diverging scripts.
Departing from the script: Tell me a 
(slightly different) story
Improvisational comedy, or ‘improv’, bills itself as the kind of live comedy 
event that throws away the script. Rather than following a pre-scripted course, 
improv comedians ask the audience to suggest their own topics and themes 
for spontaneous play-acting. In fact, even though the audience appears to call 
the shots, improvisational comedy remains utterly dependent on scripts; not 
the stage scripts written by professional humorists and gag-writers, but the 
routine scripts that we all follow in our everyday lives. Most topics suggested 
by the audience, such as ‘going to the dentist’ or ‘ordering dinner in a snooty 
French restaurant’, are evocations of familiar scripts that the improv troupe 
should play out with a humorous twist. So the humour of improv is only super-
ficially script-free. Deep down, it relies on the creative variation of scripts that 
are so well-known that no-one has ever bothered to write them down or give 
them a name.
Are these everyday routines really scripts? Most cognitive scientists think 
so, at least in an abstract sense. For them, a ‘semantic script’ is a schematic 
mental structure that captures our shared experience of a stereotypical rou-
tine, by binding together information about its typical setting and participants, 
as well as the expected sequence of actions and their effects. The term 
‘script’ was popularized in the 1970s by Roger Schank and Robert Abelson,23 
influential AI researchers who viewed scripts as chunks of common-sense 
knowledge that one needs to really understand natural language. They argued 
that neither a computer nor a human can make sense of a story about, say, 
going to a restaurant, unless it knows what usually happens when a typical 
person goes to a typical restaurant. Without a restaurant script, an ill-informed 
observer could not, for instance, infer that a diner enjoys a meal from the fact 
that the waitress receives a large tip, or infer that a diner dislikes a meal from 
the refusal to leave any tip at all, or a refusal to even to pay the bill. A novel 
experience prompts us to either learn a new script or revise an existing one. 
Yet sometimes we get it wrong, and find ourselves triggering a script that 
merely seems appropriate, but which is actually truly and deeply inappropriate 
to a given setting.
This happens all the time whenever we read whodunnit novels with devi-
ous twists, or watch movies by artful directors who trick us into jumping to 

Shock and awe
49
the wrong conclusions. But this tendency to apply a script before we know 
for sure that it apt is most often exploited by jokes, which delight in tricking us 
into applying the wrong script to a narrative. The moment of truth arrives with 
the punchline, which reveals our folly and playfully punishes us for our rush 
to judgement. Consider what is undoubtedly the most analysed joke in the 
humour literature, as brought to us by the humour theorist and computer sci-
entist Victor Raskin. It concerns a young man who pays a visit to the doctor’s 
office. With a low bronchial whisper, the man asks the doctor’s pretty young 
wife ‘is the doctor in?’, to which the wife replies, with a smile, ‘No, come on 
in’. So what starts out as an apparent instance of the visit-to-the-doctor script 
instead turns out to be an instance of the affair-with-a-married-woman script. 
With this realization, we reinterpret what has gone before: the young man’s 
bronchial whisper is not a symptom that needs a doctor’s attention, but a 
clichéd ruse to avoid the doctor’s attention in the first place. The linguist and 
humour researcher Wallace Chafe argues that it is only the absurdity of the 
way the affair is conducted that gives the joke its humour,24 yet it’s hard to see 
much in the way of absurdity here. Recall, however, Kakuzo Okakura’s claim 
that the most successful art engages and draws in the audience, making the 
viewer complicit in the resulting work. This joke is certainly no masterpiece, 
but the same principles of engagement and complicity apply as much to jokes 
as they do to paintings or poems. By hinting at the possibility of immoral 
behaviour, and fuelling the reader’s lewd suspicions, the joke succeeds in 
making the reader complicit in the conduct of an illicit affair. In other words, 
the joke offers a knowing wink and a smile to those of us with dirty minds.
The notion of script opposition lies at the heart of an influential theory 
of humour first proposed by Raskin in 1985. His theory, the Semantic Script 
Theory of Humour, or SSTH,25 builds on Schank and Abelson’s view of scripts 
as the tectonic plates of text understanding. In this view, the most coher-
ent interpretation of a text is given by the most appropriate script that pro-
vides the most explanatory coverage. However, as we’ve seen, two or more 
scripts can be triggered by even a short text, and humour can arise at the 
fault lines where two scripts compete to provide an overall interpretation of a 
text. This opposition typically comes to a crunch point at the end of the joke, 
when the punchline forces a wrenching collision. Yet script opposition is not 
itself a guarantee of humour,26 and though an opposition can prompt us to 
ditch an inappropriate script for a more appropriate alternative, a marriage of 
both scripts together should still be possible at another level of interpretation. 
Humour theorists approach the mysterious marriage of sense and nonsense 
that lies at the heart of a joke in different ways, and with different terms. Neal 
Norrick refers to it as the ‘method in the madness’ of a joke27; Jerry Suls,28 
as well as Victor Raskin and Salvatore Attardo,29 refer to it as the ‘resolution’ 
of the incongruity of a joke; and Elliott Oring, the cultural anthropologist and 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
50
­folklorist, describes it as the ‘appropriate incongruity’ of a joke,30 reflecting 
sociologist Erving Goffman’s view that ‘any accurately improper move can 
poke through the thin sleeve of immediate reality’.31 Yet however we define 
the incongruity,32 and whatever we call the resolving operation that makes 
sense of it, the principle remains the same: a joke must allow us to salvage 
sense from nonsense to gain a useful insight into the incongruity.33
Figure 3.4 demonstrates how a joke narrative can be created as a blend 
of two very different scripts. In this case, each script establishes a tone and 
a theme that seems incongruous when viewed from the perspective of the 
other. Nonetheless, both can be woven together, with a little snip here and 
there, to produce a narrative that reads coherently. If the resulting script 
seems to veer madly from tragedy to farce, then that is precisely the point 
of the exercise. One script provides the tragedy, the other the farce, and the 
sudden transition from one to the other provides the comedy, provided of 
course that the transition is well-timed and the result is understandable as a 
coherent narrative.
Most narrative jokes employ creative variations on familiar scripts. This vari-
ation mischievously makes one script look like another, a false friend of sorts, 
causing the listener to initially trigger the wrong one.34 When the moment of 
truth arrives, we are forced to see our mistake, switch scripts and perceive a 
Figure 3.4  Most narrative jokes employ a cross-over of different scripts. We 
­understand the body of the joke using one script, but are finally forced to switch 
to another. The white fragments above (read from left to right) form an emergent 
­narrative of their own.

Shock and awe
51
logic to the incongruity. But jokes are not just variations on scripts; they are 
often variations on other jokes. If you’ve heard an ethnic joke that makes fun 
of Irishmen, you can be confident that someone, somewhere, is using the 
same template to make fun of Germans, or Poles, or some other cultural tar-
get. Deep reuse occurs when two jokes put very different flesh on the same 
logical skeleton. Consider the following pair of jokes. Two English business-
men, with bowler hats and umbrellas, are waiting for a train. One proudly 
says to the other, ‘My great-grandfather died at Waterloo, don’t you know’. 
The other replies, witheringly, ‘Oh? which platform?’. Now, compare this gag 
from the late great Bob Monkhouse: ‘I still have sex at 75! I live at number 74, 
so it’s no trouble at all’. These two jokes seem very different, yet both employ 
the same logical device. What appears to be a temporal signifier, of an impres-
sive age (75) or a historical event (Waterloo), is instead interpreted as a banal 
physical location. In the commuter joke, the shift from historical significance 
to mundane insignificance is used to undermine the speaker and puncture 
his pomposity. In the Monkhouse joke, the shift from a distinguished age to 
a mundane place next door undermines his boastful claim to have a vigorous 
sex life. If humour research was stamp-collecting, we’d have good reason to 
put both of these jokes in the same plastic pocket.
Douglas Hofstadter has coined the term Ur-joke35 to refer to the notional 
first uses of a joke on which later variations are based. Ur-joke is a creative 
variation on Ur-text, a term used by literary scholars to describe an imaginary 
reconstruction of an earlier text that has since been lost to history. So Ur-joke 
nicely captures the evolutionary nature of jokes, suggesting with a wink that 
many contemporary jokes are variations on long-lost gags that once echoed 
in the ancient cities of the Old Testament. Conversely, in their General Theory 
of Verbal Humour, or GTVH, Salvatore Attardo and Victor Raskin argue that 
jokes exhibit deep similarities because they employ the same logical mecha-
nisms to create humour. The GTVH is an elaborate and much-used theoretical 
framework36 built on the script-based foundations of Raskin’s earlier SSTH. 
Attardo, Raskin and others have since identified tens of unique logical mecha-
nisms that generalize over thousands of superficially different jokes.37 You may 
remember the joke about a mad scientist from (insert country of choice) who 
builds a rocket to fly to the sun, but launches at night to avoid being burnt to 
a crisp. We see here the logical mechanism of false analogy: the sun isn’t a 
lightbulb that is hot only when it’s bright and turned on in the daytime, and 
cold when it’s seemingly dark and turned off at night. How about that old Rus-
sian chestnut in which a factory worker steals a different wheelbarrow every 
night, from right under the noses of the factory guards? This one derives its 
humorous logic from the mechanism of figure-ground reversal: the guards are 
so fixated on what the worker might be hiding in his wheelbarrow that they fail 
to see the wheelbarrow as an object worth stealing in itself.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
52
We can think of Hofstadter’s Ur-jokes as the notional roots of a large and 
tangled family tree of jokes, while the logical mechanisms identified by the 
GTVH are a key part of the genetic information inherited by variations from 
their forebears. Undoubtedly, some jokes are lineal descendants of others, 
and this would be represented in our family tree as a parent/child relation-
ship. When Winston Churchill said ‘I am easily satisfied by the very best’ he 
was clearly channelling Oscar Wilde, who had earlier said ‘I have the simplest 
tastes. I am always satisfied with the best’. However, some creative variations 
are more easily recognized as logical borrowings than others, and many jokes 
that share a deep similarity have a less obvious kinship. Another aphorism 
commonly attributed to Churchill is used to explain the left-to-right trajectory 
of his political career: ‘If you’re not a liberal at twenty you have no heart, if 
you’re not a conservative at forty you have no brain’. No one is entirely sure 
whether Churchill actually said this, or even words to the same effect, but ear-
lier variants of this phrase have also been attributed to Georges Clemenceau 
and Otto von Bismarck. The variant that commonly attaches to Clemenceau is 
‘Any man who is not a socialist at the age of 20 has no heart. Any man who 
is still a socialist at the age of 40 has no head’. One might also recognize in 
these aphorisms a certain similarity in structure and sentiment, if not in politi-
cal inclination, to a witticism coined by the British politician and writer Horace 
Walpole over a century earlier: ‘Life is a tragedy for those who feel, but a 
comedy for those who think’.
In other words, sensitive liberals lack a rational brain, while rational con-
servatives lack a sensitive heart. Both Walpole and Churchill (or Clemenceau or 
Bismarck) seem to agree that the latter is the preferable state of affairs. What 
these two witticisms have in common goes far beyond a shared logical mecha-
nism, for each offers a different creative expression for precisely the same 
political world-view. Yet both are different, and both are original, even if the 
sentiment itself is old. In contrast, Vladimir Putin was clearly trying to sound 
Churchillian when he quipped that ‘Whoever does not miss the Soviet Union 
has no heart. Whoever wants it back has no brain’. Nonetheless, for all that it 
presumably owes Churchill, Putin’s remark is still funny, and still creative, if not 
entirely original. In the words of Giora and Hanks, Putin has given us an opti-
mal innovation, a novel exploitation on a familiar quotation that packages its 
own unique meaning into a form that has already proven its comedic value.
Creating a fuss on the road more travelled
When given very few lines to speak, it can be hard for an actor to make a 
memorable impression on an audience. Bit players are rarely given the most 
important lines, yet what they have to say can be just as vital in maintaining 

Shock and awe
53
the flow of a narrative. In Macbeth, Shakespeare provides just five lines to a 
character called Seyton, Macbeth’s lieutenant, but one of these lines is abso-
lutely pivotal to the play. When a conscience-stricken Lady Macbeth dramati-
cally kills herself, and her death scream prompts Macbeth to ask ‘Wherefore 
was that cry?’, it is Seyton who delivers the grim news with the line ‘The 
Queen, my lord, is dead’. Though lacking a certain poetry, the play would sim-
ply stop in its tracks were this line to be omitted. Yet, as theatrical legend 
has it, this is precisely what happened when Donald Wolfit, a Shakespearean 
actor famed as much for his ego as his acting, took Macbeth on the road over 
half a century ago. Wolfit had given the part of Seyton to an ambitious young 
actor, who, when his ambitions were thwarted, found a most ingenious way 
to extract his revenge. When Wolfit next played Macbeth, Seyton did not give 
Shakespeare’s familiar reply to the question ‘Wherefore was that cry?’, but a 
show-stopping variation, ‘The Queen, my Lord, is very much better’.38 Like a 
tiny but well-placed explosive, this creative variation would have had a hugely 
disruptive effect on the flow of the play, leaving other actors in a state of con-
fusion and stunned silence.
Though verging on the tasteless, the concept of an improvised explosive 
device, or IED, offers a useful metaphor for the workings of the most surpris-
ing variations. In a 2010 letter to The Economist, a former US army combat 
engineer named Charles Rei lamented the military’s over-reliance on ‘gee-whiz 
gadgets’ for neutralizing the threat of roadside IEDs in Iraq, adding that the 
military had ‘continually underestimated the intelligence and creativity of the 
soldiers and insurgents’.39 Rei offers his own view on what form this creativity 
should take: ‘The easiest way to predict the location of an IED is to look at a 
map and think, where would I put one? Choke points, avenues of approach, 
intersections, areas of routine use; these are the places where IEDs are 
found’. He further notes that ‘an insurgent wouldn’t waste resources building, 
placing and watching over an IED that had little chance of success’. Insurgents 
target choke points because they are highly vulnerable to the application of a 
small but unexpected force. Indeed, the tighter the choke point, the less force 
that is needed to achieve a devastating effect. So, though Shakespeare offers 
Seyton a most meagre role, his fifth and final line is a significant choke point 
in the narrative of Macbeth, and it is in this line that the disgruntled actor can 
lay his trap. With the unstoppable dramatic force of the play barrelling through 
this point of the narrative, it only takes a little well-timed pressure to derail the 
whole show.
Most well-crafted jokes in the script-switching tradition are deliberately 
constructed around a similar choke point in the narrative, a point where maxi-
mum surprise can be achieved with a minimum of effort. For once a listener 
triggers the wrong script and becomes fully committed to a certain avenue 
of interpretation, it takes just a little force from an ‘appropriate ­incongruity’ or 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
54
an ‘accurately improper move’ to stop the listener’s advance with a sucker-
punch of a punchline. So while joke tellers and joke listeners navigate the 
same conceptual space, only one has a map. The teller, who already knows 
the ending to the joke, understands the space intimately, while the listener, 
who may have no specific knowledge of the terrain, must use more general 
common-sense knowledge of the world as a guide. This, of course, turns out 
to be a mistake, for the most obvious route to the goal is not a viable route at 
all. As shown in Figure 3.5, and in a subversive switch to the roles depicted 
in Figure 3.3, it is the knowledgeable joke-teller (depicted as the more nim-
ble, barefoot explorer) who takes the circuitous route through the concep-
tual space. The discontinuity is not a short-cut, but a logical trap, into which 
an unsuspecting listener (the plodding, heavy-shoed explorer of Figure 3.5) 
­awkwardly falls.
You could say that the discontinuity at the heart of a joke proves to be a 
catastrophe for a naïve explorer, in logical terms at least, while the joke-teller 
glides smoothly around this pitfall. And in mathematical terms you would be 
right. The kinked surface depicted in Figures 3.2, 3.3 and 3.5 is widely used 
in a branch of mathematics called Catastrophe Theory. Invented by French 
mathematician René Thom in the 1960s, catastrophe theory41 allows us to 
study the geometry of discontinuous forms, where a small change in an input 
variable can cause an abrupt and extreme change in output value. Catastrophe 
Figure 3.5  A joke-teller and joke-listener navigate the search space of ­possibilities 
very differently. In a reversal on Figure 3.3, the joke-teller takes the longer ‘safe’ 
way through the space, while the joke-listener takes the more obvious but ultimately 
‘fatal’ route.40

Shock and awe
55
theory has been used to model everything from stock market crashes to the 
moods of bipolar artists to the sudden collapse of empires and civilizations. 
The mathematician John Allen Paulos has used catastrophe theory to sketch 
a theory of humour along the lines discussed here.42 Though schematic in out-
line, the account offered by Paulos is nicely consonant with the view of crea-
tivity as intelligent search in a space of many different conceptual possibilities. 
In each case, what makes creative behaviour different from regular intelligent 
behaviour is the way the explorer exploits the discontinuous contours of the 
conceptual space, either as logical shortcuts in the race to find novel solutions 
quickly and efficiently, or as logical deathtraps in the humorous misdirection 
of a good joke.
In mathematical terms, the perceived incongruity of a joke corresponds to 
a sudden discontinuity in conceptual space. An unthinking listener who plows 
through the space on the basis of conventions, expectations and habitual 
readings will need very little pressure to be tipped over into the chasm of the 
discontinuity. Just as the tightest choke points need the least force to achieve 
a dramatic effect, the merest incongruity in a punchline can be enough to 
force the listener into a radically different interpretation of a text. So to be 
creative with language, it helps to think like an insurgent, and ask: where are 
the choke  points in this phrasing? What discontinuities between words or 
phrases and their habitual meanings can I exploit? The most ­vulnerable points 
are those that the permit the greatest leverage, so that the most subtle vari-
ation can turn its meaning upside down. Often, we need only to vary a single 
word in a familiar form to turn a glowing tribute into a wounding insult, as 
when talk-show host Clive Anderson asked author Jeffrey Archer ‘Is there no 
beginning to your talent?’. Even the subtlest logical nuance can carry a humor-
ous wallop if it is couched in a familiar but misleading form, as in this gag from 
the British sketch-writer Barry Cryer: ‘Four Jewish ladies of a certain age are 
having lunch in a restaurant. The waiter comes over and asks “Is anything all 
right?” ’.43
Déjà vu all over again
Of course, there is a much simpler and altogether more obvious way of up-
ending the meaning of a text. It’s called negation – we simply add ‘not’ to 
any phrase whose meaning we want to invert. Negation may be the most 
obvious way to achieve this effect, but it is hardly the most creative, even if 
teenagers still think it is clever to place negation markers at the very end of 
a statement as a sarcastic signal of displeasure. In language, teenagers may 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
56
be the ultimate insurgents, but the sentence-trailing ‘Not!’ is a crude IED 
that is lacking in surprise and is easily neutralized. Nonetheless, teenagers 
do plant their ­little sarcasm bombs in the right place. An unexpected variation 
at the end of an utterance has maximal surprise value, leading an audience 
down the garden path towards an interpretation that is never realized. Like-
wise, an unexpected deviation from a familiar script can be just as shocking 
when it arrives at the end of a joke. Some jokes even go as far as to employ 
repetition in the body of the text to reinforce an expectation that is finally 
dashed in the punchline. As in the story of the boy who cried ‘wolf!’, the final 
variation is all the more surprising for diverging from a pattern that has been 
established within the narrative itself. In abstract terms, these jokes employ 
what is called an AAB44 pattern structure, in which two or more examples of 
an event-type A are followed by an incongruous event B. For instance, the 
following witticism employs an AAB structure: ‘George Washington couldn’t 
tell a lie; Richard Nixon couldn’t tell the truth; and Bill Clinton couldn’t tell the 
difference’. Here, an A-type event is the use of the word ‘tell’ to denote an 
act of verbal communication, while the final B-type event is the use of the 
same word to denote an act of mental differentiation. The joke suggests that 
Clinton is less truthful than Washington, more truthful than Nixon, but less 
discerning than either.
The AAB pattern is a structural feature of many songs in the Blues tradition. 
A typical Blues verse comprises a line (A) which is sung twice in succession, 
followed by a different line (B) which ends the verse. As in jokes, the final (B) 
can be a playful departure from the content of (A), as in this verse from Tab 
Benoit’s ‘Garbage Man’45:
 My Baby, she run away with the garbage man,
 Yeah, My Baby, she run away with the garbage man,
 Well I need you so bad, so you can empty my garbage can.
But this music is called The Blues for a reason, and most AAB verses are not 
humorous and joke-like. It takes more than a surprising divergence from A to 
B to make AAB funny. Humour theorists insist that B must seem incongru-
ous when following A, yet be resolvable as meaningful and appropriate in its 
relation to A. The above AAB verse can thus be understood as a humorous 
script variation in the mould of the GTVH. Though we trigger the familiar 
script of failed romance, we later realize that the singer does not pine for his 
lover, but for the lover’s new partner, not because he misses the comforts 
of a steady romance, but because he misses the convenience of regular 
garbage collection.

Shock and awe
57
When used as a rhetorical strategy, the AAB pattern allows a speaker to 
gain some positive momentum in the run up to a negative put-down, at which 
point a killer B punch is delivered. Perhaps the most memorable use of the 
AAB pattern in this vein occurred during the 1988 US presidential elections,46 
when the following exchange took place in the vice-presidential debate:
Senator Dan Quayle: I have as much experience in the Congress as Jack 
Kennedy did when he sought the presidency . . .
Senator Lloyd Bentsen: Senator, I served with Jack Kennedy, I knew Jack 
Kennedy, Jack Kennedy was a friend of mine. Senator, you are no Jack 
Kennedy.
You almost have to feel sorry for Dan Quayle here, as Bentsen counters 
Quayle’s altogether reasonable claim to have amassed sufficient experi-
ence for the presidency with an unstoppable roundhouse punch. Bentsen 
squeezes in an additional A element to lengthen the buildup to his put-down, 
reducing both the social distance and the conceptual distance between him-
self and Kennedy with each step, so that each successive affirmation just 
adds increased force to the negation when it finally comes. Quayle can only 
respond by noting, weakly, ‘that was really uncalled for, Senator’. To appreci-
ate the contribution of the AAB pattern here, just consider if Bentsen would 
have landed such a resounding blow with the simple response ‘but you’re not 
Jack Kennedy’.
Recent work by cognitive scientists Jeffrey Loewenstein and Chip Heath 
shows that the AAB pattern in stories – which they call the repetition-break 
plot structure47 – is considered more enjoyable by readers than the equiva-
lent AAA (unbroken repetition) or ABC (no repetition) patterns. Many narrative 
jokes use explicit repetition to enforce an AAA pattern in the minds of an audi-
ence, so that AAB repetition-break comes as an incongruous and potentially 
humorous surprise. There are whole genres of jokes involving a priest, a rabbi 
and an imam; or an Irishman, and Englishman and a Scotsman; or a trio of 
nuns, hookers, husbands or some other stock characters, in which two of the 
three act somewhat predictably while the zany actions of the third provide 
the humorous departure. But there are many more jokes that do not rely on 
explicit repetition. Yet these jokes might still be said to obey an (AA)B pattern 
if prior familiarity with A and a superficial similarity between A and B causes 
the AA lead-in to be tacitly assumed. This implicitness is also a factor in the 
creative variation of familiar phrases, but even this kind of variation can benefit 
from the use of explicit AAB repetition. The AAB pattern gives an audience 
the opportunity to compare and contrast a novel variation to its more famil-
iar norm, so that the meaning of any substitutions can be fully appreciated. 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
58
Moreover, the explicit use of repetition in an AB or AAB pattern can make the 
relationship between variation and norm all the more apparent, as in the fol-
lowing triad:
 When in Rome, do as the Romans do.
 When in Athens, do as the Greeks do.
 When in Paris, do as the Germans do.
The A-script here is the standard ‘when in a city, do as the locals do’. The 
B-script is altogether more subversive, ‘when in a conquered city, do as its 
military occupiers do’. The explicit AA repetition and B divergence is not strictly 
needed here, since the first A is a cliché through and through. Nonetheless, 
the repetition does remind the audience of some received wisdom in need 
of a cheeky make-over. It may be appropriate to act like a true local, but who 
wouldn’t prefer the freedom to act like a debauched invader instead?
The final B line of the above triad subverts the A cliché that spawned it, 
but many variations simply clone a convenient norm to lend it a modicum of 
freshness and contextual fit. For instance, the ‘When in Athens’ variation in 
the second line is more an attempt to localize the familiar ‘Roman’ norm than 
to wring any humour from it, since it adds little but contextual detail to the 
original, and fails to generate any kind of non-obvious incongruity, semantic 
tension, or surprise. We’ll return to the topic of lazy variation in Chapter 7, 
where we’ll discover why linguists use the intriguing label ‘snowclones’ for 
these rather obvious forms.
Appropriately improper
The sociologist Erving Goffman coined the phrase ‘accurately improper move’ 
to describe how the charades that shape our day-to-day social interactions – 
what Goffman called ‘expression games’ – can be deliberately undermined 
with a creative action that is, at once, improper inside the charade, but sensi-
ble and proper when viewed from outside. In this light, Lloyd Bentsen’s mem-
orable put-down of Dan Quayle can be seen as an accurately improper move: 
Quayle had, after all, merely hinted that JFK might be an apt vehicle of com-
parison for himself and did not go so far as to make his comparison explicit. In 
this sense, Bentsen’s response is improper, or as Quayle described it, ‘really 
uncalled for’. Nonetheless, Bentsen needed to neutralize even the hint of 
a comparison to JFK, justifying his rhetorically accurate if socially improper 
retort with the defence ‘You are the one that was making the comparison’. 

Shock and awe
59
In other words, Bentsen accurately saw Quayle’s expression game for what it 
was and improperly ended the charade.
If our aim is to show the unreasonableness of unearned praise, half-baked 
opinion or habitual expectation, then like Bentsen, our most creative move is 
also an ‘accurately improper’ one. Such a response achieves what Elliott Oring 
calls an ‘appropriate incongruity’, a B where an A is expected to show these 
expectations to be nothing more than the rules of a game we can choose not 
to play. However, the sociologist Thomas Scheff suggests that Goffman’s sim-
ple prescription may be hard to fill48:
Devising a phrase or sentence that is ‘accurately improper’ in this sense 
would seem to be a formidable task. One must first hit upon an important 
commonly held assumption, then exactly counter it with an equally plausible 
assumption.
Ironically, if Scheff is right, the key to devising a creative and ‘accurately 
improper’ insight is an ability to recognize, and duly hit upon, ‘an ­important 
commonly-held assumption’. In language, the names we give to these 
­widely-accepted truisms are also commonly perceived as antonyms for crea-
tivity itself: the cliché and the stereotype.
In our received wisdom, clichés are never bubbling or energetic, fresh-faced 
or innovative, surprising or clever; rather, the poor devils are inevitably flyblown, 
dust-covered, tired, jaded, stale, lifeless, pale or limp. Nonetheless, just as 
we can’t have surprise birthday parties without birthdays, excitement without 
boredom, pleasure without pain or relief without anxiety, we can’t properly 
conceive of a creative departure from the norm without a ­well-developed con-
ception of what is conventional and normative and, well, boring in language. If 
anything, stereotypes get an even worse press than clichés, perhaps because 
we are prone to stereotype our stereotypes as prejudicial and small-minded, 
just as we are wont to condemn clichés with more clichés (or, in the words 
of critic Christopher Ricks,49 with cliché-clichés such as ‘flyblown’, ‘stale’ and 
‘limp’). The A of the AAB pattern is every bit as important as the B, but is 
condemned to play a largely unsung or misunderstood role in the workings of 
creative variation. Nonetheless, clichés and stereotypes have a fundamental 
role to play in linguistic creativity, and so we shall do our best to redress the 
imbalance in the next chapter.

60

4
Round up the usual suspects
Stereotypes as the building 
blocks of creative language
Mary Poppins sang that ‘a spoonful of sugar makes the 
medicine go down’, and when it comes to creativity, a liberal 
coating of the familiar can certainly make the strange and 
the unfamiliar all the more palatable to an audience. We take 
comfort from the familiar, and so use clichés and stereotypes 
as a touchstone for inference in hectic, distracting or uncertain 
situations. But if we wish to master language, rather than 
be mastered by it, we must exploit our familiar stereotypes 
thoughtfully and creatively. In short, we must learn to separate 
the familiar from the obvious, so we can exploit the immediacy 
and the evocativeness of the former without falling into the 
trap of the latter. If used thoughtfully, we’ll see that our stock of 
cultural stereotypes allows us to create combinations that can 
be both familiar and surprising.
Poster boys and Bêtes Noires
Words that evoke strong emotions or deeply-held beliefs can easily slip 
from the moorings of their literal meanings. Because the link between these 
words and the feelings they evoke is so strong, the feelings persist even 
when the words are used with newly minted figurative senses. Thus, while 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
62
it may seem trite to call someone ‘Judas!’ for betraying a shared belief sys-
tem – as Bob Dylan was memorably called in a 1965 concert in Manchester 
shortly after he went ‘electric’1 – the resulting metaphor is both unambiguous 
and visceral. Name-calling doesn’t have to be witty or creative to be emotion-
ally effective, and a language like English provides a range of stock names 
and phrases for conveying a recognizable feeling with a powerful, if rather 
obvious, punch.
Yet creativity is sometimes a necessity, especially when the feeling that 
we want to convey is neither simple nor commonplace – ‘Judas!’ ticks both 
of these boxes – but complex and nuanced, and lacking an obvious signifier 
in language. For instance, consider this playful description of a wine from a 
guide for beginners:
Riesling is the Kenny G of the wine world: technically brilliant, but oh-so-
lacking in credibility.2
Judas and Kenny G are familiar figures in pop-culture, though it is a rare event 
to see them both mentioned in the same breadth. To appreciate the creativity 
of the wine comparison, and the total lack of creativity in the Dylan incident, it 
is important that we distinguish between familiarity and obviousness. The use 
of Judas in a description of Bob Dylan was both familiar and obvious, since 
nothing draws to mind the concept of betrayal more effectively than Judas 
Iscariot (even Benedict Arnold and Vidkun Quisling are also-rans in this race). 
In contrast, the use of the saxophonist Kenny G to describe Riesling is familiar 
but non-obvious. A hallmark of creativity is the way it makes the non-obvious 
seem so obvious after the fact, and at first blush the comparison does indeed 
seem non-obvious: a wine described in terms of a popular musician? But on 
closer inspection, Kenny G – a technically-gifted musician whose music has 
become a near-constant accompaniment to elevator rides the world over – 
proves to be an ideal poster-boy for the realization that credibility and virtuos-
ity do not always go hand in hand. This realization, the comparison assures 
us, is as relevant to our appreciation of wines as it is to our appreciation of 
musicians. And if Kenny G suffers unnecessarily in the expansion of someone 
else’s wine vocabulary, then the gratuitous sideswipe only adds to the humor-
ous creativity of the comparison. Take that, Kenny G!
Whenever a simile or metaphor describes an X as a Y, we say that Y acts as 
a vehicle for carrying certain qualities of Y over to X.3 Though it hardly seems 
fair, Kenny G is an established stereotype for virtuosity without credibility, and 
has thus become a popular vehicle for ascribing those qualities to another 
person or idea. Search the web with the Google query ‘* is the Kenny G of 
*’ and one can find over a 1,000 variations on this double-edged compliment. 
Most use the stereotype to damn another musician with faint praise; thus, 

Round up the usual suspects
63
Yanni is the Kenny G of keyboards, while Eric Clapton is the Kenny G of the 
blues. Of course, it could be worse: Ringo Starr is a stereotype for the weak-
est and least talented member of a group, as evidenced in the large number 
of web-comparisons that use him as a vehicle. Linguists refer to descriptions 
like this, with the form ‘X is the Y of Z ’, as XYZ constructions,4 for obvious 
reasons. Many XYZs are neither figurative nor creative, as in ‘Barack Obama 
is the president of the United States’, but those that use a proper-named indi-
vidual as a vehicle in the Y position are usually figurative and – depending on 
the balance of obviousness to familiarity – creative.
Every domain of experience has its own familiar stereotypes which can 
be leveraged into an XYZ construction to denote a whole category of similar 
people or things. The use of individuals to denote categories is not really that 
unusual, in creative language at least: recall Lloyd Bentsen’s use of the put-
down ‘you’re no Jack Kennedy’ in the last chapter. Indeed, Sam Glucksberg5 
and his collaborators6 argue that this is how all metaphor works, after a fash-
ion. For example, the ‘jail’ in the metaphor ‘my job is a jail’ doesn’t denote a 
penal institution but a broader category of environments that are unpleasantly 
restrictive; jail is used here as a stereotypical vehicle for any kind of confining 
situation.
When we come to study stereotypes in metaphor, the capitalized Ys in 
proper-name XYZs make these vehicles easy to harvest from the web. Here’s 
a taste of what we find:
Paris Hilton is the Zsa Zsa Gabor of the 21st Century
Victoria Williams is the Yoko Ono of the folk scene
Chris Manion is the Woody Guthrie of the right
Qifa Nabki is the Winston Churchill of the Islamic Resistance
Nick Denton is the William Randolph Hearst of the blog world
P. D. Q Bach is the Weird Al Yankovich of the classical music world
David Wetherell is the Warren Buffet of the internet
Steve Jobs is the Walt Disney of the tech world
Ben Bernanke is the Tony Robbins of the financial world
Newt Gingrich is the Trotsky of the Hard Right
David Cameron is the Tony Blair of the conservative party
Michael Jordan is the Tony Hawk of the basketball world
Milton Caniff is the Rembrandt of the comics
Scipio Africanus is the Tommy Franks of the Roman legions
Peter Brett is the Tolstoy of the F train

Exploding the Creativity Myth
64
Daniel Melingo is the Tom Waits of the contemporary tango
Shahruhk Khan is the Tom Cruise of the Bollywood Industry
Edward Abbey is the Thoreau of the desert
June Wanniski is the Thomas Paine of the Reagan revolution
Bill Gates is the Thomas Edison of the tech industry
Nicholas Sparks is the Stephen King of the mush-brained romantic novel
It goes without saying that such comparisons work best when the Y cuts a 
more familiar figure than the X it is used to describe. This familiarity need not 
mean that such comparisons are always obvious, though most uses of the 
figurative XYZ construction on the web do exhibit a certain inevitability. For 
instance, most draw their Xs and Ys from the same domain, and so, in the 
sample above, we see musicians compared to musicians, writers to writers, 
artists to artists, athletes to athletes and businessmen to businessmen. In 
a web sample of 500 XYZs, with a political figure (like Tony Blair above) in 
the Y position, we find that almost two-thirds of the examples also contain a 
political figure in the X position. The sample is worryingly conservative in other 
ways too: four-fifths of the examples compare a male X to a male Y, about 
a tenth compare a female X to a female Y and a tenth are cross-gendered. 
Moreover, an XYZ in our web sample is twice as likely to be backward-looking 
(where the X is more contemporary than the Y) as to be forward-looking, while 
the Y component is four times more likely to be a fictional character than the X 
component (nine out of ten examples draw both their Xs and Ys from the real-
world). A similarly conservative parade of obvious uses for familiar figures is 
observed when we sample XYZs from the sports domain and from the music/
art domain.
Yet it need not be like this, and some XYZs put familiar figures to crea-
tive, non-obvious uses. Let’s focus on a particular figure, the basketball player 
Michael Jordan. Our sports sample contains 21 web XYZs with Jordan in the 
Y position. The corresponding Xs are listed below, with the corresponding Zs 
in parentheses:
Manny Pacquiao (Philippines), Andrew Gaze (NBL), Chet Snouffer 
(boomerang), Garry Kasparov (chess), Mwadi Mabika (WNBA), Vince Young 
(NFL), Pádraig Harrington (golf), Tiger Woods (golf), Randy Couture (martial 
arts), Daryll Pomey (Philippines), Tony Hawk (skateboarding), Champ Hallett 
(wheelchair basketball), David Berg (courtroom), Bronwyn Weber (cakes), 
Michael Chabon (literary), the tuna sandwich (mid-day meal), Billy Bob 
Thornton (movies), Ralph Appelbaum (museums), Allan Bloom (seminars), 
Britney Spears (pop), Randall Ross (rare books)

Round up the usual suspects
65
Some comparisons are more obvious than others, and most of these Xs are 
sportsmen; yet three Xs are female, and nine are from non-sports domains. 
The description of Britney Spears as the Michael Jordan of pop is a double-
whammy, bucking the trend to conserve both gender and domain in a figura-
tive XYZ comparison. Of course, the least obvious uses of a stereotypical 
person are those in which the stereotype is used as a vehicle to describe a 
non-person, such as when X is a product, an animal or a plant. The sample 
above shows that even the humble tuna sandwich is thought to possess 
Jordanesque qualities on the web, and the list below provides further evi-
dence that web XYZs sometimes use familiar stereotypes in non-obvious 
comparisons:
Der Sturmer is the Rush Limbaugh of the Third Reich
DSL is the Rocky Balboa of the fast-access future
Alfa Romeo is the Quentin Tarantino of the automotive world
Facebook is the Patrick Henry of the 21st Century
Apple’s iThingy is the Paris Hilton of mobile phones
Chicken Inasal is the Oprah Winfrey of the menu
Nintendo is the Ned Flanders of the console world
Samsung DLPs are the Lindsay Lohan of the television market
Pac Man is the King Lear of the 1980’s 8-bit videogame revolution
The Razr is the Kate Moss of phones
The Borgata is the Julia Roberts of casinos
Bradley’s Battleship is the John Travolta of board games
Piper Cub is the Henry Ford of the aviation world
Krug is the Dorian Gray of the wine world
Red meat is the Donald Trump of cancer
Copy-protected CDs are the Dick Cheney of the music industry
Tungsten is the Cleopatra of the elements
The K750i is the Chuck Norris of the photography world
Toyota Prius is the Che Guevara of the [eco-friendly car] movement
The Manhattan is the Cary Grant of cocktails
Mac Mini is the Bruce Lee of the computing world
Big Bordeaux is the Barry Bonds of the wine world
The Montrachet is the Angelina Jolie of the pack [wines]
Jimmy the Parrot is the Robert De Niro of the bird world

Exploding the Creativity Myth
66
Moby Dick is the Samson of the ocean
The Blue Marlin is the Muhammad Ali of the fish world
Pit Bulls are the Mike Tyson of the K9 world
The Boxer is the George Clooney of the dog world
The Northern Pintail is the Audrey Hepburn of the duck world
The potato is the Tom Hanks of the vegetable world
The most creative examples appear to have the least obvious interpretations, 
and resemble riddles in the way they refuse to serve up their meanings on a 
plate. To understand ‘The Razr is the Kate Moss of phones’ it suffices to know 
that Moss is a stereotypically skinny supermodel, while ‘Jimmy the Parrot is 
the Robert De Niro of the bird world’ might be understood as a reference to 
De Niro’s oft-parodied habit of aggressively repeating his lines. But ‘Red meat 
is the Donald Trump of cancer’ is a puzzle that does not yield its meaning 
so readily. While we know, for instance, that Trump is a famously aggressive 
property tycoon, that cancer is scariest when it spreads aggressively, and that 
aggressive predators tend to be voracious consumers of red meat, this puzzle 
is still missing a piece. Its meaning only becomes clear when we look to the 
original web-text (a Vegan website7) in which this XYZ was originally coined. 
Here the author notes that since red meat has been implicated in the develop-
ment of many different kinds of cancer, it can thus be categorized, metaphori-
cally, as an aggressive and opportunistic builder of cancers. It makes sense 
then that ‘the Donald’, who is the very model of an aggressive and opportun-
istic property developer, should fill the Y role in this wonderful comparison.
No real people were harmed in the making of these comparisons. The Robert 
De Niro that is employed here is merely our stereotype of the intense method 
actor, gleaned not from first-hand experience but from his many repetitive film 
roles. These are simplified conceptual models, mental doppelgangers in which 
a useful stereotypical property is recognizably grounded8: thus, Tom Hanks is 
versatile, Rocky Balboa is resilient, Chuck Norris is implacable, Muhammad 
Ali is graceful, Kate Moss is super-slim, Donald Trump is aggressive, Audrey 
Hepburn is elegant, Cary Grant is sophisticated and Angelina Jolie is both 
voluptuous and full-bodied. These stereotypes are simplistic, of course, but 
only present a problem when they are used lazily, to ‘enjoy the comfort of 
opinion without the discomfort of thought’ as John F. Kennedy memorably 
put it.9 Creative speakers do not abhor the use of stereotypes, but exploit the 
familiarity and immediacy that stereotypes offer in non-obvious ways.
Our goal in this chapter is to explore the world of stereotypes more gener-
ally, to look beyond stereotypical individuals to consider the wide variety of 
mundane (and often prejudicial) stereotypes that pervade our everyday lan-
guage. Behind every creative riff on a familiar form lies an equally familiar 

Round up the usual suspects
67
idea or stock mental image, and we’ll explore how stereotypes are used to 
anchor our most common similes, to see how similes are used to perpetuate 
the shared knowledge of a culture. We’ll also see how we can use similes to 
harvest a cast of thousands of common stereotypes from the web, using a 
search engine like Google. As counter-intuitive as it may seem, stereotypes 
are the building blocks of creative language, so the more we (or our comput-
ers) can acquire, then the more varied the descriptive toolbox we have at our 
command. Finally, we’ll show how we can use stereotypes to build a simple 
but effective metaphor generation system, called Aristotle.
The proverbial stereotype
The term ‘stereotype’ does not usually receive a good press, for generally 
good reasons. We tend to use the term as a short-hand for unjustifiable preju-
dices and biases that are in turn rooted in irrational social anxieties. Though 
social stereotypes can sometimes flatter a particular category of person, albeit 
in a way that is often double-edged and self-serving, most social stereotypes 
are negative. Consider the stereotypes that inform our opinion about different 
nationalities. The European Union, for instance, is not just a common market 
for goods and services; it supports a brisk trade in stereotypes too, though 
most of these long pre-date the foundation of the E.U. Even in  1772, the 
‘Encyclopédie, ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des metiers’ 
of Diderot and d’Alembert10 noted that ‘it’s a kind of proverb to say: as frivo-
lous as a Frenchman, as jealous as an Italian, as serious as a Spaniard, as 
malicious as an Englishman, as drunk as a German, as lazy as an Irishman, as 
deceitful as a Greek’. These associations are stereotypes not because they are 
necessarily wrong, but because they lazily assume that nations correspond 
to classes, and that the distinctive characteristics of any class can be safely 
attributed to all of its individual members. Stereotypes based on geography, 
race and nationality are easily fostered, and though prone to subtle changes 
over time, they do not retire gracefully. In 1919, the writer Hereward T. Price 
claimed that:
[t]he Russians are as muddle-headed and stupid as the Englishman of a Daily 
Mail nightmare, and as quick in perception and polished as a Frenchman, as 
fond of tea and talk as an Oriental, as open-minded, acute, and subtle as an 
Athenian, as lazy as a Spaniard, as passionate as an Italian, as cold at heart 
and calculating as an Irishman, honest, simple, and kindly as the German 
of the good old fairy tales, yet, in their wrath, as brutal as the Tartars from 
whom they spring, and, in revenge, as cunning and implacable as a Jew.11

Exploding the Creativity Myth
68
As stereotypes are echoed and reinforced by the language we use, they  
inevitably become entwined with the fabric of the language itself, in the guise 
of proverbs and clichés like Price’s as-as similes above. As a result, ­linguistic 
devices like simile provide a convenient means of packaging a stereotypi-
cal belief into a concise, reusable form, and also provide a powerful lens for 
detecting and analysing the stereotypes that become woven into these famil-
iar forms. Generally speaking, the more commonplace a simile, the more 
entrenched the stereotypical world view that it communicates. For instance, 
the simile ‘as drunk as a German’ from Diderot and d’Alembert’s Encyclopédie 
can be found just five times on the web if we search for this phrase using 
Google.
Looking at these solitary hits in the screen-shot of Figure 4.1, we can see 
that one of these is a reference to the Encyclopédie itself, another is a like-
minded quote from the Enlightenment philosopher Montesquieu (who, inci-
dentally, considered climate to be a contributing factor in the development of 
national character12), and two are not to German people at all, but to German 
huskies. Despite the enduring popularity of Oktoberfest, the idea of Germans 
as drunkards simply refuses to crystallize in the language of the web.
Figure 4.1  Screen-shot of Google results for the query ‘as drunk as a German’.

Round up the usual suspects
69
Likewise, Diderot and d’Alembert’s stereotype of the ‘lazy Irishman’ finds 
just three hits on Google, of which two are again from the Encyclopédie and 
Montesquieu. In dramatic contrast, however, is the stereotypical notion of the 
drunken Irishman, conveyed by the simile ‘as drunk as an Irishman’. As shown 
in Figure 4.2, this phrase finds over 1,300 hits on Google. This extraordinary 
number attests to the popularity of a stereotype that has become entrenched 
in a range of habitual language patterns. To this day, police vans used for the 
transport of prisoners are known by the slang term Paddywagon, arising from 
their once frequent use in the transport of boisterous Irishmen (or ‘Paddies’, 
after the diminutive ‘Paddy’ for ‘Patrick’, a common Irish name), usually from 
the scene of a violent disturbance in a public house. In a similar vein, the use 
of the word ‘hooligan’ to mean a violent and unruly person derives from the 
surname of a fictional Irish family whose rowdy exploits were celebrated in 
a music hall song of the late nineteenth century.13 Social stereotypes plainly 
lag behind the world they are intended to capture. While this is an unfortunate 
fact for groups that are ill-served by a mean-spirited caricature, it is a gener-
ally positive fact for language as a whole, since uncreative language benefits 
Figure 4.2  Google results for the scurrilous query, ‘as drunk as an Irishman’.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
70
from the appearance of solidity that these anchor concepts can provide, and 
creative language benefits from having an uncreative but familiar foundation it 
can exploit and subvert.
Wherever we find rules and conventions, linguistic or otherwise, we are 
sure to find exceptions, and sure enough, we find that the ironic phrase ‘as 
sober as an Irishman’ is also a habitual form in the texts of the World Wide 
Web. Figure 4.3 below shows that this phrasing finds over 500 hits via Google, 
less than half that of the phrase ‘as drunk as an Irishman’, but more than 
enough to suggest a firm presence in the popular imagination. Looking to the 
first snippet in Figure 4.3, we see that the author takes the ‘sober’ variation 
as an indicator that the surrounding text is merely an ironic parody of what it 
pretends to be. Other snippets show even more elaborate variations of the 
same simile; the fourth uses ‘an Irishman on Paddy’s Day’ to evoke a state 
of extreme intoxication, while the fifth evokes the image of ‘an Irishman in a 
brewery’. In each case, the ironic variation succeeds only because the norm is 
already so entrenched in the public imagination, via the widely-shared stere-
otype of the drunken Irishman.
Most stereotypes are founded on a dash of empirical observation mixed 
with a giant helping of convenient fiction. Nonetheless, social stereotypes 
Figure 4.3  Google results for the unthinkable query, ‘as sober as an Irishman’.

Round up the usual suspects
71
persist because they lend a comforting sense of solidity to our vague and 
often uninformed impressions of others. Indeed, the term ‘stereotype’ can be 
taken to literally mean a ‘solid impression’, since ‘stereo’ is derived from the 
Greek for ‘solid’ or ‘firm’, and ‘type’ is derived from the Greek for an engraved 
‘mark’ or ‘impression’. Surprisingly, however, the cognitive and social sense of 
the term comes to us by way of the world of printing, in which a ‘stereotype’ 
is an engraved metal plate for firmly imparting a printed impression onto the 
page. By happy uncoincidence, the word ‘cliché’ also originates in the world 
of printing, where it once denoted a block of movable type corresponding to 
a frequently used phrase; the availability of a metal cliché (the word derives 
from the sound made by the metal type) meant that individual letter blocks 
did not need to be re-composited each time the phrase was reused. So, a 
stock printing block for a stock phrase then. Printing provides an apt metaphor 
for how mental stereotypes are used to guide our social reasoning. Just as a 
printer’s plate stamps the same text onto every page, we use stereotypes to 
make inferences about others as if they too were empty pages, blanks lacking 
any idiosyncratic detail that might transcend the general template to which we 
have assigned them.
We owe this social-psychology notion of a ‘stereotype’ to the journalist 
Walter Lippmann, whose 1922 book Public Opinion14 introduced the idea of a 
stereotype as a partial model of the truth of a complex situation. As Lippmann 
notes, ‘Our stereotyped world is not necessarily the world we should like it to 
be. It is simply the kind of world we expect it to be.’ Lippmann’s terminology 
captured a powerful insight into the mind’s use of schematic structures, or 
categories, in dealing with the minutiae of everyday life. Rather than construct 
a detailed and unique representation for everything and everybody that we 
encounter, we instead assign them to stereotypes that allow the same details 
to be shared by many different entities. When an entity exhibits some key fea-
tures of a stereotype, we naturally assume that it possesses all of the features 
of the stereotype. As Lippmann rather sadly puts it in Public Opinion,15 ‘There 
is neither time nor opportunity for intimate acquaintance. Instead we notice a 
trait which marks a well known type and fill in the rest of the picture by means 
of the stereotypes we carry about in our heads’.
From cliché to stereotype, and beyond
The power of a stereotype lies in its ability to simplify the world, allowing us to 
focus on the salient features of an entity that have already proven their infer-
ential worth many times over. As such, stereotypes suffer from the same bad 
press as do verbal clichés: both capture knowledge that, on deeper reflection, 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
72
can appear simplistic, exaggerated or just plain wrong.16 Nonetheless, this 
knowledge is an essential part of good communication. The philosopher Hilary 
Putnam notes mischievously that ‘Communication [about tigers] presupposes 
that I have a stereotype about tigers which includes stripes, and that you have 
a stereotype about tigers which includes stripes, and that I know that your 
stereotype includes stripes, and that you know that my stereotype includes 
stripes, and that you know that I know . . . ’.17 In other words, stereotypes 
are inference-rich categories18 that collectively provide a repository of mutual 
knowledge,19 one that speakers tacitly use to establish a common ground 
when interacting with one another.20
Stereotypes and clichés provide complementary perspectives on our psy-
chological tendencies toward simplification and idealization, but they are not 
the only perspectives. Other useful type structures include the ‘prototypes’ 
of cognitive psychology and the ‘archetypes’ of Jungian psychology,21 both of 
which have their own unique connotations. Archetypes have gained an almost 
metaphysical connotation from their use in the work of psychologist Carl 
Jung, who viewed them as psychological distillations of humankind’s collec-
tive experiences. In particular, Jung used the notion of an archetype to identify 
key personality types that represent different expressions and needs of the 
human psyche, from the archetype of the child to the hero to the mother to 
the trickster. These are resonant ideas that influence our understanding of 
human behaviour at a mythic level, from the symbols we use to the rituals 
we perform.
Prototypes similarly stick in the mind as resonant ideas, not as metaphys-
ical tools to interpret the world and our actions within it, but as empirical 
observations about how humans cognitively divide the world into categories 
with more or less typical members.22 Cognitive psychologists see prototypes 
as the most familiar and representative members of a category, making them 
the ideal yardsticks for performing typicality judgements. So when Mr Blond 
in Reservoir Dogs talks about his need to ‘get a regular job job-type job’23 to 
appease his parole officer, his laboured phrasing makes it clear he is refer-
ring to the prototypical view of a job and not to the kind of criminal job he 
would much prefer to have. It is meaningful to talk not just of prototypical jobs 
but of prototypical birds, prototypical trees, prototypical weapons, prototypi-
cal games or of the prototype of any category at all. As shown in Figure 4.4, 
robins, crows, eagles, penguins, ostriches and chickens are all members of 
the category Bird, but they are not all equally typical or representative. Cogni-
tive psychologists like George Lakoff view Bird as a radial category,24 with the 
most typical members residing at or near the centre, and progressively less 
representative members residing further out, towards the periphery.
Members of other categories that share some of the most salient proper-
ties of Bird can be imagined to lie outside the boundaries of the category, but 

Round up the usual suspects
73
at a distance reflective of their inherent similarity to the prototype. Thus, as 
shown in Figure 4.4, we might imagine bats, airplanes and mosquitoes and 
other winged entities as lying outside the boundaries of Bird, yet not so far 
away that a creative speaker couldn’t playfully sneak them inside. The stretchi-
ness of radial categories means we can sometimes view – with a little creative 
licence – obvious non-members as though they were members, as in the quip 
‘the state bird of Minnesota is the mosquito’. We might even suggest that ‘the 
official bird of Washington state is the 747’, since Boeing has its headquarters 
in Seattle.
Prototypes, archetypes, stereotypes and clichés all denote similar ideas 
from different perspectives about what is normal and unexceptional in the 
world. Yet no perspective is entirely reducible to any another, and none prop-
erly subsumes all the others. In his essay From Cliché to Archetype, Marshall 
McLuhan finds an awkward middle ground with his term ‘cliché-archetype’.25 
Noting that the term ‘archetype’ implies a somewhat high-brow sensibility, 
McLuhan adopts a less metaphysical approach than Jung, and views an arche-
type as a highly conventionalized association that finds its verbal equivalent in 
the cliché. For McLuhan, the facts that flags typically hang on flag-poles and oil 
typically flows through pipelines are archetypes that form ‘complex retrieval 
systems’,26 conceptual networks in which the retrieval of one archetypal idea 
Figure 4.4  The usual suspects: More or less typical ‘birds’, and some non-birds 
that lie outside the category while still sharing salient properties with the prototypi-
cal bird.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
74
inevitably leads to the retrieval of others. Archetypes are thus aspects of a 
conventional world view; these aspects hang together to form complex ‘cross-
quoting’ structures via overlapping clichés and other non-linguistic norms. As 
such, a flagpole with a flag is more representative than a flagpole without 
a flag, while a pipeline carrying oil is more representative than one that is 
empty. In this way, McLuhan’s notion of an cliché-archetype also seems to 
reconcile itself, to a degree at least, with the cognitive-psychology notion of 
a prototype.
Like ‘cliché-archetype’, the term ‘stereotype’ is just as applicable to cars, 
books, animals and other objects in the real world as it is to people, countries 
and social groups. Consider the traits that are most salient in our stereotypical 
conception of a good cup of espresso. While espresso can vary from one café 
to another, there is an idealized conception of the perfect serving (nicknamed 
‘the god shot’ by aficionados) that is widely shared. Whenever we order an 
espresso, it is this stereotype that guides our expectations of what it will look 
like, feel like and taste like. These expectations are echoed in language in a 
variety of clichéd evocations of the qualities of espresso. Figure 4.5 presents a 
word cloud of those qualities that are stereotypically associated with espresso 
in everyday language. A word cloud is a simple visual device that is commonly 
used on the web to reduce a large document or set of words to its most fre-
quent elements, which are displayed with a proportionately larger font size. 
In Figure 4.5 the most salient properties of Espresso – which we take here to 
be the properties most frequently ascribed to Espresso in similes – are fore-
grounded in a larger, bolder type.
Of course, the precise salience of each property in Figure 4.5 – from 
intense to Italian – will vary from drinker to drinker, but the general landscape 
should be similar for all. These properties are not usually articulated (e.g. you 
don’t, as a rule, ask for an ‘Italian espresso’ or a ‘strong espresso’), but are 
assumed whenever one orders an espresso, and generally only made explicit 
Figure 4.5  Word cloud for the concept Espresso, in which salient traits are 
­foregrounded.

Round up the usual suspects
75
when a particular cup is either very good or very bad. Stereotypes condense 
a great deal of related information into a single mental structure, to form infer-
ence-rich categories that, in Lippmann’s words, allow us to quickly ‘fill in the 
rest of the picture’ whenever we are presented with an incomplete view of 
a ­situation.
Once again, language serves as a lens through which we can see the stere-
otypes that exist in a linguistic community. Figure 4.6 shows the results of 
using Google to determine the prevalence of ‘as strong as an espresso’ on the 
web. Over 500 documents attest to the fact that espresso is stereotypically 
strong, while unsurprisingly, no documents at all are found for the contrary 
position ‘as weak as an espresso’. A speculative search for other properties 
on Google finds 787 hits for ‘as intense as an espresso’, 699 hits for ‘as dark 
as espresso’ and 65 hits for ‘as rich as espresso’. If we use Google’s * wild-
card to broaden our search via the generalized simile ‘as * as espresso’, we 
net an even bigger catch that also includes ‘as bitter as espresso’ and ‘as 
aromatic as espresso’. Similes and stereotypes enjoy a productively symbiotic 
relationship: while similes leverage the descriptive power of stereotypes to 
paint evocative but concise word-pictures of a topic, they also prove to be the 
perfect packaging for the wider dissemination and cultural reinforcement of 
the stereotypes they exploit.
Figure 4.6  A Google-search shows the prevalence of the expectation ‘espresso is 
strong’.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
76
The simple art of simile
There is something undeniably democratic and unpretentious about similes. 
Not only are they pervasive in language, they are at home in any register of 
speech and in any genre of text, from tabloid newspapers to scientific texts to 
hardboiled detective fiction to romantic poetry. We can easily mint our own, 
and very often do, but most languages and cultures also conveniently provide 
a wealth of pre-fabricated similes to choose from. Speakers do not need to 
invent their own creative descriptions, but can draw on a large back catalogue 
of cultural tropes to clearly convey their impressions of a topic, as in ‘as strong 
as an ox’, ‘as sober as a judge’, ‘as pale as a corpse’ and ‘as white as a sheet’. 
But these formulaic similes are more than a linguistic shorthand; they also 
open a window onto society that allows us to identify the key stereotypes in a 
language and a culture. One of the finest expressions of this viewpoint comes 
to us by way of Charles Dickens, who opens A Christmas Carol by describing 
stock similes as an inherited source of cultural wisdom, one that is not always 
fully appreciated by speakers of a language:
Old Marley was as dead as a door-nail. Mind! I don’t mean to say that I 
know, of my own knowledge, what there is particularly dead about a door-
nail. I might have been inclined, myself, to regard a coffin-nail as the deadest 
piece of ironmongery in the trade. But the wisdom of our ancestors is in 
the simile, and my unhallowed hands shall not disturb it, or the country’s 
done for.27
Towards the end of the book, when Scrooge awakes on Christmas morning 
to the happy realization that he is still very much alive, Dickens uses a stream 
of formulaic similes to lend Scrooge’s euphoric outburst an immediate and 
unmeasured tone:
I am as light as a feather, I am as happy as an angel, I am as merry as 
a schoolboy. I am as giddy as a drunken man. A merry Christmas to 
everybody!28
Orwell might disagree, but it would seem utterly contrived for Scrooge to 
utter a stream of elaborately creative similes in a situation like this. In lan-
guage, using the right tool for the job means that the tired and familiar will 
occasionally trump the new and creative.
How big is the inventory of stock similes that members of a given culture 
can draw upon? Naturally, it depends on how you define a stock simile. If by 
‘stock’ we mean phrases that are so commonplace that they earn a place in 

Round up the usual suspects
77
print dictionaries or in specialist books of proverbs and other cultural sayings, 
then English has an inventory of about 400 stock similes. For instance, Neal 
Norrick29 based his influential 1986 analysis of stock similes on a set of 366 
similes found in the 1970 edition of The Oxford Dictionary of Proverbs. The 
linguist Rosamund Moon, who based her 2008 study of similes on common 
phrases mined from a variety of text corpora such as the Bank of English 
corpus, found a comparable collection of 377 stock similes.30 In contrast, the 
folklorist Archer Taylor used neither a corpus nor a dictionary, and collected 
thousands of proverbial similes from American speakers for his classic 1954 
study, Proverbial Comparisons and Similes from California.31 If a system as 
pervasive and extensive as the World Wide Web had existed in Taylor’s day, he 
would doubtless have found a great many more, covering every point of the 
spectrum from the formulaic to the truly creative.
Come all ye similes (and bring your 
stereotypes with you)
While metaphors are masters of disguise, similes are fundamentally unsuited 
to undercover work of any kind. Similes inevitably stand out by virtue of their 
‘as’ or ‘like’ markers, and while aging metaphors eventually become part of the 
literal establishment in language, even the oldest and most hackneyed simile 
remains, defiantly, a simile. Whereas Taylor’s painstaking collection took years 
to compile, it is entirely feasible for a computer to harvest tens of ­thousands 
of similes from the web in a matter of hours.
Google provides a special interface for just this kind of automated harvest-
ing (and other search engines, like Yahoo, are just as helpful). We use an auto-
mated process to send successive waves of related queries to Google, such 
as ‘as * as a tiger’ and ‘as tough as a *’, and sift through the snippets that are 
returned to find genuine similes, as opposed to simple comparisons.32 A sur-
prising number of these web-similes are ironic, like ‘as tanned as an Irishman’ 
and ‘as sober as a Kennedy’, but let’s put the topic of irony aside until ­Chapter 6. 
For now, we remove these mischievous comparisons by hand, to produce the 
­ultimate database of web-similes: over 12,000 in all, ascribing over 2,000 prop-
erties to over 4,000 common objects, or stereotypes. Figure 4.7 presents a 
word cloud of the most oft-used stereotypes in our database of similes.
In turn, Figure 4.8 shows a word cloud of the properties that are most 
­frequently ascribed to the descriptive nouns in these web-similes.
Two striking realizations arise from this analysis of common ­web-similes. 
The first concerns the unusually high frequency of ironic comparisons, a 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
78
­consideration of which we defer until later. The second realization is less 
immediate, but just as remarkable: even in the twenty-first century, our com-
parisons involve many of the same stereotypes that would have been used 
in Dickens’ time. This observation is a testament to the cultural nature of 
stereo­types, which are meant to be shared and inherited by the speakers of a 
­language. They constitute a key part of what Dickens calls ‘the wisdom of our 
ancestors’, which may go some way toward explaining why, in the twenty-first 
century, we still find it useful to compare people to peacocks, wolves, lions 
and eagles. Figure 4.9 presents a breakdown of the stereotypical vehicles we 
find in our database of similes from the web.
Notice that animals account for the largest share (indeed, the lion’s share) 
of vehicle categories in Figure 4.9, followed closely by people (22 per cent) 
and tools (15 per cent). The web, it seems, it is awash with figurative animals. 
When we look more closely at the similes found on the web (and retrieved 
in the snippets that are returned by the Google API), we are led to a remark-
able conclusion: as descriptive vehicles, animals are more often used to 
Figure 4.7  Word cloud of the most common simile vehicles found on the web with 
Google.
Figure 4.8  A word cloud of the properties most commonly highlighted in 
­web-similes.

Round up the usual suspects
79
describe people than they are to describe other animals. We use animals for 
a wide-range of uses in real life, as food, clothing, vehicles, farm implements 
and pets, so perhaps it should not be so surprising that we extend this cata-
logue of uses into the world of linguistic description. Nonetheless, even in 
this capacity animals show more usefulness in describing the traits of people 
than in describing the traits of other animals. The writer Thomas Love Peacock 
nicely captures the descriptive need of man for animals in this extract from his 
1816 novel Headlong Hall:
It appears to me that man may be correctly defined an animal, which, 
without any peculiar or distinguishing faculty of its own, is, as it were, a 
bundle or compound of faculties of other animals, by a distinct enumeration 
of which any individual of the species may be satisfactorily described. This is 
manifest, even in the ordinary language of conversation, when, in summing 
up, for example, the qualities of an accomplished courtier, we say he has 
the vanity of a peacock, the cunning of a fox, the treachery of an hyaena, 
the cold-heartedness of a cat, and the servility of a jackal.33
Figure 4.9  A breakdown of the vehicles found in web-similes, by semantic 
­category.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
80
Curiously, everyday language engenders a sense of familiarity with animals 
that most of us will only ever see in zoos, in movies or in documentaries on 
the Discovery Channel. As our nearest counterparts in nature, animals con-
tinue to exert a poetic force on our collective imagination, allowing us to view 
ourselves stripped of the artificial trappings of the civilized world. Despite the 
march of technological progress, this force plainly continues to make itself felt 
in the similes of the World Wide Web.
Aristotle on the World Wide Web
The reason we generally believe lions to be brave, fierce and noble is that lan-
guage tells us they are so, via conventionalized similes like ‘as brave as a lion’. 
Children grow up in a language environment where such stock phrases are the 
common coin, and so believe the truth of these linguistic chestnuts long before 
they ever have a chance to observe it first-hand. By harvesting large quantities 
of similes from the web, a computer can go a long way toward learning this 
knowledge for itself. This turbo-charged process allows a ­computer to acquire, 
in one fell swoop, Dickens’ ‘wisdom of our ancestors’ that humans take years 
to acquire. For instance, the similes acquired for the vehicle ‘funeral’ allow a 
computer to identify the following properties as most salient:
{sad, orderly, unfortunate, dignified, solemn, serious}
Naturally, these properties will be shared by other vehicles as well. For exam-
ple, similes on the web also provide us with the following stereotypes for the 
property ‘solemn’:
{monument, owl, judge, funeral, temple, dowager, lighthouse, gravestone, 
pathologist, crow, funeral_march, oracle, prayer, wake}
Now consider the simile ‘his wedding was like a funeral’, which asks us to 
adapt our knowledge of funerals to our understanding of weddings. In other 
words, the simile directs us to look for salient properties of ‘funeral’ that can 
be transposed onto ‘wedding’.34 Our knowledge of funerals is given by the 
property set above, but there is nothing in the lexical semantics of ‘wedding’ 
(as found in a dictionary, say) that tells us that weddings can be solemn, unfor-
tunate or sad. Rather, the simile requires us to exploit our tacit, experiential 
understanding of these events, such as the fact that weddings occur in a (sol-
emn) church, and are sometimes forced (unfortunately) for non-romantic (sad) 
reasons. A computer system does not have an experiential grasp of events 
like weddings, but fortunately, it can tap into the written reflections of those 

Round up the usual suspects
81
that do, by using the web as a corpus that can be queried on demand. A curi-
ous computer can thus generate six queries, one for each hypothesis – ‘sad 
wedding’, ‘orderly wedding’, ‘solemn wedding’, ‘unfortunate wedding’, ‘digni-
fied wedding’ and ‘serious wedding’ – and use a search-engine like Google to 
determine the relative web-frequency of each hypothesis. Given in order of 
decreasing frequency, they are:
sad	
wedding	
11,700 hits
serious	
wedding	
5,020 hits
solemn	
wedding	
2,750 hits
unfortunate	
wedding	
1,450 hits
dignified	
wedding	
736 hits
orderly	
wedding	
207 hits
If we take frequency to be a rough correlate of likelihood, then the most fre-
quent phrases will describe the most likely hypotheses. We can thus conclude 
that a funereal wedding is a sad and serious affair, conducted in a solemn 
manner for some unfortunate reason, yet in a way that is dignified and orderly. 
Of course, the speaker may have an entirely different and context-dependent 
meaning for the simile – the happiest weddings often resemble an Irish wake – 
but all we can expect of a computer (or an otherwise uninformed human) is an 
interpretation that respects common-sense. By combining the salient features 
provided by other web-similes for ‘funeral’, and web-frequencies that suggest 
whether (and how much) these features make sense for a ‘wedding’, a compu-
ter can make an educated guess at this common-sense interpretation.
Now consider the reverse simile, ‘her funeral was like a wedding’. The web-
similes our computer acquires for the vehicle ‘wedding’ identify the following 
salient properties:
{joyous, joyful, decisive, glorious, expensive, emotional}
A computer can adapt this knowledge of weddings to the topic ‘funeral’ by 
generating the following hypotheses/queries: ‘joyous funeral’, ‘joyful funeral’, 
‘decisive funeral’, ‘glorious funeral’, ‘expensive funeral’ and ‘emotional funeral’. 
In order of decreasing frequency, these hypotheses as found on the web as 
follows:
emotional	
funeral	
20,900 hits
expensive	
funeral	
5,760 hits
glorious	
funeral	
1,010 hits

Exploding the Creativity Myth
82
joyous	
funeral	
456 hits
joyful	
funeral	
310 hits
decisive	
funeral	
35 hits
The observation that funerals and weddings are typically expensive events 
is not a fact that one expects to find in a typical knowledge representation, 
or even in a typical dictionary. However, a computer system that acquires its 
understanding of figurative categories from web-similes, and again verifies 
the possible implications of a figurative interpretation via queries to the web, 
can acquire and use this kind of encyclopaedic knowledge with ease.
Search engines like Google make it easy – and a little too tempting – to view 
the web as a vast, unstructured encyclopaedia for just about any topic. The lexi-
cographer Adam Kilgarriff has dismissively referred to the use of the web in this 
way as Googleology, and goes as far as to say that ‘Googleology is bad science’.35 
Certainly he is right to suggest that the web-counts reported by commercial 
search engines should be taken with a generous measure of salt,36 and for fine-
grained analysis the unfiltered web lacks the quality of curated resources such 
as dictionaries, almanacs and encyclopaedias. Yet the web excels at providing 
large quantities of dynamic material, on diverse topics, that can be statistically 
used to give a broad sense of a topic. These collected materials can be used to 
estimate whether a given proposition (expressed as a query) has widespread 
acceptance on the web, or to determine whether one proposition has more 
widespread support than another. Suppose we want our computer to generate 
metaphors on a topic of popular interest, such as the famous-for-being-famous 
Paris Hilton. We might ask this system to focus on metaphors that highlight the 
fact that our topic is unnervingly skinny. Turning to its database of over 12,000 
stereotypical associations, our system will note that skinny is a salient property 
of 35 different stereotypes and simile vehicles, namely:
{twig, rail, rake, toothpick, broomstick, flagpole, pole, needle, pencil, snake, 
noodle, rake handle, lamppost, broom, chopstick, scarecrow, supermodel, 
mosquito, whippet, marathon runner, tadpole, cadaver, rope, pool cue, 
flamingo, beanstalk, string bean, sapling, stick, pin, post, stick insect, 
thread, miser, matchstick}
Any of these vehicles can be used to generate an explicit simile for the desired 
property, such as ‘Paris Hilton is as skinny as a flagpole’, or an implicit open 
simile such as ‘Paris Hilton is like a cadaver’, or a metaphor such as ‘Paris Hilton 
is a mosquito’. In each case, however – even in the case of an explicit simile 
with a stated property – the combination will insinuate that the topic also pos-
sesses other salient properties of the vehicle as well, to the degree that these 

Round up the usual suspects
83
­properties are semantically transferable to the topic. To evaluate the potential of 
each vehicle to figuratively describe a topic, a system will need to determine the 
aptness of each of these other properties. Once again, the web can be viewed 
as a mass of reverberating opinions in which the frequency of a certain proposi-
tion can be used as a rough indicator of its general acceptance or aptness.
If one were to choose the charming metaphor ‘Paris Hilton is a mosquito’, 
our system would find the following salient properties of mosquito in its stere-
otype database:
{annoying, weak, tiny, insignificant, miniscule, skinny, worthless, nasty, 
irritating, insistent, bothersome}
Mosquitoes are clearly viewed with a dim eye in the ‘wisdom of our ances-
tors’. But does the web have an equally dim view of Paris Hilton? To find out, 
the system simply generates a hypothesis-query for each of the above 11 
salient features of ‘mosquito’, yielding the following document counts on the 
web in support of each:
weak	
Paris Hilton	
2,950 hits
nasty	
Paris Hilton	
1,570 hits
skinny	
Paris Hilton	
1,100 hits
worthless	
Paris Hilton	
578 hits
irritating	
Paris Hilton	
456 hits
annoying	
Paris Hilton	
435 hits
tiny	
Paris Hilton	
303 hits
miniscule	
Paris Hilton	
310 hits
insignificant	
Paris Hilton	
5 hits
bothersome	
Paris Hilton	
5 hits
insistent	
Paris Hilton	
2 hits
It follows that describing Ms Hilton as a ‘mosquito’ will not only imply that 
she is skinny, but that she has a host of other undesirable qualities as well. In 
contrast, ‘matchstick’ has just three salient properties in our simile database – 
thin, skinny and spindly – so a comparison with ‘matchstick’ yields a more 
focussed effect, supported by:
skinny	
Paris Hilton	
1,100 hits
thin	
Paris Hilton	
307 hits
spindly	
Paris Hilton	
1 hit

Exploding the Creativity Myth
84
However, since skinny is the property of ‘matchstick’ that is found most often 
as a descriptor of Paris Hilton on the web, it does seem that the metaphor 
‘Paris Hilton is a matchstick’ is a excellent candidate for conveying this very 
property. Not very original, perhaps, but a good foundation on which to base 
further creative word-play.
A version of this approach can be accessed online, at www.­
educatedinsolence.com, in the simplified guise of the Aristotle system37 
shown in ­Figure 4.10. Aristotle invites users to enter a topic and a property 
of this topic to highlight, whereupon the system presents a list of the stere-
otypical vehicles that possess this feature. In addition to displaying detailed 
aspects of these vehicles (e.g. that wolves exhibit rapacious decisiveness), 
Aristotle also reveals how the highlighted property might be interpreted in the 
specific context of the chosen topic.
Having no knowledge of the mean things writers say about stereotypes 
and clichés, Aristotle exploits them freely, as though they are something to 
be proud of. And why not? As a software system, it simply has no sense 
of the disdain in which clichés and stereotypes are generally held, and the 
special scorn reserved for them by polemicists like George Orwell. But this 
focus on stereotypes makes Aristotle a starting-point rather than a dead-end. 
Figure 4.10  Aristotle on the web, an online tool that exploits ­web-similes as a 
source of knowledge for generating and understanding metaphors.

Round up the usual suspects
85
When harnessed properly, in well-crafted combinations, stereotypes can also 
be the stuff of truly creative language. Aristotle has yet to learn how to for-
mulate more interesting combinations for itself, but we hope – and expect – 
that it will, in time. As we shall see in Chapter 6, there are so many easily 
­harvested examples of the creative manipulation of stereotypes on the web 
that Aristotle will not lack for the guidance it needs to generalize and learn.
Conclusions: Metaphor cleansing versus 
metaphor renewal
It’s easy to be snooty about clichés and stereotypes. Proscriptive writers regu-
larly use them for target practice, as when George Orwell claimed ‘there is a 
long-list of fly-blown metaphors which could similarly be got rid of if enough 
people would interest themselves in the job’. This awful job sounds suspi-
ciously like the sinecure that Winston Smith held in the Ministry of Truth.38 
The problem, of course, is that these writers all too easily succumb to cliché 
themselves when writing of the very dangers of cliché. This complex attitude 
to cliché, characterized by sharp insight in recognizing cliché but a plodding 
banality in describing what to do about it, lead the critic William Empson to 
memorably describe Orwell as ‘the eagle eye with the flat feet’.39 Empson’s 
put-down offers a marvellous repudiation of the whole anti-cliché movement, 
since it is itself a creative turn of phrase built from a blend of two rather 
hackneyed, even flyblown, clichés: the cliché that an observant person has 
‘the eyes of an eagle’, and the cliché that a plodding thinker is ‘flat-footed’. 
Likewise, Christopher Ricks, in The Force of Poetry, notes with some humour 
that Orwell’s listing of his least favourite clichés – ‘jackboot, Achilles’ heel, 
hotbed, melting pot, acid test, veritable inferno’ – has an accidental but vital 
poetry about it, as if clichés long to be grouped into creative combinations.40 
Did Orwell succumb to a subconscious desire to use cliché creatively, Ricks 
wonders, since he so evocatively followed jackboot with Achilles’ heel (what 
better way to protect an exposed heel?), hotbed by melting pot (as if the same 
heat is used to warm both), and melting pot by acid test and veritable inferno 
(as if this metaphorical heat offers a searing test of truth)?
As demonstrated by Empson and Ricks, clichés and stereotypes are wor-
thy of scorn only when they are used lazily, as a substitute for careful thought 
and well-crafted composition. When used with care, clichés and stereotypes 
are no more or no less scorn-worthy than words themselves, and no less lim-
ited in how they can be combined. In the end, whether they are used for banal 
or creative purposes depends on how they are varied and combined,41 and 
how well they are integrated into what it is we want to say. What is true for 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
86
clichés is equally as true of Jung’s archetypes, McLuhan’s cliché-archetypes, 
and Lippmann’s stereotypes. All are familiar, but all can be used in surprising 
new ways.
This chapter has examined the strong link between conventional patterns 
of thought and conventional patterns of language. These conventional patterns 
are so pervasive in the language of the web that this link can be exploited 
to automatically acquire a large body of stereotypical associations. Comput-
ers may lack the real world experience to form biases and impressions and 
stereotypes of their own, but they can certainly acquire these indirectly, from 
the web, in a simplified and turbo-charged version of how humans learn from 
the language of others. Though the source of many a hackneyed thought and 
phrase, this body of mutual knowledge also provides the normative founda-
tions on which linguistic creativity must ultimately be grounded. The Aristotle 
system, though just a start, shows how this knowledge can be parlayed into 
a computational model for generating and understanding simple but useful 
metaphors.
In the next chapter, we drill deeper into metaphor, and investigate its close 
ties to two other heavy-hitters in creative language – analogy and conceptual 
blending.

5
Pimp my ride
Customizing language with 
metaphor, analogy and 
blending
Much of what we know and feel about the  
world is shaped not by direct experience, but by words. 
Language is at its most persuasive when it creates new 
pathways for information to flow between ideas, so that strong 
feelings for one topic can become equally strong and vivid 
feelings for another. In effect, creative language is a form of 
conceptual rewiring that allows us to influence, with words 
alone, how ideas are connected and emotions are channelled 
in the heads of an audience. Having already looked at simile, 
we now look at how metaphor, analogy and blending enable us 
to customize language to our own ends.
Vehicles of creativity
Henry Ford famously joked that customers could buy his new model-T in any 
colour they liked, so long as it was black.1 Ford could afford to be dismiss-
ive of a customer’s desire for personalization; when his assembly-line first 
started to crank out the model-T, car ownership was thousands of times less 
­common than it is today, and the act of owning a car – any car at all – was 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
88
itself a supreme act of social differentiation. Yet, as ownership grew and cars 
became more commonplace, automakers like General Motors capitalized on 
the new demand for variety, offering cars in a wide range of colours, sizes 
and styles.
Variety is not just the spice of life, but of language too. Plain folks may 
prefer plain language, but even the plainest of us occasionally feel the need 
to trick out our ride, linguistically speaking, and inject a little individuality and 
flair into how we communicate. Plain language is, in many ways, the model-T 
of communication: sturdy and affordable, a normally reliable vehicle for our 
meanings, but a vehicle that often appears dull and unsophisticated. Mono-
chromatic prose is fine as far as it goes, and as George Orwell argued (in 
Chapter 1), plain speaking is often the best way to get our meanings across, 
yet speakers strive to customize their use of language in many different ways. 
Henry Ford may have been dismissive of the bells and whistles that consum-
ers would later come to demand, but buying a new car is now as option-ridden 
as buying a coffee in Starbucks (or should that be the other way round?). Our 
shared facility for linguistic creativity makes home mechanics of us all, allow-
ing us to invent our own add-ons or just copy and perhaps even improve upon 
the road-tested ‘mods’ of others.
No modern writer better represents the model-T school of monochromatic 
prose than Dan Brown, author of ‘The da Vinci Code’2 and its various prequels 
and sequels. Though critically reviled, Brown has enjoyed immense commer-
cial success; readers love his fast-paced plots larded with historical details 
that are presented in the most unchallenging airport-friendly prose. The British 
stand-up comedian Stewart Lee has memorably lampooned Brown as the 
kind of author who writes sentences like ‘The famous man looked at the red 
cup’.3 It’s a curiosity of language that we can mock a writer like Brown for 
being capable of this level of blandness, yet consider a comedian like Lee to 
be creative for attributing this blandness to Brown. The difference is one of 
context and purpose: as a writer, we expect a higher level of linguistic innova-
tion from Brown; but as a comedian, Lee seems to have perfectly distilled this 
purest drop of eau de Brown. In truth, Brown is not a bad writer, no more than 
the model-T was a bad car. But the creativity of the model-T lay in its method 
of mass production, which made it the world’s first affordable car. In contrast, 
critics are sceptical of any art that smacks of the production line, and expect 
instead to find the creativity on the canvas, screen or page.
Of course, we expect critics and sharp-tongued comedians to be mean, 
but other writers are just as eager to get into the Brown-bashing business 
too. When speaking at the University of Maine in 2005, Stephen King unchari-
tably described Brown as ‘the intellectual equivalent of Kraft Macaroni and 
Cheese’,4 conveniently forgetting that he himself has not always been appre-
ciated by the critics for his shelf-crowding best-sellers. Two decades earlier, 

Pimp my ride
89
King had described his own work as ‘the literary equivalent of a Big Mac 
and large fries’,5 which shows what a difference 20 years can make to one’s 
self-image. Popular writing shares many qualities with popular food: both are 
convenient to buy and quick to consume, and both can be satisfying in an 
unhealthy but lip-smacking fashion. Naturally, by comparing popular art to fast 
food, the implication is that both are junk, and that each is the lowest common 
denominator of its respective domain. Brown and King are household brands, 
and so are naturally compared to other high-profile marques. Here is critic 
Peter Conrad reviewing Brown’s sequel to The da Vinci Code (named The Lost 
Symbol in true Brown fashion) in 2009:
Brown, like Coke, is a global brand. . . . The writing is as bad as Brown’s 
admirers have come to expect: imagine Coke gone flat.6
The Coke metaphor works well for Conrad, and he goes on to elaborate it as 
follows:
Brown relies on italics to carbonate his limp language.
Yet, Brown must not use enough italics for Conrad’s liking if the result resem-
bles ‘Coke gone flat’. The capper, however, is Conrad’s conclusion:
Dan Brown’s latest blockbuster is the literary equivalent of Coca Cola and 
will no doubt sell as well.
How is it that Brown can be ridiculed for his clunky prose, but the critics 
themselves can get so much creative mileage out of well-worn tropes like 
these junk-food7 metaphors? Indeed, if these metaphors all have the same 
conceptual foundation, which views an easy read as junk food, how can these 
metaphors ever escape their own critical judgement?
As these examples show, we can analyse metaphors at different levels of 
form and content. At one level, a metaphor can be viewed as a playful combi-
nation of words that allows us to describe one idea or domain of experience 
with the words we normally reserve for another. At a deeper level, we might 
view metaphor as the use of one conceptual structure to organize our under-
standing of an entirely different concept or domain. Adopting this conceptual 
perspective, we might even conclude that metaphor is much more than a 
linguistic phenomenon, and that language is just one possible medium for the 
expression of metaphorical thinking. In recent decades, influential scholars 
like George Lakoff,8 Mark Johnson9 and Ray Gibbs10 have been at the vanguard 
of this shift from the linguistic to the conceptual understanding of metaphor. 
This shift has posited a new and more profound role for metaphor in thought. 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
90
No longer just a tool of effective communication, the conceptual metaphor is 
now widely seen as a fundamental part of our cognitive apparatus. Because 
each conceptual metaphor is a productive schematic mapping between the 
mental representations of two different domains, a single conceptual schema 
can give rise to a thriving family of related linguistic metaphors.
Thus, a schematic mapping like Low-Brow Fiction is an Unhealthy Foodstuff 
can be superficially realized in many different ways at the linguistic level. For 
instance, we’ve seen that this conceptual metaphor can be rendered in words 
so that popular fiction is described in terms of a calorie-rich Big Mac and fries, 
perhaps to emphasize how this fiction can be big (like most of Mr. King’s 
offerings) and filling, yet frowned upon by serious nutritionists (read: critics), 
or in terms of macaroni and cheese, whose homely convenience bears as 
much relation to real Italian food as Mr. Brown’s writing bears to serious lit-
erature. Each linguistic realization elaborates the underlying conceptual meta-
phor in different ways, allowing us to visualize the rather generic notion of 
an Unhealthy Foodstuff in a way that appeals more directly to our senses 
and to our specific experience of the world. Like Ford’s model-T, or the ‘pre-
fabricated henhouses’ that Orwell worried about, Big Macs are produced on 
an industrial scale, with millions pouring off the McDonald’s assembly line 
every year. Likewise, we know that Kraft’s Mac & Cheese is loved by genera-
tions of kids whose appetites have yet to develop more sophisticated tastes, 
while Coca Cola dominates the market for sugary drinks that can widen the 
waist and rot the teeth. All are comfort foods with their own unique properties 
that can easily be transferred to the domain of popular fiction. Different critics 
can use the same conceptual metaphor of Low-Brow Fiction is an Unhealthy 
Foodstuff, yet each may bring something fresh to the way it is rendered anew 
each time.
In fact, this conceptual metaphor is itself an elaboration of an even more 
generic metaphor that views Ideas as Foods, commonly rendered in stock 
phrases such as ‘food for thought’, ‘the meat of an argument’, ‘chew over the 
issues’ and ‘digest the news’. Drilling deeper, we see evidence in our eve-
ryday use of language that an even more generic metaphor is at work here, 
one that views Mental Content as a Physical Substance, as when we talk about 
the ‘substance of a message’, ‘the density of information’ or ‘an insubstantial 
argument’. Indeed, we find it hard to talk about ideas at all without invoking 
some kind of conceptual metaphor to view the products of cognition as the 
physical contents (or ‘content’) of the mind. As noted by John Barnden,11 a 
computer scientist who has extensively studied everyday metaphors of mind, 
we ‘grasp’ ideas, ‘bounce’ ideas off one another and ‘push doubts to the back 
of our minds’.
At the conceptual level then, the metaphors from King and Conrad above 
employ the same underlying conceptual structure and convey broadly the 

Pimp my ride
91
same meaning. In fact, Mr. King employs the same conceptual schema twice, 
once to modestly describe his own work and again to attack the work of Dan 
Brown. Yet, to focus entirely on the conceptual level is to miss the linguistic 
nuances that make these snarky remarks so much fun; each barb may instan-
tiate the very same schema, but their creativity lies in how this schema is 
elaborated at the level of words. For it is at this level that considerations of 
style and technique take centre stage. A fixation with schematic conceptual 
content would force us to conclude that two pictures of the same scene or 
topic have the same artistic merit when clearly they would not. If we give 
marks for effort, then Conrad’s use of the schema beats both of King’s, since 
Conrad at least attempts to use the schema in a systematic manner. He begins 
by noting that the status of the Brown brand is as globally entrenched as that 
of Coke, by some measures the most valuable commercial brand in the world. 
He then quickly builds on this to compare the products themselves, likening 
Brown’s writing to the taste of a flat Coke. The use of ‘flat’ is key here, since 
a great many of Conrad’s readers may actually like the taste of Coke. Conrad 
is forced to qualify his comparison so that it yields the negative inferences he 
wants (and needs) to yield. He goes on to describe Brown’s irritating use of 
italics as an attempt to add fizz to his writing, perhaps implying that overuse in 
either case is liable to leave the reader with a bad case of gas.
Though the conceit here is somewhat counterproductive at a schematic 
level – Conrad has already described Brown’s writing as ‘flat’ in the non-
effervescent sense of a stale beverage – it does allow him to use that won-
derful (if metaphorically mixed) combination of words ‘carbonate his limp 
language’. In fact, it is Conrad’s use of the Brown is Coke metaphor, a simple 
elaboration of the schema Low-Brow Fiction is an Unhealthy Foodstuff (or, 
more charitably, Popular Fiction is A Popular Foodstuff) which in turn elabo-
rates the Ideas Are Foods schema, that allows Conrad to carbonate his own 
review of Brown’s writing. In other words, the conceptual schema is just a 
starting point, and a rather commonplace one at that; the creativity of Con-
rad’s review derives from how he uses the schema at the linguistic level, as 
a structure from which he can hang a whole series of related similes, meta-
phors and analogies.
Scheming with schemas
Good metaphors deliver a concentrated burst of information and feeling, 
in such quantity that, like jokes, they are poorly served by rational explana-
tions of what they mean. The lazy use of conceptual schemas can make 
our metaphors seem mechanical, gimmicky and insincere, while creative 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
92
­one-offs can seem striking and immediate because they make us feel first 
and analyse second, if we consciously analyse them at all. Suppose a new 
colleague you know little about is described by the office gossip as a ‘busted 
flush’. Even if you have no idea of the rules of poker, you’ll still get the gist 
of this put-down straight away, since it’s a tough sell to compliment anyone 
with the label ‘busted’. But if you are familiar with the rules of poker, this 
metaphor can convey so much more, by tapping into your experiences of 
poker and of the highs and lows that a good game of chance can produce. 
The label ‘busted flush’ nicely compresses the compelling drama of a good 
poker game into a simple two-word phrase, communicating a sudden shift 
from high to low, from hope to failure and from prospective winner to certain 
loser. This shift is disappointing enough in a game context, but when applied 
to another person, the phrase evokes a near-tragic sense of loss and squan-
dered promise.
Look beneath the minimalism of ‘busted flush’ and you’ll find a whole world 
of meaning, as deep and as resonant as you care to imagine. Though the gist 
is simple, almost every scrap of poker knowledge that is brought to bear on 
its elaboration can yield additional insights. For instance, poker players know 
that a flush – five cards of the same suit – is a risky all-or-nothing strategy to 
pursue. When aiming to turn three-of-a-kind into four-of-a-kind, or two-pairs 
into a full house, players know that failure to improve their hands will still leave 
them in a pretty good position. In contrast, a partial flush is worthless; all the 
pieces must come together for it to work, and either one has a complete flush 
or nothing at all. The card that finally busts a flush is the poker equivalent of 
a tragic character flaw, as when someone who seems to promise so much is 
shown to be lacking some vital quality.
Though our appreciation of this metaphor can certainly be enhanced by a 
recognition of the conceptual schema Life is a Game, the most important part 
of the metaphor obeys no such schema. We often view different kinds of life 
situations through the lens of game play – as when we describe ourselves as 
‘being in a stalemate’, or ‘stuck behind the eight-ball’, or ‘backing a loser’ – but 
there is no general metaphoric tendency to view different kinds of people as 
different configurations of playing cards. What makes poker such a good met-
aphor for life in general is the array of feelings that the game can evoke, strong 
feelings such as anxiety, joy, hope and disappointment that are common to 
many different situations in everyday life. The sudden rush of disappointment 
that follows a misplaced investment in a busted flush mirrors that which fol-
lows a misplaced investment in another human being: both promise a great 
deal but finally deliver nothing at all. It is these shared feelings, rather than 
an overarching conceptual schema, that make poker (and other high-tension 
games) such a powerful vehicle for metaphor.

Pimp my ride
93
Structure matters
Strictly speaking, is this use of poker to re-frame our conception of language 
a kind of simile, a metaphor or an analogy? As it happens, it is a mix – or a 
hodgepodge, if you are feeling uncharitable – of all three together. Gener-
ally speaking, the more elaborate the conceit, the less likely it is to fit neatly 
into a single category of creative language. Rather, as a conceit is developed 
through the course of a text, it can meander from one category of expression 
to another, manifesting as a simile here and a metaphor there, whichever is 
most conducive to the author’s current purpose and temperament. Remem-
ber, the conceit is the insight behind the creative expressions, which suggests 
that one domain of experience can be re-framed in terms of another, while the 
linguistic metaphors and similes are often just a means to an end, to convey 
that conceptual insight in the most resonant form that the author can muster. 
But if we can veer from one expressive form to another when communicating 
a single underlying idea, what keeps all the pieces in place and ensures the 
overall coherence of the resulting text?
The answer to this question comes in two forms. If the conceit is an elab-
oration of a well-understood conceptual schema – such as Politics is Sport 
or Theories are Buildings – then that schema will impose its own consistent 
stamp on all of the individual expressions that successively develop the con-
ceit. When talking about romantic relationships, for instance, we might hop 
between different but related aspects of the Life is a Journey12 schema, such as 
the road the lovers are travelling along (bumpy roads are a sure sign of a trou-
bled romance), the lovers’ vehicle (perhaps a bicycle made for two, as in HAL 
9000’s favourite song ‘Daisy, Daisy’13) or the ultimate destination (marriage, 
parenthood or the divorce courts?). Though we might use different similes and 
metaphors along the way to develop these aspects, these expressions will all 
tend to be mutually coherent because they are all rooted in the same underly-
ing schema. Alternately, if the conceit is an original one, like the offbeat notion 
that we can look at people through the prism of a poker hand, then our stock 
of conceptual schemas like Life is a Game will be of little help, offering just 
modest opportunities for elaboration around the edges of an otherwise novel 
arrangement of ideas. In this case, we have to rely on a structural analogy to 
keep all the pieces neatly in place.
Many of our most elaborate similes and metaphors are also analogies, 
insofar as they establish a coherent mapping of elements from one domain 
of experience onto another. Students familiar with the SAT college-entrance 
examinations14 will likely have a hate-hate relationship with the A:B::C:D format 
for analogies,15 as in dog:bark::cat:meow or computer:processor::car:engine. 
While similes are grammatically noteworthy for their use of ‘like’ or ‘as’, and 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
94
metaphors are just as noteworthy for their lack of an explicit comparison tag, 
high-school students learn to verbalize an analogical relationship with expres-
sions of the form ‘A is to B as C is to D’. Aristotle, in his Poetics, considered 
this kind of proportional analogy to be a sub-category of metaphor, since the 
proportion A:B::C:D implicitly underpins metaphors of the form A’s B or C’s 
D, as when we talk of a computer’s engine, or more fancifully, of a dog’s 
meow. The same kind of implicit proportional analogies underpin the kenning 
riddles of old English.16 In Beowulf,17 for instance, the sun is described as 
the ‘world candle’, exploiting the analogy room:candle::world:sun, while the 
sea is described as a ‘whale road’ or ‘whale path’ via the implicit analogy 
person:road::whale:sea.
SAT-like tests do not use proportional analogies to enlighten but to chal-
lenge and evaluate. To ensure an objective marking scheme, each analogy is 
posed as a multiple-choice riddle for which there is a single correct answer. 
So, given a source-domain pairing A:B, a student must identify the correct 
mapping C:D from a given set of candidates. All but one of these are distract-
ers, sirens designed to lure unwary students onto the rocks. The following 
example is more prosaic than those of Beowulf but is typical of the SAT:
BIRD :	
NEST ::
(a) squirrel :	
tree
(b) horse :	
horsebox
(c) dog :	
kennel
(d) beaver :	
dam
(e) baby :	
nursery
A hapless student might be tempted by a number of false harbours in this 
example: just as birds live in nests, squirrels live in trees, dogs live in ken-
nels and beavers live in dams; likewise, while young birds are reared in 
nests, human babies are reared in nurseries. Option (b) is quickly discarded, 
since horses occupy horseboxes just for the purposes of transportation, but 
option (d) is worthy of further consideration, since birds both construct their 
own nests and dwell in them, just as beavers construct and dwell in their own 
dams. Squirrels do not build their own trees, nor dogs their own kennels, 
nor babies their own nurseries. So, the best answer is the most systematic 
answer, that is, the answer that represents the most coherent and extensive 
mapping between domains: (d).
The simple form of a proportional analogy can be deceptive, as these 
analogies often draw on obscure aspects of our knowledge of the world. As 
noted by Aristotle, analogy and metaphor often work hand in hand, as in this 
rather enigmatic witticism from Sigmund Freud in his treatise on jokes and 

Pimp my ride
95
the unconscious: ‘A wife is like an umbrella. Sooner or later one takes a cab’.18 
Freud offers a curiously Victorian interpretation of his joke, in which he claims 
that ‘One marries in order to protect oneself against the temptations of sen-
suality’, but the joke can better be explained if we summarize it as a propor-
tional analogy in the Aristotelian fashion, as follows:
Wife : Prostitute :: Umbrella : Taxicab
The analogy can only be properly understood if we view it as an instance of 
creative categorization. Freud asks us to see the parallels between a wife 
and an umbrella in the context of a contrast between umbrellas and taxicabs. 
The resolution arrives when we categorize wives and umbrellas as the private 
facilities of individuals, in contrast to taxicabs, which can be categorized as a 
public facility, hired and shared by the masses. The missing piece of the puz-
zle is the concept Prostitute, which like a wife is both a woman and a lover, 
and which like a taxicab is ‘accessible in return for money’. So, to understand 
Freud’s riddle, we must see it as a problem of analogy (viz. what corresponds 
to what?) and of categorization (viz. what do corresponding elements have in 
common?).
Thankfully, students undergoing modern SAT-like tests are unlikely to 
encounter analogical riddles of the psychosexual variety beloved of Freud, 
but the analogies they do encounter may nonetheless require a nuanced 
understanding of both words and the world. For instance, the proportion 
hack:writer::mercenary:soldier hinges upon our sense that there is something 
equally disreputable about hacks as writers-for-hire and mercenaries as sol-
diers-for-hire, and so this proportion is, in its way, a more contemporary (and 
less sexual) counterpart to Freud’s object-for-hire analogy. While even scholars 
may scratch their heads at that museum piece of cryptic Victoriana, it is worth 
noting that computers can do rather well on modern SAT-style analogy tests. 
Using a semantically organized computer-readable dictionary-cum-thesaurus 
like WordNet,19 a computer can just about scrape a passing grade on a test 
with real SAT analogies.20 In fact, computers can approach human levels of 
performance on the SAT if they look beyond the confines of the dictionary and 
tap into broader intuitions about the world. While these intuitions are not given 
an explicit form in a conventional dictionary, they do have a linguistic form, 
implicitly at least, on the World Wide Web.
Consider how a human student might solve the earlier bird:nest analogy. 
Our student might characterize the relationship between bird and nest via the 
set of possible linking phrases that can meaningfully be squeezed between 
them, such as ‘in their’, ‘builds’, ‘lives in’ and ‘returns to’, and then find another 
word pair with a similar range of linking phrases. Computers have no linguistic 
experience of the world to draw upon, yet they can still scan the Web to find the 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
96
most popular linking phrases across a wide variety of texts. By also noting the 
frequency of each linking phrase, a computer can build a vector ­representation 
for each word pair (such as dog:kennel or beaver:dam) in a high-dimension 
space. A comparison of the vectors for any two word-pairs yields a numeric 
measure of how similar they are in terms of the relational phrases that can 
link them, which turns out to be a very good proxy for the relational similarity 
of the two word-pairs. Since proportional analogies hinge on relational similar-
ity, a computer using only the text of the Web (harvested via a search engine 
like Google) can do surprisingly well. Using these techniques, in a model he 
calls Latent Relational Analysis (LRA),21 the Canadian computer scientist Peter 
Turney has developed systems that can score above 55 per cent on tests with 
real SAT analogies, whereas random selection in a five-way choice will yield 
just 20 per cent on average. Above 55 per cent is a pass rate for humans, and 
pretty close to the average score obtained by human test-takers on SAT analo-
gies. Not enough for admission to the Ivy league, to be sure, but a remarkably 
promising start for computers as they tackle a vexing human problem.
Outside the artificial context of a test paper, most analogies are not dis-
tinctively marked as such in a text, but come wrapped in the guise of a simile 
or metaphor, or a combination of both. Here, we see the satirical writer P. J. 
O’Rourke describing the appearance of the Oriental Pearl Tower in Shanghai. 
He tells us that the tower looks like
a Russian Orthodox church of the twenty-eighth century, or a launch vehicle 
for a pair of Houston Astrodomes, or a humongous shish kebab that lost 
everything but two onions in a barbeque fire.22
The tower is such a visual novelty that it almost defies literal description. The 
key elements are a series of pink tessellated globes – two large and one 
small  – mounted along the vertical length of a needle-like structure that it 
rooted to the ground via a tripod of legs. But such a description hardly does 
it justice, and the London Independent newspaper has memorably described 
the tower as looking like ‘a syringe that’s swallowed a pink neon disco ball’.23 
Though fantastical, these similes do a good job of capturing the sheer implau-
sibility of the structure; if you’ve seen the tower up close, and you should, 
there is a clear analogical mapping between the structural parts of these 
descriptions and the structural parts of the tower. The globes do look like disco 
balls, or giant onions, or the Houston Astrodome or the domes of a Russian 
orthodox church, while the backbone of the structure does look like a giant 
syringe, or a rocket, or a giant skewer or a church spire. What’s more, the rela-
tionship between the parts of the description align nicely with the relationship 
between the parts of the tower. The giant globes do look like they’ve been 
skewered onto the tower and are about to be launched into the heavens.

Pimp my ride
97
Creative linguistic analogies thus fall into two broad categories: those 
that describe a pre-existing target domain in terms of another and those that 
describe a pre-existing target in terms of a specially constructed patchwork fan-
tasy. The perceived creativity of this second kind of analogy depends not only 
on the pragmatic and semantic distance between the domains themselves 
(e.g. a tower vs a syringe) and their connotations (e.g. between ­reaching for 
the skies and searching for a vein), but also on the implausible arrangement 
of the elements within the vehicle domain (e.g. a disco ball in a syringe, or 
the Houston Astrodome on a rocket). We should be careful to note that this 
category of analogy is not funnier by definition, for it is a pudding that is very 
easily over-egged. However, because these analogies allow for intra-domain 
disparity (syringes and disco balls) as well as inter-domain disparity (towers 
and syringes), then by definition they do offer more opportunities for the kinds 
of creative tension that can result in humour.
Analogies of the form A:B::C:D are called proportional analogies because 
the pairing C and D preserves the proportion that is observed between A 
and B. The term ‘proportion’ is literally apt in arithmetic analogies such as 
2:4::3:6 but applies to all analogies in a broader relational sense. There is a 
good reason why The Independent contrived to have the syringe swallow the 
disco ball, or why O’Rourke needed to have everything but the onions fall off 
his giant kebab. In each case, the author needs to establish the right spatial 
relationships between the parts of the description, so that these relationships 
will be proportional to the spatial relationships in the target domain. But the 
proportions in an analogy are not always visual or spatial; in many concep-
tual analogies, the proportions relate to the use of the same organizing rela-
tionships in the source and target domains. A is proportional to C because it 
shares the same conceptual relationship with B as C does with D. The abstract 
proportions between the elements of the source and target domains allow us 
to map the conceptual structure of one onto the other.
A powerful contemporary account of analogy is offered by Dedre Gentner’s 
Structure Mapping Theory (or SMT).24 Gentner observes that good analogies 
exploit a source domain with a rich relational structure to describe a target 
domain whose core relations (e.g. those to do with cause and effect) are 
organized in isomorphic ways. A classic example, and one that has inspired 
generations of scientists and hippies alike, is the Niels Bohr/Ernest ­Rutherford 
analogy shown in Figure 5.1. The analogy compares the structure of the atom 
(with its nucleus of protons and neutrons orbited by layers of spinning elec-
trons) to the structure of the solar system (with its core, the sun, orbited by 
planets at varying distances). A coherent analogy thus identifies aspects of 
the target domain that structurally mirror key aspects of the source domain. 
Insightful analogies also exhibit systematicity by focussing on those parts of 
the source and target domains that are well connected in, and central to, the 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
98
workings of those domains. Compared to Bohr’s atom as solar-system map-
ping, the incendiary analogy for which Turkish politician Recep Tayyip Erdogan 
was jailed in  1994 seems to lack both systematicity and coherence: ‘The 
mosques are our barracks, the domes our helmets, the minarets our bayonets 
and the faithful our soldiers’.25 Erdogan’s analogy, from an Islamic poem, more 
closely resembles a cubist painting – with its thought-provoking mishmash 
of conflicting perspectives and scales – than a coherent, systematic mapping 
with explanatory power.
Gentner and her colleagues have shown in repeated experiments that peo-
ple tend to prefer analogies in which an important causal structure is shared 
across both domains.26 The Bohr/Rutherford analogy is so compelling precisely 
because the shared structure supports causal explanation as well as mental 
visualization: the planets orbit the sun and do not fly off into space because 
the sun is so much bigger than they are and so exerts an attractive force that 
keeps them in orbit; the analogy suggests that a comparable force must be 
keeping the electrons spinning in place around the nucleus. To have real explan-
atory power, the analogy must be coherent: if two elements are related in the 
source, and both elements are mapped onto the target, then these elements 
must have a comparable relationship in the target. Gentner suggests that the 
core relationships in the source domain – which together offer the most sys-
tematic explanation for the workings of the source – are mapped identically, 
or with minimal transformation, onto the target. Thus, planets revolve around 
the sun and electrons revolve around the nucleus, planets are attracted to the 
sun and electrons are attracted to the nucleus, and planets are much smaller 
than the sun while electrons are much smaller than the nucleus.
Figure 5.1  The Rutherford Atom and the Solar System: The classic analogy is 
founded on structural similarities between two very different physical scales.

Pimp my ride
99
Gentner, like Aristotle, has argued that analogy plays a central role in the 
workings of the metaphor. In contrast, Sam Glucksberg and his collaborators 
argue that metaphors are more accurately understood as categorization state-
ments.27 In the metaphor ‘my job is a jail’, Glucksberg argues that jails are not 
compared to jobs, rather the word ‘jail’ denotes a category – such as confining 
and oppressive situations – in which jail is a very prominent member. Thus, the 
metaphor tells us that the idea of a job (and ‘my job’ in particular) might also 
be included in this category. As we saw in the last chapter, prominent exem-
plars are often used in language as proxies for the unnamed categories they 
exemplify (thus, Kenny G has become an exemplar for people or things that 
are technically brilliant but which lack credibility). How else are we to under-
stand claims like the following, made by the former Afghan minister of the 
interior Ali A. Jalali: ‘Afghanistan is not Iraq. It is the theme park of problems’. 
The word ‘Iraq’ has a dual reference28 in this comparison; while it normally 
denotes a specific country, it refers here to a whole category of countries with 
Iraq-like problems that are amenable to the kinds of solutions that worked in 
Iraq (such as the controversial ‘surge’). Likewise, ‘theme-park’ refers here to 
the category of places whose diverse challenges are as likely to inspire terror 
and fear as they are excitement and adventure.
Of course, we can also put on our analogist hats and argue that the meta-
phor ‘my job is a jail’ establishes a systematic structural analogy between jobs 
and jails, in which workers are prisoners, managers are guards, cubicles are 
cells, the boss is the warden and the water cooler is the exercise yard. The 
office bully might even be the hulking white-supremacist in the bottom bunk, 
the one with a taste for fresh meat and a bowel-chilling romantic gleam in his 
eye. All of these are analogically possible and certainly add colour and humour 
to the interpretation, yet such an analogy might just be an interesting side-
show to a more central act of category inclusion. So, which view is correct? 
Earlier, when analysing Freud’s metaphorical joke about wives, umbrellas and 
taxicabs, we saw how analogy can work hand in hand with categorization 
to communicate a complex figurative meaning. So, perhaps one need not 
choose one over the other after all?
An intriguing compromise, with the equally intriguing name The Career of 
Metaphor, has been proposed by Brian Bowdle and Dedre Gentner.29 In this 
integrative perspective, a metaphor is both appreciated differently and proc-
essed differently as it ages. Bowdle and Gentner argue that novel metaphors 
(like ‘Afghanistan is . . . the theme park of problems’) are initially understood 
as comparisons, so that structure mapping may be used to identify analogical 
similarities between the relational structure of both domains. As our familiar-
ity with these metaphors grows, and they no longer seem quite so novel or 
challenging, we come instead to understand them as categorization state-
ments. As Bowdle and Gentner put it, there is an ‘evolutionary path . . . from 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
100
­comparison to categorization’. In this clever reconciliation of analogy and cat-
egory inclusion, challenging new metaphors are best understood by using 
the structural insights offered by analogy. But as such metaphors lose their 
new car smell and become more familiar with age, it often becomes more 
effective to treat them instead as inclusive categories that readily accept new 
members.
Frankenstein comparisons and badass blends
In the movie Sunset Boulevard, the aging Norma Desmond remains con-
vinced of her star power: ‘I am big! It’s the pictures that got small’ she 
cries.30  The actor Ethan Hawke might well agree. When asked to write a pro-
file of Kris Kristofferson for Rolling Stone magazine, Hawke had to create an 
imaginary star of his own to serve as an apt contemporary comparison. For 
Hawke, Brad Pitt is as meaningful a comparison as one can make, but even 
Pitt’s star power is but a dim bulb to that of Kristofferson when he shone 
most brightly in the 1970s. To communicate just how impressive the singer/
actor/activist would have seemed to an audience in 1979, Hawke assembles 
the following Frankenstein-monster from the body of Pitt and other assorted 
star parts:
Imagine if Brad Pitt had written a No. 1 single for Amy Winehouse, was 
considered among the finest songwriters of his generation, had been 
a Rhodes scholar, a U.S. Army Airborne Ranger, a boxer, a professional 
helicopter pilot – and was as politically outspoken as Sean Penn. That’s 
what a motherfuckin’ badass Kris Kristofferson was in 1979.31
Pitt comes off poorly in the comparison, but this is precisely the point: no con-
temporary star comes off well, because in Hawke’s view, none has the wattage 
or the all-round appeal that Kristofferson had in 1979. The awkwardness of the 
comparison, and the fancifulness of the composite image, actually serves as 
a creative meta-description of Kristofferson’s achievements. In effect, Hawke 
is saying ‘look to what lengths I must go to find a fair comparison for this man 
without peer’. Note how information actually flows in both directions in this 
comparison. To create a more rounded comparison, Hawke finds it necessary 
to not only mix in a few elements from other stars (such as Sean Penn), but 
also to burnish Pitt’s résumé with elements borrowed from Kristofferson him-
self. Most of this additional structure is imported directly from the target into 
the source, such as when we are asked to imagine Pitt as a professional heli-
copter pilot. The other structure is imported in the form of an analogy: while 

Pimp my ride
101
Kristofferson wrote songs for the likes of Janis Joplin, Pitt is imagined here as 
a songwriter for her modern counterpart, Amy Winehouse.32
This Pitt 2.0 doesn’t actually exist of course. Hawke’s description is a con-
ceptual blend that constructs a whole new source concept in its own coun-
terfactual space. Blending is pervasive in modern culture and can be seen 
in  ­everything, from cartoons33 to movies34 to popular fiction,35 while the 
elements of a blend can come from any domain of experience, from clas-
sic ­novels to 140-character tweets36 to individual words. As defined by the 
cognitive linguists Gilles Fauconnier and Mark Turner,37 conceptual blending 
combines the smoothness of metaphor with the structural complexity and 
organizing power of analogy. We can think of blending as a cognitive opera-
tion in which conceptual ingredients do not flow in a single direction, but are 
thoroughly stirred together, as in a chef’s bowl, to create a new structure with 
its own emergent meanings.
Fauconnier and Turner’s theoretical framework gives us the formal tools 
to characterize the middle ground that is formed from the selective projec-
tion and integration of elements from two or more bundles of conceptual 
concept, called mental spaces.38 For instance, we might give the name ‘Astro-
tourist’ (itself a word-level blend) to the middle-ground between an adven-
turous space-farer (an ‘astronaut’) and a curious tourist. This blended word 
form39 is more than a metaphor (an astronaut viewed as a tourist) and more 
than an analogy (a structural comparison of space travel for science and ter-
restrial travel for fun), but a true lexical and conceptual blend of both. That is, 
an astrotourist is a non-professional astronaut who travels for fun and not 
for science. Astrotourists also have an emergent property that comes from 
neither input space, since commonsense dictates that astrotourists must be 
very rich indeed if they are to buy their way into space (yet another blended 
neologism for space tourists nicely highlights this requirement: aristonauts). 
So, as championed by Fauconnier and Turner, blends are more than merely 
descriptive: a blend is a conceptual product in its own right, a cross-quoting 
and newly ‘chunked’ idea that can itself be cross-quoted as part of even larger 
conceits in the future.
In linguistic creativity, less is almost always more. The more concise and 
allusive a creative expression, the more buy-in it requires from an audience 
to flesh it out, thus allowing an audience to share just a little of the paternity 
of the creative act. The active participation of an audience in elaborating a 
highly compressed meaning can turn a listener from a passive recipient into 
an active constructor of meaning, more a midwife than an anxious onlooker. 
Whenever we say that a particular barb is dripping with satire or drenched in 
malice, we pay tribute to the ability of a concise phrase to serve as a sponge 
for our meaning, one capable of absorbing much more content that its com-
pact form would outwardly suggest. Consider the following, said of director 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
102
Sam Mendes in the Guardian newspaper after studio bosses had chosen him 
to direct the 23rd film in the James Bond franchise: ‘Appearance: Like the 
painting in George Clooney’s attic’.40
This is not a simple comparison, but a complex blend that is loaded with 
figurative meaning, and we require neither a prior mental image of Sam 
Mendes nor a knowledge of the paintings in Clooney’s attic to understand 
its real meaning. We can be quite certain that the picture in question is not a 
real picture that Clooney might actually own, whether A Rake’s Progress or 
Dogs Playing Poker, but an entirely fictional painting that we create on the fly, 
via Fauconnier and Turner’s process of conceptual blending (see Figure 5.2). 
As Fauconnier and Turner might say, this is a multi-layered blend that must be 
unpacked41 in several stages, and Figure 5.2 represents just the first stage of 
unpacking. The blend exploits our familiarity with Oscar Wilde’s The Picture of 
Dorian Gray,42 a morality tale concerning the fate of a handsome but narcis-
sistic young man who pledges his soul so that his painted self might suffer the 
ravages of time in his stead. Dorian soon discovers that his portrait – the infa-
mous painting in the attic – not only changes to reflect his true age, but also 
Figure 5.2  Not-so-gorgeous George – The blend of George Clooney and Dorian 
Gray that is cross-quoted in ‘the picture in George Clooney’s attic’. Mapping within 
the blend is logical and systematic, so once we accept the analogy ClooneyGray, 
the picture in Clooney’s attic is not just a picture of Dorian Gray but a picture of an 
aging Clooney.

Pimp my ride
103
holds a mirror to his inner being. As Dorian descends into moral degeneracy, 
his painted counterpart suffers a more physical degeneration. Dorian’s portrait 
becomes increasingly ugly to behold as he himself remains unnaturally youth-
ful. Wilde’s story comes wrapped in a memorable and highly quotable text, 
and has become as potent a cliché-archetype as any that Carl Jung or Marshall 
McLuhan can offer.
In everyday communication, however, the cliché-archetype has collapsed 
into pure cliché: if an acquaintance retains a youthful vigour into late middle-
age, people are just as likely to trot out the ‘picture in the attic’ conceit as they 
are to reach for that other chestnut, ‘Peter Pan’. These uses are so formulaic 
that we can easily forget the full import of the Dorian Gray cliché-archetype. 
To suggest that a youthful oldie has a Dorian-like portrait in the attic is to 
imply that this person has not only withstood the physical effects of aging, 
but has also withstood the physical effects of sinning, while nonetheless 
becoming rotten to the metaphysical core. This often overlooked allusion to 
sin and degeneracy, if brought again to the fore, can lend renewed pungency 
to the cliché.
In the right hands, any cliché can be revitalized in a well-turned phrase, 
and The Guardian breathes humorous new life into the Dorian Gray cliché-
archetype by embedding it within two more topical nested blends. A visual 
­representation of the workings of this figure-within-a-figure is provided in 
­Figure 5.3. The innermost blend re-imagines Wilde’s story with a new leading 
man, George Clooney, whose matinée-idol good looks make him an apt sub-
stitute for the handsome youth of the original tale. Clooney has maintained his 
status as a Hollywood sex symbol for almost two decades, and he remains a 
regular fixture in the pages of celebrity gossip sheets. We find it easy to imag-
ine a slowly decaying portrait in a dark corner of Clooney’s attic, and even if 
the conceit has the tang of sour grapes, this just adds to its snarkily humorous 
effect. Note that this inner blend is more than a simile, a metaphor or an anal-
ogy, and it does more than compare George Clooney to Dorian Gray. Rather, it 
creates a new version of the morality tale with its very own star. In the world 
of the blend, Clooney really does have a portrait of his aging, sin-wracked face 
in the attic. This inner blend puts a new face on Wilde’s tale, to create a new 
chunk from familiar elements that can then be recruited by other blends and 
other conceits, as though it had always existed in our cultural lexicon.
This outer blend works largely as a simile, mapping the appearance of the 
director Sam Mendes to the appearance of the fictitious portrait in Clooney’s 
attic. It is still a blend, however, because it imagines a counterfactual world 
in which Clooney has made a Faustian bargain to preserve his leading-man 
looks. In this world of the larger blend, we have to imagine the ways in which a 
lesser-mortal like Mendes might resemble a physically decaying matinée idol. 
We infer, for instance, that Mendes might once have been quite ­handsome, 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
104
but now retains just a guilty hint of his youthful splendour. In short, we 
assume that Mendes looks like a ruined version of George Clooney, and, one 
supposes, like someone who has destroyed their own good looks through 
rakish excess. The humour of the conceit derives in part from this obvious 
hyperbole and in part from the gratuitous sideswipe at George Clooney. But it 
also derives in large part from a more subtle inference: Mendes merely looks 
dissolute and merely looks like one who has squandered his looks and his 
morals in the pursuit of corporeal pleasures; in fact, he may well have enjoyed 
Figure 5.3  The figure-within-a-figure in The Guardian’s comparison of director 
Sam Mendes to ‘the picture in George Clooney’s attic’.

Pimp my ride
105
very few (or none at all) of these pleasures, and so in a way, the poor fellow 
merely looks like one who is paying the physical price for someone else’s dis-
solute behaviour.43
In the end, the reason The Guardian uses George Clooney is quite simple: 
Mendes has a passing resemblance to Clooney, more so than to the other 
­Hollywood stars (such as Johnny Depp, say) on whom the mantle of Dorian 
Gray may sit more comfortably. The Wildean/Faustian version of George 
Clooney is a classic example of what Gilles Fauconnier and Mark Turner call a 
middle-space,44 a manufactured middle ground that facilitates a larger mental 
leap between two more distant frames of reference.
But do readers really go to such lengths to analyse a passing remark in 
a snarky newspaper column of no great import? Perhaps many do not, but 
the potential for deep analysis, and thus for deeper enjoyment, is certainly 
present, even if everyone does not always avail of it. Moreover, even a cursory 
analysis will suggest to the reader that there is more meaning and resonance 
to be had if one cares to look, and this perception – even if it doesn’t always 
spur deep analysis – can still add to our sense of enjoyment. Most readers 
will be aware of the remark’s broad allusions (such as to Dorian Gray, Faustian 
bargains, Hollywood excesses and so on) even if no conscious attempt is 
made to completely connect the dots. Conversely, we might also ask whether 
the author of the throwaway remark deliberately imbued it with the complex 
meanings that our analysis has credited to it, or whether have we simply over-
interpreted it for our own purposes. However, in the final analysis, does it 
really matter if a witticism turns out to be more funny and more resonant than 
its author had first intended? Creative expression is a process of discovery for 
both writer and reader alike, even when this expression is a throwaway quip 
in the gossip section of a daily newspaper.
Seeing the world through metaphor eyes
Researchers in Psychology, Linguistics and Cognitive Science (and the blend 
of all three, Cognitive Linguistics45) have collectively pieced together a com-
pelling story about the workings of metaphor, analogy, simile and blending. 
This story goes some way toward demystifying the mechanisms of crea-
tive language production and consumption, by committing to specific mental 
processes and conceptual representations. But the real test of this story is 
not how convincing it seems or how well the scholars agree but the practi-
cality of computational implementation.46 Ultimately, it comes down to this: 
does our story have enough detail to allow us to build a realistic computer 
model?

Exploding the Creativity Myth
106
Computer scientists have been working on the problem of creative lan-
guage for decades, to produce working (if limited) models of metaphor,47 
analogy,48 simile49 and even blending.50 The recurring bottleneck in all of these 
efforts is, inevitably, knowledge: algorithmic processes are all well and good, 
but where does a computer acquire the common-sense knowledge that 
these processes are supposed to operate upon? There is a flip side to this 
dilemma, however, for if a computational model is good enough, it can make 
a little knowledge go a very long way. We have developed one such model 
in the guise of the Metaphorize system, which is robust enough and just 
about knowledgeable enough to run on the Web (at www.educatedinsolence.
com). Metaphorize51 acquires its stereotyped knowledge of the world from 
three different sources: the abundance of similes on the Web (as described in 
Chapter 4); the abundance of questions, rich in presuppositions, that are com-
monly posed to Web search engines (e.g. ‘why do pirates wear eye-patches?’ 
and ‘why do dogs bury bones?’); and manual knowledge-engineering, in the 
GOFAI tradition of the Cyc52 project, in which engineers enrich the system 
with the most useful cliché-archetypes53 (e.g. that soldiers carry guns or that 
guns fire bullets). At present, Metaphorize contains over 100,000 simple ster-
eotypical beliefs about the world. Figure 5.4 shows a snapshot of the applica-
tion as it appears online, showing its analysis of the tongue-in-cheek assertion 
‘Google is a cult’.
Metaphorize is a brainstorming tool that allows users to pose figurative 
what-if questions such as ‘hackers are terrorists’ or ‘scientists are artists’. 
For each what-if, Metaphorize introspects about the further questions that 
are entailed by this perspective – this is relatively easy for the system, since 
much of its knowledge comes from questions in the first place – and then 
uses ­linguistic knowledge to identify those avenues that are most likely to 
bear creative fruit for the user. For instance, when asked to consider ‘hackers 
as artists’, Metaphorize ponders the meaningfulness of ‘hacker art’, ‘hacker 
techniques’ and ‘hacker studios’. Likewise, if asked to imagine ‘hackers as 
hobbyists’, the system ponders the plausibility of ‘hacker clubs’. The ­presence 
of established uses of these phrases on the Web lends credence to the cor-
responding hypotheses, so Metaphorize gives the highest ranking to the 
hypotheses with the most linguistic support.
Metaphorize also supports blending, and to a degree it even supports blends 
within blends, but it is not yet capable of anything close to the sophistication 
and effortless virtuosity of the Dorian blend in Figure 5.3. Nor will it be, real-
istically speaking, for some time to come. Right now, the system can handle 
simple blends like ‘media empire’ or ‘space tourist’, by using Web evidence to 
determine, for example, which aspects of an ‘empire’ are most salient in the 
world of media, or which aspects of science transfer most readily to the space 
domain. So, the acceptability of ready-made phrases like ‘media dynasty’ and 

Pimp my ride
107
‘media fortune’, or ‘space laboratory’ and ‘space ­experiment’, dictates which 
aspects of empires and scientists are highlighted in their respective blends. 
The combination of these functionalities allows Metaphorize to handle more 
complex blends like ‘astronauts are space scientists’ or ‘matadors are Fla-
menco dancers’, though at present the human user is still very much in the 
driver’s seat as to which blends are actually interpreted by the system. Clearly, 
we have a long way to go before tools like Metaphorize can manipulate words 
and ideas with anything like the creative fluency of humans. In the interim, 
however, our computer models can still serve two very important goals. First, 
they can show us whether our cognitive theories are on the right track and 
humble us by highlighting the practical limitations of those theories. Second, 
and most rewardingly, robust computer models can enable new software 
applications to provoke, stimulate and perhaps even to enhance creativity in 
humans.
Figure 5.4  Brainstorm for one, please: we can use computer models of creative 
language processing as tools for exploring conceptual what-ifs and stimulating 
human creativity.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
108
Conclusions: New model, original parts
True motor-heads worship classic cars, yet are not afraid to tinker with a clas-
sic. In fact, to car aficionados, no vehicle is beyond custom modification. 
­Custom paint-jobs, rear spoilers, alloy rims, turbochargers, superchargers, 
performance camshafts and other modifications can all improve the look, the 
feel and the power of a vehicle. Who cares what the manufacturer’s specifi-
cations say? These specifications are designed for conventional owners and 
serve only as a starting point for those who really want to explore what their 
vehicles can achieve. In this chapter, we’ve argued that creative language has 
much the same relation to conventional language as custom cars do to the 
mass-produced vehicles that roll off a factory’s assembly lines. A creative 
speaker does not totally reject or seek to obliterate the conventional but aug-
ments convention with powerful ‘mods’ like metaphor, analogy and blending 
to build something better and more individualistic.
Whenever we are tempted to think of creative language as merely the 
eye-catching packaging that we put on our thoughts, we do well to remem-
ber Goethe’s maxim that words are often most useful precisely when ideas 
fail us.54 For, we express ourselves creatively not just for the benefit of an 
audience, but for our own benefit also. Words are our handles on ideas, and 
our complex ideas need expressive but uncomplicated handles; in fact, the 
simpler the better. Anyone can articulate a complicated idea in a complicated 
way, but it takes genuine insight to reduce it to its simplest form without loss 
of meaning or the potential for subsequent elaboration. Our struggle to find 
this most convenient handle is our struggle to identify the real essence of an 
idea, and creative expressions can provide concise handles for ideas that are 
still taking shape. The more creative the handle, the more room a new idea 
has to breathe, to develop into something more, something that may further 
surprise and delight us. If we were forced to articulate new ideas in wholly 
literal terms, our most promising darlings would almost certainly be strangled 
at birth.

6
Six ridiculous things 
before breakfast
Finding method in madness 
and sense in nonsense
All creativity is surprising at some level, since it challenges our 
habitual assumptions about how things can and should be. 
Humorous creativity goes further still, and seemingly revels in 
the nonsensical and the absurd. Yet, even the most outrageous 
humour merely flirts with the ridiculous, for to be genuinely 
creative, humour must show us that there is folly in conventional 
wisdom and wisdom in unconventional foolishness. In this 
chapter, we consider how apparently illogical actions – such as 
saying the opposite of what we really mean or using deliberate 
ambiguity and outlandish imagery to communicate deeply felt 
sentiments – can be sensible and efficient strategies for achieving 
our communicative goals.
Hatter and anti-Hatter
The White Queen boasted to Alice that she could sometimes believe as 
many as six impossible things before breakfast.1 This is quite a claim, even in 
­Wonderland, yet the morning news that promises to ‘tell it like it is’ is liberally 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
110
peppered with enough metaphoric descriptions and literal impossibilities to 
put even the Mad Hatter off his breakfast. Most of the metaphors we encoun-
ter everyday employ the language of literal impossibility to say something 
meaningful, and possible, on a non-literal level. For, even the most conven-
tional metaphors flit along the boundaries of sense and nonsense: we cannot 
literally ‘catch a cold’ or ‘empty our minds’, no more than we can ‘beef up an 
idea’ or ‘kill a proposal’.2 Like the incongruity of jokes, it often seems that non-
literal meanings come wrapped in forms that are, superficially at least, absurd. 
Yet, it is the appearance of nonsense that challenges us to seek out a deeper 
figurative meaning beneath the surface. The Hatter may have been mad, but 
even he would not bet his breakfast on the claim that there is never any logic 
to illogicality nor sense in nonsense.
Indeed, there is scarcely a logical fallacy that logicians think fatal to 
sound argumentation that comedians do not routinely exploit for humor-
ous ends. Logicians tell us to avoid the fallacy of equivocation3 – using the 
same word in different senses in the same argument – but language would 
be robbed of a remarkably productive strategy of humour if we could not 
exploit ambiguity in this way. Logicians also caution us to stay clear of 
the fallacy of accent4 – ­placing a misleading emphasis on one part of an 
argument over others – but much of the deliberate misdirection in jokes 
relies on viewing this emphasis not as a fallacy but as a narrative strategy. 
Moreover, humour exploits a whole range of what logicians call fallacies of 
presumption,5 from the ­fallacies of sweeping generalization6 and hasty gen-
eralization7 to the fallacies of false analogy,8 false cause9 and irrelevant the-
sis.10 That’s a lot of fallacies, which leads us to conclude (if not too hastily) 
that logic plays a pivotal role in humour, not as a guardian of meaning but as 
a reverse barometer of meaningful absurdity. The most successful comedy 
duos – from Hope and Crosby to Lewis and Martin to the ­magicians Penn 
and Teller – divide the comedic responsibilities in two, with the straight 
man acting as the logical foil for the often illogical antics of the funny guy. 
Needless to say, the logical straight man must also serve as the fall guy, yet 
it is the two together, the mix of logic and anti-logic, that yields the humor-
ous creativity. Even without a straight man on stage, there is always one 
in the audience, for we bring our own expectations to bear every time we 
understand a joke.
Logicians pay great heed to fallacies because logic is annihilated by the 
anti-logic of fallacy just as surely as matter is annihilated by anti-matter. In 
language and argumentation, the anti-logic of absurdity must, therefore, be 
handled with great care. While we want to use absurdity – or the threat of 
absurdity – to destroy the arguments of others, we must be extremely care-
ful that it does not annihilate the substance of our own arguments too. Con-
ventional language gives us special ‘containment chambers’ to contain the 

Six ridiculous things before breakfast
111
effects of absurdity, to make it a viable threat to others without destroying our 
own arguments as well. The comedian George Carlin harnessed ­illogicality 
in this way when he argued that ‘A smoking section in a restaurant makes 
as much sense as a peeing section in a pool’.11 His argument is striking and 
humorous because of the ruthless way in which it wields the anti-logic of 
stupidity. Using ‘as’ to keep the absurdity at arm’s length, Carlin evokes the 
ridiculous idea that a swimming pool might actually allow us to urinate into 
its waters, provided we do so in a specially designated area of the pool. The 
image is disgusting (perhaps we imagine the discoloration of the water or 
people complaining of the odd taste) and defies commonsense: urine would 
spread throughout a pool just as surely as smoke throughout a restaurant. 
This is precisely Carlin’s point, of course: if the idea makes no sense in a 
swimming pool, it surely makes no sense in a restaurant or on an airplane. 
By herding absurdity into specially constructed linguistic devices and using 
it to eat into the arguments of others, comedians like Carlin show that good 
arguments can be effective and silly; one need not preclude the other. We’ll 
return shortly to this intriguing use of ‘as’ to compartmentalize and channel 
absurdity for creative ends.
Another safe (albeit less subtle) container for absurdity is negation. If the 
proposition X is silly or absurd, then wrapping it in the container (not X) safe-
guards us from this silliness. You may question the benefit of stating the 
obvious in this way, but the specific interaction of negation and absurdity 
can yield unexpected insights. When John Donne asserts that ‘no man is 
an island’,12 his negation does more than turn the absurd into the obvious, 
but asks us ponder how close a man might come to being an island, if only 
­figuratively. In a more modern context, the lyric ‘I’m no Superman’13 from the 
TV series Scrubs uses negation to turn a fanciful claim into a meaningful artic-
ulation of human limitations, and in particular the practical limitations faced 
by doctors in their practice of modern medicine. As Michael Reddy pointed 
out in his critique of the conduit metaphor of language,14 meaning does not 
reside in an utterance like the contents of a box. Rather, listeners collaborate 
with speakers to construct meaning among themselves.15 When a speaker 
negates the absurd or the ridiculous to create the obvious, listeners collude 
with the speaker to find a meaningful and insightful middle ground between 
both extremes.16
Indeed, we often derive meaning from the negation of propositions that 
no sane person would ever assert or believe. Imagine a well-to-do wife, in 
an opulent house in the suburbs, shouting at her husband: ‘I’m not your 
maid!’. Since this wife is nobody’s maid, her assertion is perfectly truthful, 
but is, on the face of it, no more sensible than the equally true assertion 
‘I am not Mike Tyson!’. However, if this wife is weary of her husband’s indif-
ference to her housekeeping efforts, it can be meaningful to assert that his 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
112
indifference resembles that of a lord of the manor to a lowly scullery maid. 
Though patently obvious, this kind of negation amounts to what Erving 
­Goffman describes as an ‘accurately improper move [that] can poke through 
the thin sleeve of immediate reality’.17 The wife effectively punctures the 
shared pretence of her subservience, to say something like: ‘Stop treating 
me like a maid, expecting me to pick up your clothes, serve your meals and 
wash your dishes, without any show of gratitude. You may not think of me 
as a maid, but that is how you act’. The husband may reply with the equally 
accurate ‘I never said you were my maid’, but this merely addresses the 
superficial charge, and fails to deflect the argumentative force of the wife’s 
improper but accurate assertion.
Rachel Giora and her colleagues have conducted a range of compre-
hension experiments on how people understand negated assertions like 
these.18 Their results suggest that negation can be used to induce a meta-
phoric interpretation; so when membership in a familiar category like maid 
is negated, ­listeners bring the figurative aspects of the category to the fore 
in their ­interpretation. Recall that Sam Glucksberg19 views such situations 
as examples of dual reference: the word ‘maid’ typically denotes the class 
of domestic servants, but it can also refer to the figurative category of peo-
ple who are treated like servants and who are expected to perform menial 
household tasks. Giora has shown that when we negate the blatantly false 
or the literally absurd, speakers quickly move to a metaphoric understand-
ing that is not so silly. So, parents aren’t just stating the obvious when they 
tell their kids that life is not a popularity contest. For the same reason, it 
is still meaningful to remind politicians of what is so obvious to everyone 
else: fund-raising over the Web may now be the norm, but the internet is 
not an ATM.
Explicit negations that seem uninformative from an objective viewpoint 
may nonetheless establish a playful pretence that carries a good deal of 
­subjective information. When American tennis pro Vitas Gerulaitis finally 
beat Jimmy Connors in 1979, his win ended a losing streak of 16 straight 
losses against Connors. Exultant, he joked ‘And let that be a lesson to you 
all. Nobody beats Vitas Gerulaitis 17 times in a row!’20 If the strident tone 
of the negation strikes us as delusional, then this is precisely the point 
of the witticism, which tries – and fails, with humorous modesty – to sal-
vage some dignity from such a poor run of form. And if one had expected 
Gerulaitis to feel vindicated by his ­ultimate victory over Connors, Gerulaitis 
uses his ridiculous warning to remind us that he is only too aware of the 
score sheet and that to harbour any sense of vindication would be equally 
ridiculous. What emerges from this simple negation is a witty blend of two 
extremes: the arrogance of the victor, tempered by the modesty of a peren-
nial loser.

Six ridiculous things before breakfast
113
Both negation and nonsense mark out extreme positions from which a 
listener can infer a creative speaker’s true intent. Thus, what seems like a 
pointlessly explicit negation can allude to a more figurative meaning that is 
left unspoken. Implicit negation yoked to apparent nonsense can achieve the 
same effect. Consider the following examples from the Web, in which an 
absurd situation is couched within an absurd-seeming conditional:
If he was any more Christmassy, he’d be a mince pie
If Tweety was any more latent, he’d be a set of fingerprints on CSI: Miami
If he were any more laid back, he’d be a snooker table
If Bill Clinton was any more ‘low rent’, he’d be a Spring break destination
If the guy’s suit was any more empty, he’d be a freaking coat hanger
If he was any more stupid, he’d have be watered twice a week
If he was any more flaming, he’d be a Tiki Torch
If he was any more composed, he’d be a Beethoven symphony
If he was any more shallow, he’d be a mud puddle
If he was carrying any more water, he’d be a camel
If he was any more relaxed, he’d be in a coma
If he was any more chilled out, he’d be a polar bear
If he was any more cold and stiff, he’d be a corpse
If he was any more wooden, he’d be a pine post
Since the consequent in each case is clearly ridiculous, the antecedent must 
also be false to prevent the assertion of this silly (if not impossible) state of 
affairs. Thus, since a human being cannot possibly be a mud puddle, or a 
snooker table, the referent of ‘he’ cannot also be any more shallow or any 
more laid back, in a metaphorical sense at least. Notice also how the fallacy 
of equivocation is frequently exploited in these examples through the use of 
ambiguous properties that can be used in two different senses at once: one 
sense applies to the target (e.g. ‘shallow’ as in ‘superficial’) while another 
applies to the vehicle (e.g. ‘shallow’ as in ‘not physically deep’). The logician’s 
handbook of fallacies is, after all, copied from the comedian’s handbook of 
joke strategies, and the use of obvious equivocation is just another signal of 
the speaker’s playful lack of sincerity.
Implicit negation is also signalled by a speaker when an implausible claim 
is labelled as the product of mere perception. If X merely looks like Y, then X 
is not  Y. In fact, if it seems ridiculous to assume that X can even look like Y, 
then we must question our perceptions and recalibrate accordingly. So, when 
­Niccolo Machiavelli – the author of The Prince and a writer who is held up 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
114
as the model of cynical self-interest – is perceived as naïve in the following 
­examples from the Web, we do well to doubt our senses:
He makes Machiavelli look like a kindergarten teacher.
Karl Rove makes Machiavelli look charmingly naïve.
A schemer who makes Machiavelli look like Mother Teresa.
Peter Mandelson -- he makes Machiavelli look like Mary Poppins.
Locke makes Machiavelli look touchy-feely.
This guy makes Machiavelli look like a social worker
A man who makes Machiavelli look like an amateur.
Lorne Michaels makes Machiavelli look like Ronald McDonald.
This man makes Machiavelli look like the hero of a Frank Capra movie.
Cheney makes Machiavelli look like Mickey Mouse.
LBJ . . . makes Machiavelli look like Santa Claus.
Hillary Clinton makes Machiavelli look like a second-grader.
[He] makes Machiavelli look like a saint and Torquemada look like a 
philanthropist.
A true Washington insider makes Machiavelli look like a real prince.
One can use the altogether lazier phrasing ‘Machiavelli on steroids’ to com-
municate the idea that a particular person or group possesses Machiavellian 
qualities in abundance. But the fun of these examples is that they ask us to 
­suspend disbelief for a moment, to imagine the master manipulator being 
placed into new categories and contexts where he clearly does not belong. 
We might imagine how It’s A Wonderful Life would turn out if the main char-
acter was Niccolo Machiavelli instead of George Bailey, and wonder how the 
now miscast Jimmy Stewart would handle his new role. Alternately, we might 
briefly imagine Machiavelli in Disneyland, humiliated in a mouse-ears cap, or 
what Machiavelli in a Santa suit would do to a child’s faith in the Christmas 
spirit. These look like blends, but the pretence required by each is so ridiculous 
that the blended elements do not mix, and quickly separate again. This is the 
point, of course: the instability of each blend only highlights the extreme nature 
of the comparison, prompting us to infer that what is highlighted is not a warm 
and fuzzy anti-Machiavellian quality, but a cold and grasping ultra-Machiavellian 
trait. The ‘look’ in each of these examples is a reminder that we are dealing with 
appearances and that things may not be as they seem. As such, our sense of 
the ridiculous is an excellent guide to the use of creative pretence in language. 
However, as we’ll see next, ironic pretence is often a good deal more subtle, 
and the use of implicit negation is not always so clearly sign-posted.

Six ridiculous things before breakfast
115
Double-edged words
Scholars have articulated a variety of nuanced views on irony, but most agree 
that irony is a calculated exploitation of the cooperative principle, the assump-
tion – most famously articulated by the philosopher of language H. P. Grice21 – 
that speakers choose their words so as to effectively communicate their 
intentions to an audience. So, while irony is often challenging and sometimes 
devious, it is a manner of speaking that is designed to be understood and 
appreciated by an audience. Irony may involve pretence,22 but it’s a superficial 
pretence, not a deep deception. Irony may involve inappropriate language, but 
it is a relevant inappropriateness23 whose relevance is discernible to an audi-
ence. Likewise, though irony demands a degree of insincerity from a speaker, 
it is a pragmatic insincerity24 that does not rise to the level of mendacity. It’s 
one thing to utter a misleading statement if one’s goal really is to mislead, and 
another entirely to utter an apparently misleading statement when one’s goal 
is for an audience to see through the pretence and pierce ‘the thin sleeve of 
immediate reality’. But if irony constructs a flimsy facade that is designed to 
be pierced, why bother with pretence in the first place? We bother, of course, 
because irony is much more than simple pretence for its own sake.
To be ironic, one does not have to say the opposite of what one means, 
though it can often seem this way. Indeed, as argued by Rachel Giora, even 
simple negation is not so black and white but is often far more nuanced than 
classically minded logicians would like to think. Thus, the implicit negation of 
irony does not crudely invert our apparent meaning, rather it mitigates25 this 
superficial meaning so that the speaker’s intention is recognized as a selec-
tive, contextually understood blend of what is said and its negative inversion. 
Certainly, when we say ‘Thank you!’ to someone who has been rude and 
who does not deserve to be thanked,26 an ironic tone can give our remark the 
same meaning as ‘Screw you!’. But we also say ‘Thank you!’ to remind the 
violator that we, at least, know how to preserve the unspoken social contract 
of good manners, even if they do not. In these exchanges, we see the prag-
matic insincerity identified by Sam Glucksberg and his colleagues: our ironic 
utterances may actually be true at some level, yet we do not mean our words 
in the way that they would normally be interpreted. Thus, there is a pragmatic 
insincerity in the apparent hubris of Vitas Gerulaitis at a 1–16 score line, much 
as when we say ‘oh, you’re too helpful’ to a friend whose eagerness to help 
is actually detrimental to our efforts. Irony often uses pragmatic insincerity to 
couch a rebuke in a form that is conventionally, and sometimes conveniently, 
taken as a compliment.
So, there are eminently logical ends to the apparent illogicality of irony 
after all. Though it seems roundabout and wastefully indirect at first glance, 
irony actually allows us to achieve remarkable concision and cutting power 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
116
with words. For, we squeeze two levels of meaning into an ironic utterance: 
an allusion to an expectation that has been violated, by pretending it has not 
been violated at all, and a reminder that we have noticed this violation, which 
often acts as a rebuke to the offending party. In most uses of verbal irony, the 
pragmatic insincerity is detected by noting the inappropriateness of the utter-
ance to the context. There is no reason to say ‘Thank You!’ when someone 
rudely ignores you, and no cause for triumphalism in a 1–16 score line. Some 
utterances, however, make use of a fully self-contained form of verbal irony, in 
which the utterance establishes and dashes its own expectations. That is, the 
ironic part of a description is semantically or pragmatically incongruous with 
the rest. Some utterances of this kind have earned the status of proverbial 
similes in the English language. For instance, we might say that a dense lec-
ture on Hegelian philosophy is ‘as clear as mud’, or that a supposedly straight 
road is ‘as straight as a rainbow’ or that an apparently crazed individual is actu-
ally ‘crazy like a fox’. These formulations are so commonplace and clichéd that 
we tend not to think of them as instances of irony, but ironic they are.
One can argue that the description ‘clear as mud’ lacks irony because it 
seems to mean more or less what it says. On a scale of clearness, mud will 
occupy some extreme point far removed from clarity, and it is this degree of 
clearness that is communicated by ‘clear as mud’. There are two problems 
with this get-out-of-jail card. First, when used as an answer to the question ‘Is 
that clear?’, the phrase relies on equivocation to make its point, for the ques-
tioner’s sense of ‘clear’ (the specific achievement of clarity) is not the same as 
the respondent’s sense of ‘clear’ (the scale of clearness more generally). This 
equivocation is deliberate and rises to the level of pragmatic insincerity on 
the part of the respondent. Second, there seems little doubt that the phrase 
is structured so as to humorously create an expectation (‘yes it is clear . . .’) 
before then dashing this expectation (‘. . . clear as mud, you fusty old fool!’). 
The insincerity is fleeting and the phrase rights itself in the end, so that it 
seems to make its true meaning explicit. Yet, this eventual explicitness does 
not make the phrase any less ironic: its time frame may be compressed, and 
its insincerity may not extend beyond the boundaries of the utterance, but its 
allusion to an expectation (e.g. that a good lecture should be ‘clear’) and its 
subsequent dashing of this expectation marks it out as irony. Because these 
phrases offer a self-contained form of irony that encapsulates expectation and 
response in a single phrase, they can serve as the perfect laboratory guinea-
pig for experimenting with irony.
Whereas negation can be explicitly conveyed with semantic markers like 
‘not’, ‘never’ and ‘nobody’, irony typically uses a more subtle intimation of the 
ridiculous to achieve the same ends. Our experience of the world furnishes 
us with much of the knowledge that is needed to identify whether a particular 
assertion is sensible or ridiculous, as in the false politeness of a disgruntled 

Six ridiculous things before breakfast
117
customer or the false hubris of a perennial loser, but sometimes we need a lit-
tle extra help from a speaker, especially when this flirtation with the ridiculous 
assumes a more subtle guise. This help can come in many forms, such as the 
curl of a lip, the wink of an eye, the raising of an eyebrow or the tone of the 
voice. However it is done, speakers who engage in creative pretence often 
signal their status as unreliable narrators. By hinting that their perceptions 
may lack precision, they give the stronger hint that the conventional mapping 
of words to meanings is not to be trusted. Lexical markers of imprecision like 
‘about’, ‘almost’ and ‘nearly’ and verbs of mere appearance like ‘look’ and 
‘seem’ can thus mark a speaker’s desire to be accurately improper. As we’ll 
see, listeners ignore these markers at their peril.
The ironic Web
Ironic similes like ‘as crazy as a fox’ and ‘as clear as mud’ are unlikely to 
light up any conversation. Yet, writers like Raymond Chandler have used the 
form of the ironic simile to craft some wonderfully imaginative lines.27 Classic 
Chandlerisms include ‘He looked about as inconspicuous as a tarantula on a 
slice of angel food’28 (to describe a hulking white man stomping about a black 
neighbourhood) and ‘The people who run that place are about as sympathetic 
as Georgia chain-gang guards’.29 Notice Chandler’s use of the word ‘about’ in 
these similes. The lexicographer Rosamund Moon has suggested – based on 
a corpus analysis of frequent similes and a small set of ironic similes – that 
‘about’ always prefigures the use of irony in a simile.30 Analysis of the long tail 
of less frequent ‘about’ similes on the Web will allow us to see whether this is 
indeed so or whether ‘about’ is a signal of creative pretence more generally.
Instances of the ‘about as X as Y’ pattern are widespread in the texts of 
the Web, and so the pattern points us to a rich if impure vein of creative com-
parisons that can easily be harvested using a search engine like Google. Our 
goal, as before, is to see how stereotypes are used in figurative comparisons, 
both for and against type. As in our previous Web-mining efforts in Chapter 4, 
the resulting matches are sometimes banal and difficult to understand outside 
their specific contexts of use; so we filter any comparisons in which reference 
is made to properties established outside the simile, or to the broader context 
of the utterance, and we keep those whose properties derive from the use or 
abuse of obvious stereotypes. We build on the results of the earlier search for 
simple ‘as’-similes by using queries with the form ‘about as * as *’, and once 
again we conduct a widespread if non-exhaustive search of the Web by ask-
ing Google for 200 hits for each query. Since we are especially interested in 
finding similes that use elaborate and sometimes ridiculous combinations, we 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
118
accept all similes whose vehicle is a well-formed noun phrase, no matter how 
many words it contains or how complex is its syntactic form. We also accept 
those that use familiar personages with obvious stereotypical associations, 
such as Stephen Hawking, Albert Einstein and the much-maligned Kenny G.
In all, Google gives us just over 45,000 matches for our ‘about’ patterns. 
Just 1 in 8 of these matches is found more than once in our 200-hit horizon, 
suggesting that most ‘about’ similes are disposable one-offs crafted for just a 
single use. Others are well-established proverbial similes in the Archer Taylor31 
sense (such as the clichéd ‘about as useless as tits on a boar’), though ‘about’ 
does seem to mark a speaker’s desire to invent a simile on the hoof, even if one 
does ultimately lapse into cliché by the time the second ‘as’ arrives. Many of 
the retrieved matches cannot be understood without specific contextual knowl-
edge of the topic that is being described. Nonetheless, we find that the broad 
intent of over half of the matches (53 per cent) can be understood from the 
simile alone, because they use vehicles with obvious qualities that are widely 
accepted as cultural ‘facts’, such as the widespread belief that Machiavelli was 
cynical, Buddha was fat and Adolf Hitler was evil. This presents us with approx-
imately 20,000 similes whose meaning pivots around a broadly understood 
stereotype or a combination of stereotypes. It’s worth noting that just 1 in 7 
of these ‘about’ similes uses a vehicle with a single content-word (as in ‘about 
as smart as a rock’), and overall, ‘about’ similes use an average of three con-
tent words per vehicle. Moreover, the overlap between the ‘about as’ similes 
harvested here and the simple ‘as’ similes harvested in Chapter 4 is negligible: 
chop off the ‘about’ marker and just 3 per cent of these new similes are also 
found in the earlier corpus of simple similes. The presence of the ‘about’ marker 
thus leads us to harvest an almost completely different set of similes.
Recall that Dickens referred to conventional similes as a relatively stable 
form of cultural wisdom that is inherited from ‘our ancestors’. In contrast, 
creative one-offs are typically coined without a concern for their place in his-
tory, and we find that 12 per cent of ‘about’ similes on the Web make use 
of well-known names from the current pop-cultural and political climate. Only 
1 in 7 or so (14 per cent) highlights a positive aspect of a famous personage, 
and most view prominent figures as reliable targets of humour and ridicule. 
Indeed, a list of the most commonly dropped names offers a roll-call of topi-
cal hate figures such as ex-president George W. Bush, his political advisor 
Karl Rove, the socialite Paris Hilton and the filmmaker Michael Moore. These 
figures are evocative enough to serve as complete vehicles in their own right, 
yet occur just as frequently in combination with other scene-setting concepts, 
as in these two examples from the Web: ‘about as lost as Paris Hilton in a 
library’ and ‘about as frustrated as Stevie Wonder in an Easter egg hunt’. It is 
hard to imagine either of these having any linguistic currency in a 100 years 
from now or to imagine a future Dickens puzzling over their origins.

Six ridiculous things before breakfast
119
We hand-annotate all 20,000 ‘about’ similes as either straight or ironic by  
determining whether the highlighted property is stereotypically associated with 
the vehicle (hence the simile is straight), or whether the vehicle describes an 
idea that, stereotypically at least, we would strongly expect not to exhibit that 
property (hence the simile is ironic). In other words, we use implicit negation as 
a criterion for deeming a simile to be ironic. As shown in Figure 6.1, we find that 
just a quarter of ‘about’ similes (24 per cent) are straight, insofar as they use a 
vehicle for which the highlighted property is salient and apt, and three quarters 
(76 per cent) are ironic, since they use a vehicle that subverts rather than rein-
forces this property. The ‘about’ marker, it seems, is a magnet for irony.
The strong propensity for irony with the ‘about’ form suggests that the 
double-hedging of ‘about’ and ‘as’ together is intended to prepare an ­audience 
for a description that is not just imprecise, but which may also involve implicit 
negation. This mitigates the risk that the author’s true intent is misunder-
stood. But the ‘about’ marker does not always signal irony, as evidenced by 
the 24 per cent of ‘about’ similes that are not deemed ironic. By looking at the 
wide range of creative similes on the Web, we can refine Rosamund Moon’s 
hypothesis about the role of ‘about’ in signalling irony, and more accurately 
claim that ‘about’ prepares the listener for a challenging comparison that may 
demand deeper figurative analysis. The frequency with which ‘about’ is used 
in ironic similes means that when there is doubt as to the aptness of a vehi-
cle for a given property, the presence of ‘about’ will likely sway the listener 
towards an ironic interpretation. Indeed, the ‘about’ marker is informative 
even for similes that do not explicitly use it. If an ‘about’ variant of a simile can 
be found on the Web, this is a strong indicator that the unmarked variant has 
an ironic intent also. This criterion, among others, now allows computers to 
achieve a modest competence at detecting irony in similes.32
An ironic fist in a velvet glove
Regardless of your politics, you are likely to understand the simile ‘about as 
insightful as George W. Bush’ as ironic. You may well believe the ex-president 
to be capable of genuine insight, as many commentators on the Right do 
Figure 6.1  Breakdown of ironic and straight (non-ironic) instances of ‘about’ similes.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
120
believe, but will likely know that many others consider him incapable of pro-
found thought. In this either-or situation, you will probably come down on the 
side of irony, while perhaps disagreeing with the sentiments expressed by this 
interpretation (you do not have to agree with an ironic statement to recognize it 
as irony in the first place, though it must be said that people with the most fixed 
beliefs also seem to be the most impervious to the charms of irony). Or con-
sider these non-political examples from our Web-corpus, which each suggest 
similarly imaginative dilemmas both for their protagonists and their audience:
about as decisive as a horny bulldog in a pound with no cages
about as decisive as a kitty in a room full of catnip
Without a specific context, it really is a judgement call as to whether these 
descriptions are intended ironically or not. On one hand, conventional wis-
dom tells us that cats are drawn to catnip almost as much as male dogs are 
drawn to potential mates. With no obstacles to bar their way, we easily imag-
ine each making an unhesitant beeline for their objects of desire. On the other 
hand, these animals do seem rather spoiled for choice, so it only takes a little 
anthropomorphism to imagine each paralysed by indecision and torn between 
the many choices on offer. Looking to the specific Web-documents that use 
these examples, we see that the word decisive is actually used in a somewhat 
anthropomorphised sense in each case, to mean ‘the ability to make a single 
choice, and stick to that choice’. The irony of the second example becomes 
clearer when we see the larger context in which it is couched: ‘Rather than 
stick with that bad decision, they backtrack, looking about as decisive as a 
kitty in a room full of catnip. And for what?’.33 While context is always help-
ful, the point of the ‘about’ marker is that context is not always completely 
determinative. As we’ll see, ‘about as’ has a generally souring effect on any 
adjective that it precedes: if the adjective has a negative sentiment, ‘about 
as’ intensifies its unflattering effect; if the adjective has a positive sentiment, 
then ‘about as’ encourages us to take this sentiment as an ironic criticism. 
Thus, we can non-ironically rephrase the above descriptions without any loss 
of meaning as follows:
 about as indecisive as a horny bulldog in a pound with no cages
 about as indecisive as a kitty in a room full of catnip
Just as water prefers to flow down an incline, not up, irony generally prefers 
to downshift the sentiment of a description, so the ‘about’ marker seems 
­idempotent in the context of a clearly unflattering description. This becomes 
clearer when we look in our Web-corpus for ‘about’ similes with an obviously 

Six ridiculous things before breakfast
121
positive property like useful. In the list of vehicles below, any that is used ironi-
cally is marked with an asterisk:
about as useful as . . .
*a chocolate teapot	
*a one-legged man at an arse kicking contest
*tits on a bull	
*a chocolate tea kettle
*a chocolate fireguard	
*a screen door on a submarine
*a cow’s fifth teat	
*a steam engine in getting to the moon
*buying one shoe	
*a coalman on a maglev monorail
*a fish on a bicycle	
*looking at tea leaves
*a football bat	
*an appendix
a clock	
a microscope
*tits on burnt bacon	
*a third nipple
*crystal balls	
*an infected scrotum
*knickers on a kipper	
*teats on a bull
*biodegradable house paint	
*an ashtray in a motorcycle
*a 10-ton rock in a canoe	
*a useless thing
*teats on a boar	
*side pockets on a cow
*polka dots to a polar bear	
*a one-armed man on a building site
*a chocolate fireplace	
*a dog chasing a parked car
*a dead house plant	
*an old vacuum tube
*a raincoat in the desert	
*teaching aerobics to the homeless
*a fridge at the North Pole	
*scuba diving with an umbrella
*tapeworms	
Google Scholar
*a hat full of busted assholes	 *a blunt pocket knife
*a case of jock itch	
*a penis on a priest
*watching paint dry	
*an asshole hole on my elbow
*a solar telescope	
*a fart in a spacecraft
*Ouija boards	
*truth at a political convention
*handles on a banana	
*an old pair of underwear
*tits on a nun	
*a wet cowpie in the summer sun
*bloodletting	
*a van full of 8 track cartridges
*a tinfoil hat	
*mammary glands on a chicken
*toilet paper for a fish	
*a knock on the head

Exploding the Creativity Myth
122
*square wheels	
*training wheels for tricycles
*a bag full of farts	
*a knife in a gun fight
*a hole in the head	
*a chocolate saucepan
*an inflatable dart board	
*a condom machine in the Vatican
*a snow cone in Siberia	
*a broken pencil
*a clutch on a walrus	
*air conditioning on a motorbike
*a pork chop in a synagogue	 *a cautery on a wooden leg
*a foam hammer	
*bucket brigades in fighting fires in skyscrapers
*a warm bucket of spit	
*a pocketknife in a laser tag arena
*an umbrella in a volcano	
*a windshield wiper on a goat’s ass
Asterisks abound! But now consider the remarkable lack of asterisks when 
we look at the most frequent vehicles for the contrary property, useless, in 
our web-corpus of ‘about’ similes. The vehicles that are used with both useful 
and useless are highlighted in bold:
about as useless as . . .
a screen door on a submarine	 tits on a bull
JPEGs to Helen Keller	
the Windows firewall
tits on a boar hog	
a sore thumb
teats on a boar hog	
udders on a bull
a football bat	
a one-legged man in an ass-kicking 
contest
a hat full of busted assholes	
a cat flap in an elephant house
a chocolate teapot	
inviting triangles to a circle convention
a hole in the head	
a marzipan dildo
an appendix	
the underside of a desk in a nuclear 
explosion
a milk bucket under a bull	
a cocktail umbrella in a thunderstorm
a solar-powered lightbulb	
a three-legged cat
a flat tire	
an inverted penis
a pair of tits on a boar	
knees on a fish
a gun with no bullets	
an old shoe
an ashtray on a motorcycle	
a toothpick in a canoe
a damp squid	
a pinky toe

Six ridiculous things before breakfast
123
an umbrella in the desert	
a fart in a spacesuit
tits on a male dog	
soggy toilet paper
mammary glands on a boar	
a three-legged dog
a male nipple	
riding cross country on a midget 
unicycle
an asshole on my elbow	
a condom in a convent
the prick on the pope	
a cell phone tied to a wall
the proverbial chocolate fireguard	
a liberal in a gunfight
an old wart	
a canoe in the middle of the desert
a 3-dollar bill	
a fish out of water
an inflamed appendix	
a brick
tits on a nun	
a toenail in a donkey factory
a bra on a horse	
a pool of runny turd at a pottery contest
a bag of condoms at a monastery	
an extra navel
tits on a frog	
a fish with a bicycle
a bikini store in Antarctica	
glass hammers
a chocolate spacesuit	
a broken chair
wheels on a fish	
a sneaker full of shit
While both sets of vehicles are equally humorous in a sardonic vein, note the 
prevalence of irony in the useful similes and the utter lack of irony in the use-
less similes. Many of the same vehicles crop up in each set; so it is not the 
inherent silliness of the vehicles that makes the similes ironic, but the senti-
ment of the property they are used to convey. The property useless does not 
need irony to yield humour, since images of extreme dysfunction will tend to 
be humorous in their own right. In contrast, it is much harder to think of some-
thing genuinely useful that is also genuinely funny, though of course it can be 
done. More generally, complimentary properties like insightful, decisive and 
useful have a positive sentiment, and so are more amenable to the souring 
effect of ironic subversion than unflattering properties with a negative senti-
ment like dumb, indecisive and useless. The ‘about’ marker just makes this 
curdling effect more pronounced, asking us to try and find something nega-
tive and critical in what follows, and to give more credence to an ironic inter-
pretation if a description initially seems more positive than negative. Sharp 
tongues, like sharp knives, are more often used to cut than to butter-up.
Nonetheless, the question of whether a property is complimentary or 
insulting is not always straightforward. While properties like useful and use-
less are mostly stable in terms of their sentiment, so that useful is almost 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
124
always a good quality and useless is almost always a bad quality, others are 
more fickle, and can vary from one context to the next. Consider the ­quality 
menacing, which has a mostly negative sentiment, unless of course it is a 
deliberately cultivated aspect of one’s personality, in which case it can be posi-
tive. For instance, boxers, wrestlers, warriors, rappers, bodyguards, guard-
dogs, criminals and actors playing the roles of villainous characters all strive 
to create an air of menace for which the literal description ‘menacing’ is a 
positive sign of uncritical approval, and for which the ironic description ‘about 
as menacing as’ is a negative sign of criticism and failure. If the sentiment of 
a linguistic sign is contextually unstable and cannot simply be learned as if it 
were hard wired into the language, then we must place even greater ­reliance 
on cues like ‘about’ to tell us what to make of it when it is used in an unfamiliar 
and creative description. Let’s look at all the ‘about as menacing’ similes we 
can find in our Web-corpus (* again marks those similes with ironic intent):
about as menacing as. . .
*a boozy college cheerleader	
*a petting zoo
*the Care Bears	
*Daffy Duck
*a smile	
*a college professor
*a wet kitten	
*a suburban shopping mall
*the Vegas Strip	
*Meg Ryan
*the Famous Five	
*a gumdrop
*Iowa	
*a bunion
*Uncle Fester	
*a wet firecracker
*a stuffed bear	
*a teddy bear
*the local under 14 netball girls	
*a magnet school chess club
*my kid’s rubber ducky	
*a sedated goldfish
*a granola bar	
*an old lady holding a nail file
*a group of weekend ramblers	
*a rubber duck
*a rabid gerbil	
*a toothless family dog
*the Cookie Monster	
*a marshmallow
*a newborn puppy	
*the corner grocer
*Count Chocula	
*the Seven Dwarfs
*Vanilla Ice	
*my 2nd grade teacher
*my cat	
*a bit of soggy tissue
*Keystone Cops	
*a herd of wet bath towels

Six ridiculous things before breakfast
125
*piss ants on a chocolate bar	
*a marshmallow in bubble wrap
*a fluffy kitten	
*banana pudding
*an outbreak of sunspot activity	
*being mauled by a sheep
*goldfish	
*Garfield
*a pregnant woman	
*a canary
*a fluffy little squirrel	
*sliced squid
*a toddler	
*an eggplant
*an extra on Green Acres	
*an ice cream cone
*Fred Rogers	
*a kitten preying on a vicious ball of yarn
*a newborn mouse	
*pigeons
*a handicapped chipmunk	
*Big Bird
*a sock puppet	
*vegetables
*a Boy Scout	
*a lamp post
Few people would want to be seen as menacing, least of all by an interview 
panel, a jury or a prospective parent-in-law. Yet, to use a music analogy, words 
like ‘menacing’ are not simple notes, but complex chords that cause a range 
of properties, some positive and some negative, to resonate at once. The 
negative notes of menacing are most prominent when it is used to ­suggest 
creepiness, wrongdoing and a potential for physical violence, but the more 
complimentary notes can be heard when it is used to suggest toughness, 
firmness and a potential for effective physical action. All of the examples 
above are ironic, and none of them appear complimentary, which suggests 
that the irony is targeting the positive notes of the chord while de-­emphasizing 
the negative ones.
Shotgun weddings
We owe our modern stereotype image of the chimneysweep – top hat, tails 
and cockney accent – to Dick Van Dyke’s role as Bert in the 1964 Disney musi-
cal Mary Poppins. The top-hatted chimneysweep may never have been a his-
torical reality, but it has, in its way, become a peculiarly modern stereotype. 
The Web lists over a thousand chimneysweep companies that are named 
after some variation on ‘Top Hat’, and so a computer that used the Web as 
a knowledge-base might be forgiven for thinking that ‘about as modern as a 
top-hatted chimneysweep’ is not in the least bit ironic. Except that, when in 
doubt, the use of ‘about’ with a complimentary property seems to predispose 
us to an ironic interpretation. This is why the ‘about’ form (and various other 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
126
­constructions for corralling absurdity discussed earlier) is such a convenient 
­support structure for linguistic creativity on the hoof. Our examples do not 
have to be clear-cut, and our logic does not have to be perfect, for the con-
struction itself will do much of the work in communicating our intentions.
We observed that there is a negligible overlap (just 3 per cent) between 
similes harvested with the ‘about’ marker and those harvested with ‘as’ alone, 
but this underestimates the role of stereotypical imagery in ‘about’ similes. On 
closer inspection, we find that almost two-thirds (60 per cent) of our ‘about as’ 
similes use at least one stereotypical image that is also used in the ‘as’-only 
similes from our earlier analysis. These longer ‘about’ similes do not always 
use stereotypes in isolation, or even to exemplify the same properties as their 
shorter and simpler counterparts, but they do tend to combine stereotypes 
in novel ways to create visceral images. For instance, the similes ‘as quiet 
as a cat’ and ‘as noisy as a blender’ are harvested in our ‘as’ sweep, while 
the more outrageous combination ‘about as soothing as a cat in a blender’ is 
harvested during our ‘about’ sweep. If this simile prompts you to imagine a 
screaming cat being mulched to a bloody pulp in a kitchen appliance, then feel 
free to partake in a villainous Mwa-ha-ha-ha of your own, for no one asked you 
to imagine that the blender was turned on! As much as we may dismiss such 
comparisons as tasteless, one of the joys of creative language is that it asks 
us to fill in the logical gaps for ourselves, making us complicit in the construc-
tion of the author’s playfully subversive and sometimes cruel imaginings.
In almost one-third (30 per cent) of our ‘about’ similes from the Web, the 
vehicle is a marriage of two different stereotypes linked with a preposition, as 
in ‘a cat in a blender’. These combinations typically employ two stock images 
with contrary properties, in which the negative usually trumps the positive. As 
David Fishelov34 has noted, the most striking vehicles are not built from the 
most exotic images but from familiar stereotypes that are combined in inter-
esting and unexpected ways. For instance, consider the lyrics of the Leonard 
Cohen song Bird on a wire35 (the reader is invited to browse Cohen’s lyrics 
here: leonardcohenfiles.com/album2.html#10).
In the course of this song about Cohen’s search for personal freedom, the 
singer compares himself to two kinds of animal, a ‘bird on a wire’ and a ‘worm 
on a hook’, and to two kinds of person, a ‘knight from some old-fashioned 
book’ and a ‘drunk in a midnight choir’. Though it is the comparison of the 
singer to a ‘worm’ that appears to be the most incongruous and disrespectful, 
it is the comparison of the singer to a ‘drunk’ that generates the most humour. 
The reasons for this are three-fold. First, the image of a drunk in a choir is both 
striking and humorously chaotic, since we expect choralists to be committed 
volunteers and harmonists; the image of a worm on a hook is neither. Second, 
though it is easy to imagine a worm on a hook, it is not quite so easy to men-
tally visualize the singer as a worm; in contrast, it is very easy to imagine the 

Six ridiculous things before breakfast
127
singer as a drunk, and especially a drunk singing in a choir. Third, and perhaps 
most importantly, the image is not just striking but ridiculous: we imagine the 
drunk singing with gusto while earning the enmity of the choir, and just as we 
would be entertained by the foolishness of a singing drunk in real life, we find 
the image constructed here foolish and entertaining.
A visualization of Cohen’s simile from the perspective of Fauconnier and 
Turner’s blending theory is provided by Figure 6.2. In the terminology of blend-
ing theory, running the blend allows us to imagine the consequences of the 
combination: the drunk, uninhibited and profane, exercises his freedom of 
expression at the expense of the choir, much like Cohen wants ‘to be free’ 
from the expectations of those around him. All the choir (and society) can 
do is look on and frown. So, as depicted here, Cohen’s comparison is not so 
Figure 6.2  The sacred and the profane in Leonard Cohen’s lyric ‘Like a drunk 
in a midnight choir’. Two familiar images are combined to yield a third that is less 
conventional, but which accurately evokes the author’s desired meaning.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
128
much incongruous as mocking: it conveys its desired meaning – an inhibited 
striving for personal freedom from social expectations – using an image that 
is at once accurate but improper, and ridiculous but effective.
The effect of affect
With a little help – well, actually, a lot of help – from a computer, we can tag 
each property that is highlighted in our ‘about’ similes with a positive or nega-
tive tag, to indicate whether the property has a sentiment that is more flattering 
than critical. As we saw earlier, computers can now perform a decent, if unso-
phisticated, analysis of the gross sentiment of a text by considering the senti-
ment of the individual words it contains. To do this, computers use sentiment 
dictionaries that associate a positive or negative (or neutral) rating with a wide 
variety of words. One such resource is SentiWordNet,36 a sentiment-tagged 
version of the WordNet37 electronic dictionary. Another is Cynthia Whissell’s 
dictionary of affect,38 an inventory of over 8,000 English words with pleasant-
ness scores that are statistically aligned from human ratings. We would like to 
separate the question of whether the apparent sentiment of the property in an 
‘about’ simile is grossly positive or negative from the question of whether the 
simile is ironic or not, since our answer to the latter can colour our views on the 
former. Some adjectives, such as dull, unattractive and stupid, are uniformly 
critical in any context, but others, such as fragile, tough and menacing, occupy 
a usage-sensitive middle ground between clearly positive and clearly negative. 
Any sentiment analysis of these similes will yield debatable results, and so we 
may as well have an unbiased computer perform the analysis for us.39
The pleasantness ratings range in Whissell’s dictionary of affect range from 
1.0 (most unpleasant, such as ugly) to 3.0 (most pleasant, such as genuine), 
with a mean rating of 1.84 and a standard deviation of 0.44. A computer can 
simply assume that the property of a simile is conventionally negative if it 
possesses a pleasantness score less than one standard deviation below 
the mean (1.36) and is conventionally positive if it possesses a pleasantness 
score greater than one standard deviation above the mean (2.28). Whissell’s 
resource is by no means a perfect yardstick for measuring the sentiment of a 
property; indeed, as we have argued, there can be no such yardstick in princi-
ple, since most properties are complex chords, not simple notes, and reveal 
different shades of themselves in different contexts of use. Nonetheless, an 
imperfect yardstick is better than none at all if it is consistent and objective in 
how it works.
Figure 6.3 provides a breakdown of our corpus of simple ‘as’ similes by their 
ironic content (ironic or straight) and by the apparent pleasantness ­(positive 
or negative) of their highlighted properties. We can see in Figure 6.3 that the 

Six ridiculous things before breakfast
129
avoidance of irony is the norm in these similes and that a positive attitude is 
conveyed twice as often as a negative attitude (55 vs 26 per cent) when irony 
is absent. In contrast, simple ironic similes are five times more likely to convey 
a negative attitude as they are a positive attitude (16 vs 3 per cent).
Figure 6.4 provides a comparable breakdown for ‘about’-similes, which 
tend to use longer vehicles and exhibit a higher prevalence of irony.
Remember, of course, that an ironic simile that highlights an apparently 
positive property is actually conveying a critical and unflattering meaning, 
while an ironic simile that highlights an apparently negative property is actually 
conveying a positive and somewhat flattering meaning. Looking to the longer 
‘about’ similes in Figure 6.4, we see that straight ‘about’ similes use a negative 
property to communicate a negative attitude a little more often than they use 
a positive property to communicate a positive attitude (12 vs 9 per cent), but 
that ironic ‘about’ similes use a positive property to communicate a negative 
attitude in almost 9 out of 10 cases (71 vs 8 per cent). Simple similes are thus 
more likely to impart a positive view of a topic, while longer similes that carry 
the ‘about’ marker are more likely overall (whether straight or ironic) to impart a 
negative view of a topic.
The property highlighted by a simile may have differing connotations from 
one context to another. When computers annotate the sentiment of similes 
in our Web-corpus, they tend to smooth over this context-sensitivity with 
Figure 6.3  Distribution of simple ‘as’-similes by the pleasantness of their high-
lighted properties (positive or negative) and the speaker’s intention (ironic or 
straight).
Figure 6.4  Distribution of ‘about’-similes by the pleasantness of their highlighted 
properties (positive or negative) and the speaker’s intention (ironic or straight).

Exploding the Creativity Myth
130
a gross average of a property’s pleasantness in  all contexts. As shown in 
­Figure 6.3, just 3 per cent of simple ‘as’-similes are ironic and highlight an 
apparently ­negative  property, while Figure 6.4 shows that this percentage 
rises to 8 per cent for ‘about’-similes. Some of these properties are ambiva-
lent, as when menacing, bad, dangerous and wicked are considered positive 
by a self-described tough guy (think of Michael Jackson singing ‘You know I’m 
Bad, I’m Bad’40), or when fragile is used to describe a dainty loved one or a 
delicate piece of art or when tame is used to positively describe a friendly pet 
but to negatively describe a street thug. Yet, for most intents and purposes, 
and with some obvious exceptions (ranging from 3 to 8 per cent of cases), the 
average pleasantness rating of a property seems to be a very good indicator 
of the pleasantness of that property when highlighted in a simile,41 ironically 
or otherwise.
As shown in Figure 6.4, four fifths of ‘about’ similes are used to achieve 
a sardonic effect, either by directly describing a topic in negative terms (12 
per cent) or by indirectly implying a critical perspective via irony (71 per cent). 
In contrast, Figure 6.3 shows that simple ‘as’-similes are used for sardonic 
purposes in just two fifths of cases (16 per cent ironically highlight a positive 
property and 26 per cent non-ironically highlight a negative property). Negativ-
ity is under-represented in simple similes, since straight conventional similes 
communicate a positive description more than twice as often as a negative 
description (55 vs 26 per cent). Irony appears to provide a necessary correc-
tive to this imbalance, allowing negative descriptions to be crafted from posi-
tive properties. In simple similes, the balance is almost restored, with positive 
outweighing negative by 58 vs 42 per cent. Figure 6.4 shows that ‘about’ 
similes more than correct the remaining imbalance by employing increased 
length and ingenuity in the service of negativity and ridicule.
The lessons of irony
Creative language makes willing bedfellows of the logical and the ridiculous. 
But if logic presents us with the clear distinctions of soundness, contradiction 
and fallacy, then the ridiculous is an altogether fuzzier and ill-defined notion. 
It does not rely on the breaking of rules or the crossing of clear, well-­defined 
boundaries. The ridiculous is not a semantic notion,42 hardwired into the 
meanings of words and proscribed by definitions of how they should sensibly 
be used. Rather, the ridiculous is a fluid pragmatic notion, one that crucially 
depends on an unstable mixture of commonsense, culture, ­psychological 
insight and social expectation. Dividing by zero? That’s illogical. Jogging in high-
heels? That’s ridiculous. Writing an unauthorized autobiography or ­making a 

Six ridiculous things before breakfast
131
black café-au-lait? That’s illogical. Making a fish smoothie or putting a cat in the 
blender? That’s disgusting, and of course, ridiculous. Describing an elephant 
seal as a bear in a wet suit? That’s perceptually accurate, and improper (indeed, 
a crime against the dignity of a proud animal), and laughably ridiculous. Losing 
a match and declaring yourself the winner? That’s illogical. Winning the 17th 
match after 16 straight losses? That verges on the pathetic, but with a touch 
of the inspirational. Displaying hubris at this 1-out-of-17 achievement? That’s 
ridiculous. Illogical behaviour is often denounced as ridiculous, but the ridicu-
lous is a far bigger and more amorphous notion than simple illogicality.
The world is full of unlikely situations that are improbable but real, and 
made logically possible by their very existence, yet our well-tuned nonsense 
detectors scream ‘ridiculous!’ The difference between the illogical and the 
ridiculous is akin to the difference between knowledge and wisdom, or fact 
and attitude or effect and affect. It emerges from the productive overlap 
between what is possible and what is pathetic, unwise, uncomfortable, ugly 
or dysfunctional. In The Sign of the Four, Sherlock Holmes famously asks 
of Dr Watson ‘How often have I said to you that when you have eliminated 
the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth?’43 
Perhaps not always the truth, but a potential for truth, certainly. Holmes, that 
master of logical reasoning, lectures Watson about our potential to find mean-
ing and genuine insight into the improbable and the ridiculous. No aspect of 
creative language challenges our perception of the ridiculous – or hones this 
perception – quite like irony.
So, let’s conclude this chapter with another sampling from our Web-corpus 
of creative ‘about’ similes, one that focuses on irony’s love of what is possible 
but improbable and ridiculously unwise. The following is a list of the vehicles 
in ‘about’ similes that we find for the property likely. Once again, the ironic 
vehicles are starred with an asterisk:
about as likely as . . .
*Satan skating to work	
*Elvis running for president
*a quiet night in for Lindsay Lohan	
*aliens landing in New Jersey
*Santa Claus	
the sun rising in the morning
*being hit by a meteor	
*Jack Bauer saving the world on 
a daily basis
*being accepted to Harvard	
*a George Bush getting a third term
*a comic book about the Holocaust	
*Bigfoot
*a low-flying pig	
*a sobriety day at Lambeau Field
*a trip to the Death Star	
*lasting world peace

Exploding the Creativity Myth
132
*a dog learning to play guitar	
*the Pope building minarets in 
Vatican City
*Uma Thurman landing in my lap	
*telepathy
*the parting of the Red Sea	
*monkeys flying out of my ass
*grass growing around a hog trough	
*snow in Los Angeles
*a magic fish	
*the sun rising in the west 
tomorrow
*turning lead into gold	
*a resumption of the Punic Wars
*Madonna joining a nunnery	
*flying pigs
*flying cars	
*the Infernal Regions suffering a 
chilly spell
*Bridget Jones losing 10 pounds	
*Jenna Jameson becoming a plus-
sized model
*snow in the Sahara	
*racing Zambonis on the Sahara
*a neutered dog having puppies	
*a blizzard in the Sahara Desert in 
July
*Bob Barker cutting a rap album	
*the Pope making a wine tour of 
Sonoma County
*my cat winning a Nobel prize	
*Cristiano Ronaldo joining Swindon 
Town
*Richard Nixon taking a second	
*the marriage of Pamela Anderson
career as a hula dancer	
to Richard Simmons
To quote astronaut Dave Bowman in 2001: A Space Odyssey, ‘My god, it’s full 
of stars!’

7
Think like an investor
Buying low and selling high 
in the market for creative 
language
To use language creatively is to invest in language, either by 
adding new value to old forms and conventions, or by cheekily 
undermining those conventions to expose the limitations of 
received wisdom. Linguistic investments can be as simple as the 
refurbishment of a familiar phrase so that it can be ‘flipped’ for a 
quick profit, or as bold and iconoclastic as the breaking apart of a 
venerable linguistic institution when its perceived value becomes 
less than the sum of its individual parts. As we explore these 
parallels in this chapter, we’ll see that the search for creative value 
among the familiar words and phrases of language has much 
in common with the search for monetary value in a business 
environment. Investors, in business or language, must have a 
keen eye for hidden value, and the agility to exploit this potential 
before others do it first.
Rembrandts in the attic
We all accumulate junk that we can’t quite bring ourselves to throw away. 
We cram the stuff into closets and attics in the hope that it might once again 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
134
prove useful some day. Our heads are full of the stuff too, from old wives’ 
tales to the  detritus of popular culture: half-remembered slogans, jingles, 
catchphrases, punchlines, lyrics, movie quotes and snatches of poetry. If we 
believe George Orwell, even our language is clotted with stale coagulations 
of words that have lost the power to vividly evoke their meanings. Recall how, 
in Politics and the English Language,1 he fretted about the ‘vast dump’ of cli-
chés and other jaded phrases that have accumulated within English, and how 
he fantasised about chucking many a clapped-out metaphor and threadbare 
idiom onto the bonfire. Yet there might be objects of genuine value hiding in 
these piles of seemingly old-fashioned rubbish, if only we would just take the 
time to re-assess their value in the new light of a fresh context. Indeed, given 
the inherently cyclical nature of fashion, a quick rummage in the attic or the 
flea market may well offer a more effective means of blazing a trail than a visit 
to the most fashionable boutiques.
This philosophy of the flea market resonates nicely with an intriguing theory 
that the psychologists Robert J. Sternberg and Todd I. Lubart call the invest-
ment theory of creativity.2 This theory views every creative act as a conscious 
decision to thriftily exploit undervalued or unconventional ideas, in a way that 
can generate unexpected value in a new context. As Sternberg puts it, ‘crea-
tive people decide to buy low and sell high in the world of ideas – that is, they 
generate ideas that tend to ‘defy the crowd’ (buy low), and then, when they 
have persuaded many people, they sell high, meaning they move on to the 
next unpopular idea’.3 The investment metaphor nicely captures the prevailing 
intuition of creativity as an inherently risky business. For a producer commits 
resources to a creative act without knowing whether his desired goals will 
ever be realized, or whether his intended audience will recognize the value of 
the final result. Film studios, for example, invest obscene amounts of money 
and mobilize huge crews of skilled workers in the making of a movie that 
may yet fail spectacularly at the box office.4 In linguistic creativity, one invests 
attitude and knowledge and one’s credibility as a speaker in a creative expres-
sion, running the risk that witticisms will ring hollow, that jokes will fall flat, 
and more seriously, that ironic remarks will be taken at face value, perhaps 
causing the speaker to be associated with a repellent point of view. A creative 
investor is neither a ‘value’ investor like Warren Buffett, who looks for solid 
fundamentals on a balance sheet, nor a ‘me too’ investor who feeds on hype 
and follows the herd. More than money is invested, but time and energy and 
focus and trust. To be creative with words, as with anything else, one must be 
willing to occasionally look silly.
Sternberg and Lubart observe that ‘evidence abounds that creative ideas 
are often rejected’, noting that many works we now consider classics were ini-
tially rejected by publishers when first created. From an investment perspec-
tive, failed ideas are a thrifty place to look for surprising value, for failed ideas, 

Think like an investor
135
like has-been actors,5 sometimes catch a second wind. The 3M company’s 
famous Post-It notes,6 for instance, are a well-known application of a rather 
unsticky glue with an inferiority complex. This 90-pound weakling among 
adhesives was invented by 3M scientist Spencer Silver, who failed to interest 
his colleagues in a glue that was so weak it could be stuck and unstuck with 
ease. It was years before one such colleague, Art Fry, thought to use the glue 
to keep page markers from falling out of his hymn book. Yet even when pro-
ductized, Fry’s idea failed to take off, mainly because it solved a problem that 
consumers did not yet recognize as a problem worth solving. Only when free 
samples were given away did the public come to appreciate the many uses of 
sticky paper for themselves, and only then did it succeed.
In a world away from hymn books, Pfizer’s anti-impotence drug Viagra 
started life as a rather unimpressive angina and hypertension medication,7 
whose active compound is called Sildenafil. Unfortunately, Sildenafil proved 
to be about as good at treating angina as Spencer Silver’s glue was for build-
ing model aircraft. However, Pfizer’s chemists did observe that angina suf-
ferers in clinical trials were coyly reluctant to return their unused pills. Inves-
tigating further, Pfizer recognized Sildenafil’s potential as a new treatment 
for sexual dysfunction. Catching its second wind as the catchier Viagra, the 
new drug was a major success for Pfizer, both commercially and in terms of 
its impact on popular culture. Other drugs too have had a profitable second-
life long after their original benefits have become a matter of conventional 
wisdom. Aspirin, for instance, is still used to treat aches and fevers, but it 
has also been creatively re-imagined and marketed as an effective means of 
reducing the risks and the effects of heart attacks and strokes. Even Thalido-
mide, a drug associated with serious birth defects that is almost universally 
viewed with a mix of horror and contempt, has found a second life of sorts8 
as a treatment for the symptoms of leprosy and as a potential weapon in the 
fight against cancer.
Perhaps the most famous exponent of the investment theory is the Dadaist 
artist Marcel Duchamp.9 In 1917, Duchamp submitted a signed urinal to an 
exhibit of the Society of Independent Artists in New York. Cheekily titled Foun-
tain and adorned with the signature of the supposed maker, ‘R. Mutt 1917’, 
Duchamp’s contribution is what artists call a readymade,10 a found object with 
perceived merit that an artist chooses and presents as a work of art. While 
the Society initially rejected Duchamp’s Fountain, denying that it was any kind 
of art at all, Dada or otherwise, it has since found notoriety and lasting fame 
as one of the most influential artworks of the twentieth century.11 Duchamp 
had a much larger goal than the artistic rehabiliation of the much maligned 
urinal: his goal was to challenge cozy conceptions of what does and does not 
constitute art. Duchamp’s creative investment in Fountain, though meagre 
from a craftsman’s perspective, requires a corresponding investment from the 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
136
viewer, for the work asks us to view a piece of porcelain toilet-ware not just as 
an object with its own aesthetic value but as a signifier for something larger: 
the artist’s power to decide on what constitutes art.
As shown by its initial rejection, Duchamp’s investment was clearly a risky 
one, since producers often clash with consumers – even consumers that are 
themselves producers – about what constitutes the most salient properties 
of a creative product. While consumers are normally guided by conventional 
wisdom, creative producers focus on secondary properties that are less 
obvious but just as valuable. A producer may thus need to persuade con-
sumers that a product should be evaluated in a very different light. In most 
cases, the obvious quality or utility of a product is its own best argument, 
but in others, a producer may have to vigorously defend a creative choice. 
Duchamp (or an anonymous champion12) defended Fountain in an unsigned 
article for the magazine Blind Man,13 arguing that: ‘Whether Mr Mutt made 
the fountain or not has no importance. He CHOSE it. He took an ordinary 
article of life, placed it so its useful significance disappeared under the new 
title and point of view – created a new thought for that object’. Duchamp 
re-imagined the artist as primarily a creator of ideas, and in readymades like 
Fountain he found a daring means of expressing new ideas by reusing some 
very familiar forms.
In the words of computer scientist Bipin Indurkhya, innovators like Duch-
amp re-conceptualize a familiar object.14 Not only do they change the way they 
themselves think of, and mentally represent, an object, they may also encour-
age others to adopt this new conceptual representation as well. Doubters will 
look at Duchamp’s Fountain and see just a urinal, while proponents who look 
at it will see a piece of art. The reality is that each camp is looking at exactly 
the same object, but each is conceptualizing this object in very different ways. 
Viewers who bring different expectations to the work will appreciate different 
aspects of it, and different features will be foregrounded by each as the most 
salient. Creative re-conceptualization, then, is a process of selectively moving 
features from the conceptual background to the foreground, and vice versa. 
Duchamp wasn’t selling a urinal in 1917 but a fresh new way of thinking about 
art and everyday objects.
Mind the salience gap
Experience shapes our expectations of the world. When faced with a famil-
iar stimulus, the associations that come most rapidly to mind are generally 
those that have proven most salient to the interpretation of similar stimuli 
in the past. But these unbidden associations can also work against us, to 

Think like an investor
137
produce confusion and surprise in situations that merely seem familiar, as in 
the case of Duchamp’s mischievous Fountain. To use the terminology of Vic-
tor Raskin and Salvatore Attardo, Duchamp’s Fountain forces the viewer to 
switch scripts, and to vacillate between scripts, from the museum script to 
the restroom script and back again to the museum script. Duchamp knew that 
his sculpture would always carry the whiff of the men’s room, for the salience 
of urine to urinal is wired into our mental lexicons: we cannot help but think 
of the former, however fleetingly, when we encounter the latter, whether in 
a gallery or in a toilet. In contrast, James Joyce forces this association to the 
fore in Ulysses, when he tells us that Mr Leopold Bloom enjoys the ‘fine tang 
of faintly scented urine’15 in his breakfast kidneys.
Suppose, at Halloween, you see a child draped in a white sheet, peering 
through specially cut holes while toting a Jack-o’-Lantern in one hand and a 
sack of candy in the other. This familiar stimulus is not a word in our mental 
lexicons, but it does match a cliché-archetype with some very salient associa-
tions, so we effortlessly assume that the child is dressed as a ghost. After 
a moment’s reflection, other potentially relevant facts might also come to 
mind: for instance, that white sheets are often used for wrapping corpses, 
wherein lies their connection to ghosts, as well as the more practical obser-
vation that this sheet has likely come from someone’s bed. As postulated in 
Rachel Giora’s aptly named Graded Salience hypothesis,16 salience is not an 
all-or-nothing distinction. Rather, salience admits gradations or degrees, and 
the factors influencing the perceived degree of salience include ‘convention-
ality, frequency, familiarity or prototypicality’.17 The mental associations that 
one can bring to bear on the interpretation of a familiar stimulus will thus 
occupy different positions along a salience gradient, with those that appear 
most salient (such as those associated with words in our mental lexicons) 
being activated first, to exercise the greatest influence, initially at least, on the 
interpretative process.
 The existence of a salience gradient provides ample opportunity for a crea-
tive speaker to manipulate the expectations of an audience, especially where 
clichés and other familiar forms are concerned. With just a hint of pragmatic 
insincerity, the comedian George Carlin has thus asked us to ponder the fol-
lowing possibility: ‘Could it be that all those trick-or-treaters wearing sheets 
aren’t going as ghosts but as mattresses?’.18 Carlin’s joke, which exploits the 
cultural associations shown in Figure 7.1, demonstrates that our conventional 
knowledge of an object – in this case, that bed-sheets are typically used to 
cover mattresses – is not always the most salient for understanding its use 
in a familiar context. The salience gradient allows a creative writer to exploit 
a gap between the highly predictable associations of an audience and the far 
less predictable associations that are required to understand the writer’s own 
perspective, which may be wittily incongruous.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
138
Crafty comics are masters at playing the gradient of using high-salience  
associations to establish audience expectations before then using lower-
­salience associations to undercut these expectations. Salience offers us time-
tested inferential short-cuts for understanding familiar situations, yet there are 
creative insights to be had – often more profitable than that of a throwaway 
quip – when we choose to re-conceptualize the familiar, to view it afresh as 
something alien and unfamiliar. In the language of the buy-low-sell-high phi-
losophy, high-salience associations are for ‘me-too’ investors; a creative indi-
vidual must be willing to explore the whole gradient if one wants to identify 
profitable exceptions to conventional wisdom.
Short-selling in a complacent market
Stock market investors can exploit the herding effect of salience in different 
ways. Some use financial analysis to identify stocks that the rest of the mar-
ket has overlooked and undervalued, while others do the opposite, and profit 
from an anticipated decline in the fortunes of an overvalued company. Inves-
tors who are willing, for instance, to scour the foreign press or trawl certain 
Figure 7.1  Re-conceptualization as Arbitrage: creative comedians exploit gaps in 
the perceived salience of different pieces of cultural knowledge in familiar-seeming 
contexts. A child wearing a bed-sheet at Halloween might be dressed as a ghost 
(figurative association, strong salience) or as a mattress (literal association, weak 
salience).

Think like an investor
139
internet forums may acquire facts pertaining to the health of a company that 
do not appear salient to others. Thus, shrewd investors in 2008 would have 
seen a chance to profit from the soon-to-drop stock price of a company like 
GM, with its (then) single-minded reliance on gas-guzzling, ecology-smashing 
behemoths, or Toyota, with its initially sluggish reaction to claims of malfunc-
tioning accelerators. This kind of financial re-conceptualization is called short-
selling, or shorting the market, or more simply, going short. A short-seller does 
not buy-low and sell-high, but sells high and then buys low. Technically speak-
ing, a short-seller borrows a quantity of stock from a broker, sells the stock 
while it is still trading at a high price, and then waits for the price to fall. After 
the anticipated fall, the investor then buys back the stock at a lower value, 
returns the stock to the broker and keeps the surplus profit. Short selling is 
a creative way of preserving the liquidity of a market, and allows companies 
to hedge against events that they would prefer not to happen. Nonetheless, 
excessive short-selling has been blamed for the worst crashes of the stock 
market, in 1929 and 2008. If short-selling is creative, it is a distinctly insolent 
form of creativity. So, ripe pickings for humour, then.
Creative speakers often invest in commoditized language, to derive a profit-
able return by emphasizing an unexpected meaning from the lower reaches 
of the salience gradient. These speakers achieve their return on investment 
through what Hanks calls an exploitation and what Giora calls optimal innova-
tion. For clichés and stereotypes can always be bought low, and once a novel 
twist has improved their communicative value, sold high (or at least a little 
higher). The literary critic Christopher Ricks put it thus: ‘Instead of banish-
ing or shunning clichés as malign, haven’t we got to meet them, to create 
benign possibilities for and with them?’19 One benign investment strategy is 
the simultaneous use of a cliché in two different frames of reference, a mean-
ing-maximization strategy that humor theorists call double-grounding.20 The 
Economist, an otherwise sober publication on business topics, has an obvious 
weakness for this particular strategy, and its weekly articles on current affairs 
are frequently topped with a frothy and disposable wit. For instance, double-
grounding is evident in The Economist’s title for an article on government 
efforts to curb price fixing, ‘Cartels: Fixing for a fight’21 while an article on SAB-
Miller’s attempt to buy the brewer Foster’s deftly references Chaucer with the 
title ‘SABMiller’s Tale’.22 This vein of benign possibility is easily exhausted, so 
to avoid repeating oneself it becomes necessary to move on, to new clichés 
and variations, just as Sternberg and Lubart would predict.
Conversely, if speakers refuse to meet their clichés head on, as Ricks 
advises, it can fall to listeners to explore not-so-benign possibilities of 
their own. We can view the lazy use of cliché by others as an opportunity 
for ­short-selling, and coin our own creative variations in response. In 1960, 
for instance, Hollywood released a cinematic love letter to German rocket 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
140
­scientist Wernher von Braun entitled ‘I aim at the stars’. As a key figure in 
the development of Nazi V-2 rockets in World War II, von Braun was spirited 
to America at war’s end where he was to play an important role in the US 
space programme. But Hollywood might have given more thought to the title 
of its biopic, given that von Braun, a former member of the SS, had designed 
the missiles that rained down on London two decades earlier. The cliché of 
‘aiming at the stars’ was duly subverted by comedian Mort Sahl, who sug-
gested the alternate title ‘I aim at the stars (but sometimes I hit London)’.23 
Short-selling another’s complacent use of language doesn’t just undermine 
an over-valued platitude, it yields a humorous return for the short-seller, who 
also gains the conversational upper hand. One can argue that Sahl wasn’t 
just short-selling the grandiose idea that we can ‘aim at the stars’, but short-
­selling von Braun himself. Linguistic short-sellers punish weakness and simul-
taneously profit from it, by thwarting a victim’s communicative goals while 
advancing their own.
This is adversarial creativity at another speaker’s expense, with a result that 
is often humorous enough and insightful enough to justify the social cost. The 
Irish statesman Edmund Burke put it best when he said: ‘He that wrestles 
with us strengthens our nerves, and sharpens our skill. Our antagonist is our 
helper. This amicable conflict with difficulty helps us to an intimate acquaint-
ance with our object, and compels us to consider it in all its relations. It will not 
suffer us to be superficial’24 (my italics). As shown in the following exchange, 
complacent speakers can indeed suffer for their superficiality.
S1: Well, everyone is entitled to their opinion.
S2: You mean, everyone is entitled to your opinion.
A cliché is a double-edged blade that can cut the one that wields it just as 
surely as it can cut an opponent. What better way to punish the superficial use 
of cliché than by showing, to very real effect, the dangerous opportunity one 
presents to an opponent when familiar phrases are used without sufficient 
regard to their ‘object . . . in all its relations’?
On the night of his shock election defeat in 1945, Winston Churchill was 
in no mood for cheery platitudes. His wife’s suggestion to ‘look at this as 
a ­blessing in disguise’ was thus met with a withering put-down: ‘Well, it’s 
a bloody good disguise’.25 Humour researchers have given the name trump-
ing26 to this kind of linguistic short-selling, in which one speaker’s lazy use of 
cliché is seen by another as an opportunity to subvert the unspoken assump-
tions that should properly, and thoughtfully, inform its use. By showing how 
these assumptions might not be valid in the current context of use, the cli-
ché is turned against its user, often to humorous effect, as the user’s lazy 
and superficial use of habitual language is exposed and devalued. Naturally, 

Think like an investor
141
the ­subversive blow is sharpest if delivered quickly, providing ample evidence 
of the listener’s quicker wit and deeper insights.27 Conversely, the lazier the 
cliché or the meaner the stereotype, the sillier it can look when trumped.  
Consider this example attributed to the Irish philosopher John Scotus Eriugena, 
who served as court philosopher to emperor Charles the Bald in 845 A.D.28
S1 (Charles): [sitting at dinner table]  What separates an Irishman from a 
drunken fool?
S2 (Scotus): [from across the table] Only this table.
The original exchange took place in Latin, not English, but the cliché – that close 
proximity is a sign of strong similarity – works just as well in both languages 
(Charles: Quid distat inter sottum et Scottum? Scotus: Mensa tantum). What 
makes clichés and stereotypes such a rich vein for humour is the unthinking 
way in which they are so often used. A speaker who lazily employs a cliché 
as a substitute for real insight is unlikely to properly plan for its use as a con-
versational gambit, and is easily caught off guard by an adversarial gambit in 
response. Trumping views conversation as a strategic game, rather like chess, 
in which each move aims to advance the goals of the speaker,29 but at the risk 
of opening the speaker to an unanticipated attack. The irony of trumping is that 
the short-selling respondent effectively agrees with the speaker, for only by 
agreeing with what has been said can the speaker’s utterance be turned into 
an instrument of self-harm. That is how short-selling works, after all: one must 
first borrow the stock that one believes to be over-valued. Consider this joke 
about an argumentative husband and wife:
S1 (wife):	
[pointing to monkey cage in zoo]  Your relatives, I suppose?
S2 (husband): [nodding]  Yes, my in-laws.
So trumping uses superficial agreement to mask a deeper divergence of 
views. The ‘yes’ here is an implicit echo of S1’s argument, which the respond-
ent S2 borrows at face value and then short-sells. The argument returned to 
S1 is the same argument – the husband tacitly accepts that the monkeys 
are indeed his relatives – but it is an argument that has dramatically fallen in 
value. In the financial markets, short-sellers should avoid moral hazard by not 
actively causing a borrowed stock to fall in value, but this is precisely what a 
creative speaker does when trumping. The respondent S2 wants S1’s argu-
ment to fall in value, and causes this collapse by inserting a clever variation 
(relatives → in-laws).
Clichés do not come with owner-manuals, but some consideration should 
always be given to their ideal conditions of use. One should not, for instance, 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
142
describe a particular combination with the cliché ‘a marriage of X and Y’ unless 
one sincerely believes that marriage is an idealized pairing. To describe an 
­oddball combination like ‘Frolf’ as a ‘marriage of Frisbee and Golf’ is to open 
yourself to trumpings of the form ‘yeah, a shotgun marriage’, ‘a broken mar-
riage’, or depending on your politics, a ‘gay marriage’. Neither should you 
defend your social drinking with the cliché ‘I only drink as much as the next 
guy’ since the next guy might well be an alcoholic.30 Likewise, never tell your 
boss that ‘I do the work of two people for this company’, since two idiots typi-
cally achieve much less than one competent worker, and you open yourself to 
the trump ‘yes, Laurel and Hardy’. Conversely, if you happen to be the boss, 
never say ‘we are all in the same boat together’, since your peevish ­employees 
may well respond ‘yes, you bang the drum while we man the oars’.
How to think like an up-seller
Sternberg and Lubart’s investment theory views creative individuals as up-
sellers. In language, up-sellers create added value by injecting novelty and 
freshness into an all-too-conventional phrasing. Up-selling is efficient and cre-
ative whenever a variation yields a large improvement from a modest invest-
ment of effort. If you represent a sprawling chemical company like BASF, 
why say ‘We make chemicals’ when you can evoke romance and magic with 
‘We create chemistry’ instead? As we have seen, up-selling typically occurs 
when a simple substitution in a well-known expression evokes both the con-
ventional meaning of the form and yields an additional meaning besides, the 
­producer’s ROI (return on investment). In Twelfth Night, Shakespeare tells us 
that ‘some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness 
thrust upon them’, while in Catch-22, Joseph Heller tells us that ‘Some men 
are born mediocre, some men achieve mediocrity, and some men have medi-
ocrity thrust upon them’. The idea of striving to achieve mediocrity is pathetic 
enough, but the implied contrast with Shakespeare’s original ‘greatness’ adds 
yet another layer of bathos to Heller’s variation.
Investors obtain little or no ROI from lazy variations that exhibit just a super-
ficial engagement with an original expression, for these are just another way 
of following the herd. Looking to the web, other frequent substitutions for 
‘greatness’ in Shakespeare’s line include ‘weirdness’, ‘wickedness’, ‘excel-
lence’, ‘leadership’, ‘power’ and ‘failure’. Some are near synonyms (‘power’, 
‘excellence’ and ‘leadership’), others are odd (‘weirdness’), while some show 
just enough conceptual engagement with the original source material to be 
interesting (‘failure’). The linguist Geoffrey Pullum has derided the use of 
these simple variations as ‘phrases for lazy writers in kit form’,31 noting that 

Think like an investor
143
one chestnut in particular – that Eskimos have an unfeasibly large number of 
words for snow – is commonly localized to whatever nationality a journalist 
wishes to lampoon. Pullum was especially exercised by a 2003 usage in The 
Economist which went ‘If Eskimos have dozens of words for snow, Germans 
have as many for bureaucracy’.32
The economist Glen Whitman has minted the catchy label ‘snowclone’ 
to capture the potent mix of familiarity and virulent reproducibility that so 
annoyed Pullum, and the label has found favour with linguists and non-
­linguists alike.33 Though obviously and only a metaphor, and a playful one 
at that, Whitman’s evocation of cloning nicely captures our general ambiva-
lence about replication without limits. Cloning is one of those technological 
possibilities that excites and worries in equal measure, and though many 
can see the benefits of thoughtful experimentation on a personal level, most 
are repulsed by the notion of mass commoditization on an industrial scale. 
Untrammelled replication, untroubled by thought, is rarely a good thing, for 
memes or for genes. But we should be careful not to deride all variations as 
snowclones, even if the underlying phrase has been over-used by others. In 
this spirit, the last variation on Shakespeare’s line above, which substitutes 
‘failure’ for ‘greatness’, is worth a closer look. This variation has been used 
to comic effect by journalist and film critic Joe Queenan in his long running 
campaign to simultaneously celebrate and castigate the actor Mickey Rourke: 
‘Some men have failure thrust upon them, but Rourke went out and seized 
failure by the throat’.34 While all snowclones are variations, not all variations 
are snowclones.
Orwell’s contempt for over-used metaphors was especially pronounced 
in the case of journalists, since writers working in a jargon-rich domain are 
too-easily seduced by lazy tropes, especially those that come in the conven-
ient ‘kit form’ deplored by Pullum. It can grate, for instance, when movie 
reviewers smugly refer to films as ‘vehicles’ and directors as ‘helmers’. The 
newspaper of the entertainment industry, Variety, provides new readers with 
a glossary of its most frequently used metaphors,35 which makes it all the 
more tempting for its writers to use them with abandon. Such clichés can 
seem cloying and pretentious to an outsider, who may feel that to use them 
is to endorse them. Yet because these clichés are grounded in metaphor, 
they are ripe for creative investment, allowing a writer to humorously sub-
vert the surface meaning while exploiting the underlying literal meaning. The 
columnist Marina Hyde, who navigates two different cliché-silted domains 
for The Guardian – sports and movies – recently used this strategy to criti-
cize the actor Kevin Costner on both flanks at once when, in an article on 
sports ­movies, she referred to ‘the Kevin Costner vehicle – why can’t the vehi-
cle ever be a hearse? – that is Tin Cup’.36 This is no snowclone, for no other 
­substitution could work as well here. Hyde was cannibalizing her own past 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
144
writings with this quip, having taken the variation on a test-drive in the earlier 
headline ‘Russell Crowe vehicle turns out to be a hearse’.37 We often try to 
wring as much value from a productive strategy as we possibly can, even at 
the risk of repeating ourselves.
How to think like a short-seller
Linguistic short-selling is often pointedly humorous, especially when it targets 
a strident speaker whose use of complacent language fosters a sense of pom-
posity and self-satisfaction. The reversal in these cases, what we have called 
a trumping, can cause the rapid de-pressurization of an over-inflated ego. The 
boxer Muhammad Ali relates one such story of what happened when he let 
his ego blind him to the obvious.38  To his credit, Ali’s own anecdote does not 
show him in a entirely favourable light. As he tells it, this exchange occurs 
soon after boarding an airplane, but let’s omit the punchline for now:
Flight attendant: Buckle your seat belt, Mr Ali, we’re about to take off.
Muhammad Ali:  Superman don’t need no seat belt!
Ali was undoubtedly a more thoughtful man than his braggadocio would sug-
gest. This carefully nurtured up-selling of his own physical prowess, in and out 
of the boxing ring, was to produce some wonderful examples of witty bra-
vado. It’s not surprising then that he would describe himself as a superman – 
or indeed, as the Superman – and expect others to buy into this humorous 
delusion, in his presence at least. For Ali, the Superman mythos provided the 
perfect metaphor for this outsider who was now the hero of the mainstream, 
a peerless champion of unquestioned strength and rugged good lucks. So 
in the above exchange, Ali’s ego leads him to profile just those parts of the 
Superman concept that emphasize his obvious strengths as a boxer. However, 
the Superman concept provides a rich base of knowledge that popular-culture 
has spread far and wide, and there are salient aspects of the concept that 
must be overlooked to make Ali’s self-serving metaphor work in this context 
of airline travel. In financial terms, Ali’s metaphor is weaker than it seems, and 
is ripe for a short-seller to step in and take a profit.
And profit she does. The full exchange in Ali’s anecdote finishes with a 
resounding trump by the stewardess:
Flight attendant: Buckle your seat belt, Mr Ali, we’re about to take off.
Muhammad Ali:  Superman don’t need no seat belt!
Flight attendant: Superman don’t need no airplane, neither.

Think like an investor
145
Once again, we see that trumping requires a tacit acceptance of the vic-
tim’s words at face value.39 Note the use of ‘neither’ here, which suggests 
that the stewardess is adding to, rather than subtracting from, Ali’s claim. 
A linguistic short-seller extracts the most profit when a victim’s words are 
perceived to be trading at a high price. While short-sellers do not buy these 
words at their over-inflated price, a tacit acceptance of their meaning does 
allow the short-seller to borrow the words, before returning them in a much 
de-valued state. This borrowing is apparent in the echoic manner in which 
stewardess reuses most of Ali’s own words.40 But her borrowing adds an 
innocent-seeming variation that utterly demolishes the foundations of Ali’s 
Superman metaphor. Ali profiles Strength and Invulnerability in his concep-
tualization of Superman, while the stewardess profiles Flying-Ability instead. 
In a boxing ring, Ali’s perspective would surely triumph, but in an airplane, 
the stewardess scores a stunning knock-out. Is it a bird? Is it a plane? No, 
it’s Muhammad Ali, made to look puny by a flight attendant bearing linguistic 
Kryptonite.
Clichés and stereotypes persist in a community because they capture 
useful generalizations. But this generality means they are rarely immune 
to exceptional cases. Much of their meaning is implied rather than explic-
itly stated, which enables a short-seller to safely reject these implications 
while remaining in overt agreement with what is actually said. To trump 
another speaker’s cliché or stereotype, a short-seller must first identify the 
unstated assumptions that allow it to work as a successful generalization, 
and then respond with an exceptional case that makes it fall flat in the cur-
rent context. The most apt exceptional cases become easier to identify with 
practice. For example, if an annoying acquaintance tells you that, despite 
your differences, he really does think that he and you ‘are like brothers’, a 
short-seller might agree by mentioning two well-known brothers who are 
famous for not getting along, such as ‘Cain and Abel’, or two brothers who 
are famous for being intellectually mismatched, such as ‘Bill and Roger Clin-
ton’, or two who are famous for both of these reasons, such as ‘Michael and 
Fredo Corleone’.
This tendency of short-sellers to profitably exploit the hidden weakness 
of others is not limited to the domains of finance and communication. Tamar 
Gendler, a philosopher of science, argues that the exploitation of a conceptual 
weakness via the construction of an exceptional counter-example is key to 
the workings of thought experiments.41 These are scientific and philosophi-
cal experiments that are performed not in the laboratory but in the confines 
of the mind itself. Yet the best thought experiments possess a logical force 
that makes them as convincing as any physical experiment that can be per-
formed in the real world with the usual arsenal of gauges and stopwatches. 
The course of modern science has been deeply influenced by experiments 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
146
that thinkers have performed in the comfort of an armchair and which need 
no physical confirmation. Perhaps the most famous of these is Galileo’s proof 
that objects fall with a speed that is independent of their physical mass, and 
so, for instance, that Sumo wrestlers and supermodels fall at the same speed. 
This claim by Galileo contradicted conventional wisdom that scientists had 
held dear since antiquity. Aristotle, whose legacy seemed unshakeable, had 
claimed that heavy objects necessarily fall faster than light objects, and his 
claims do have a certain intuitive appeal: boulders should fall faster than peb-
bles, shouldn’t they? But behind this appeal, Aristotle’s theory was fatally 
flawed. Galileo was about to go short on Aristotle.
Popular history imagines Galileo climbing to the top of the tower of Pisa, 
to drop objects of different sizes and weights over the side. This quaint image 
misses the true essence of Galileo’s contribution, which – like Duchamp’s 
Fountain – was conceptual rather than physical. He didn’t show that the sun-
dry objects he is supposed to have dropped off the tower fall at the same 
speed. He showed that all objects everywhere must necessarily fall at the 
same speed, no matter where or how far they are dropped. Galileo used 
brains to trump Aristotle, not brawn, by identifying the unspoken assumption 
from which the Aristotelian theory derived its apparent value. Aristotle spoke 
of objects falling at different speeds, but he didn’t feel the need to define 
precisely what he meant by an ‘object’. Surely, you might think, we all know 
the meaning of ‘object’ in this context? Though the word is likely to bring a 
range of different objects to mind, Aristotle’s theory assumes that all objects 
are stereotypically simple. His objects are rigid and uncomplicated, of a kind 
that few of us would find philosophically troubling, such as cannonballs, horse-
shoes, pots and pans. This stereotype was the weakness that Galileo would 
so ruthlessly undermine. He imagined an exceptional object that ran counter 
to Aristotle’s expectations: two cannonballs of different sizes and weights, 
one heavy and one light, tied together by a flexible rope.42 Each cannonball is 
clearly a different object, but the connecting rope turns the combination into a 
unified whole, a complex object. How would Aristotle’s theory deal with this 
jerry-rigged oddity?
Not so well, as it turns out. Galileo showed that Aristotle’s theory, like a 
flustered schoolboy, provides two contradictory answers to the question of 
which should fall faster, the heavy ball alone, or the rope-tied combination 
of heavy and light balls. According to the prevailing Aristotelian wisdom, the 
combination should fall faster, as shown in Figure 7.2(a), since the heavy and 
light ball together are clearly heavier than the heavy ball alone. But accord-
ing to this wisdom, as the flexibly-tied combination plummets towards the 
ground, it should fall heavy-ball first, as in Figure 7.2(b). The rope would allow 
the light ball to trail behind at a fixed distance. Yet this also means that the light 
ball should act as a drag on its heavier companion. This drag should slow the 

Think like an investor
147
heavier part of the duo, causing the combination of heavy and light balls to fall 
slower than the heavy ball alone.
No scientific theory can tolerate contradiction. A theory that contradicts 
itself is a madly-spinning compass that tells you north is anywhere you want 
it to be. Yet it’s important to note that Galileo didn’t sneak the contradiction 
into Aristotle’s theory with some clever piece of scientific sophistry. The con-
tradiction was there all along, lurking beneath the surface where blinkered 
scientists had simply failed to notice it.43 The only way to resolve the contradic-
tion is to abandon the link between mass and speed altogether and to adopt 
Galileo’s position: all objects fall at the same speed, regardless of weight. As 
a theory. Aristotle’s account was trading far above its true scientific value. It 
was only a matter of time before a shrewd short-seller like Galileo came along 
and knocked it down to size, reaping its unearned value for himself and his 
own theories.
This comparison of conceptual thought experiments and linguistic trump-
ing has more than an abstract similarity to recommend it. In a very real sense, 
a thought experiment like Galileo’s is truly a scientific joke of sorts,44 a cruel 
logical prank at another theorist’s expense. So it’s worth nothing that when 
Galileo first presented this thought experiment in his book Dialogue Concern-
ing the Two Chief World Systems – a controversial work that was to be a 
source of considerable friction with the church45 – Galileo put the defence 
of Aristotle’s theory into the mouth of a character named Simplicio. With a 
stroke, Galileo cruelly suggested that followers of Aristotle were not just 
naïve, but pedantic and simple-minded.46 Galileo defeated his opponents with 
the cold logic of a short-seller, but couldn’t resist one more rhetorical twist of 
the knife.
Figure 7.2  (a) The combination falls faster than the heavy ball alone and (b) the 
light ball acts as a drag on the heavy ball, so the combination falls slower.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
148
Investing in readymades:  
Hand-made by robots
Though mostly remembered for his physical art, Marcel Duchamp was also 
noted for his linguistic creativity. For instance, the signature ‘R. Mutt’ which 
adorns his Fountain can be seen as a play on the name of a major urinal 
manufacturer (‘Mott’) blended with a reference to Fountain’s status as a 
readymade (‘R. M’). The late palaeontologist and science writer Stephen 
Jay Gould, who was also a passionate scholar of Duchamp’s work, wrote at 
length about the artist’s ability to slice and dice words to yield new mean-
ings. One particular example of the artist’s playfulness – the enigmatic for-
mula ‘A Guest  A Host  A Ghost’ that was inscribed on candy wrappers 
at a Paris show in 1953 – has been described by Gould as ‘a vital and central 
place in the totality of his life’s work’.47 Though clearly in awe of Duchamp, 
Gould thus saw an obvious continuity between the creativity of his ready-
mades and his fascination with word play. The ghost pun and others do lever-
age our conventional associations with everyday words, but they seem too 
‘processed’ to be genuine readymades. So what is the linguistic equivalent 
of a readymade? And if they exist at all, are these readymades an aspect 
of linguistic creativity in which humans (and perhaps even computers) can 
profitably invest?
Clichés and quotations seem to be the most obvious candidates for read-
ymade status. Rather than express our own meanings in our own words, 
these pre-built forms allow us to reuse a combination of words and mean-
ings that Shakespeare or Milton or Wilde or a legion of better writers have 
already built for us. Reference books are full of the things, and when reading 
the original texts, we sometimes memorize our own favourite lines for later 
use. However, these reusable forms lack the creative intent of readymade 
art, especially when we use them primarily as labour-saving shortcuts, or as 
a means to show off an expensive education. To use a cliché as a cliché is no 
more creative than Duchamp using his Fountain as a urinal. To be creative, the 
reuse must take the familiar form on vacation, to an incongruous new context 
where it raises as many questions as it answers. From this perspective, we 
must also deny readymade status to snowclones. While these variations on 
familiar forms do strive for a creative frisson of sorts, their real inspiration lies 
not in an interesting original phrase, but in someone else’s exploitation of that 
phrase. Snowcloning is more akin to plagiarism than creativity; indeed, snow-
clones encourage mass-produced plagiarism on an almost industrial scale. 
Snowclones concern themselves with the appearance of creativity, but miss 
the whole point of creativity, somewhat like an artist who, on seeing Duch-
amp’s Fountain, opens a factory for making novelty urinals.

Think like an investor
149
A true linguistic readymade is any resonant phrase which speaks to the 
reader of broader possibilities in other contexts. Though not clichés as such, 
we encounter these phrases everywhere. The expression ‘Chaos is a Greek 
word’ is found about 1,000 times on the web, most often as a simple state-
ment of etymological fact. However, the phrase also makes an excellent title 
for a book about travelling or living in Greece. Not only does it suggest that 
Chaos is an inherently Greek concept,48 it cheekily suggests that the Greeks 
invented Chaos and thus have a first-mover’s advantage at being the most 
chaotic people on Earth. Robert Penn Warren took the title of his 1946 novel 
on political corruption, All The King’s Men,49 from a resonant line in the nurs-
ery rhyme Humpty Dumpty, inspiring Woodward and Bernstein to name their 
1974 account of Nixon’s downfall All The President’s Men.50 In 2010, the graffiti 
artist Banksy made a film named Exit Through The Gift Shop. The origins of 
this readymade title lie in signs that often adorn museums and galleries, none-
too-subtly suggesting that you round off your visit with a little retail therapy. 
As a readymade, the phrase resonates with the fear that rampant consumer-
ism has hijacked all aspects of modern society. Of course, different produc-
ers can be inspired by the same innocuous phrase, and a London band had 
already taken Exit Through The Gift Shop as their name a year earlier. The band 
subsequently renamed itself Brace Yourself, prompting Banksy to thank its 
members with an original painting with the readymade title Brace Yourself. 
That Sotheby’s valued the painting at £200,00051 tells us something of the 
value the artist placed on his readymade film title.
In a practice that became the norm for college students in the seventeenth 
century, students were encouraged to maintain a book of commonplaces – a 
recording of interesting thoughts, observations and phrases that they might 
encounter in the course of their day. The practice, called commonplacing, is 
even referenced in Shakespeare’s Hamlet.52 Imagine if modern students were 
likewise encouraged to keep a commonplace book too, to record any resonant 
phrases that caught their eye. One need not know how the phrase is to be 
used in some future creative setting, only that it has some concise, descriptive 
utility that might make it useful in some other, perhaps incongruous, context. 
Different phrases will make a subjective appeal to the wit and the whimsy of 
different readers. For instance, the title of every chapter in this book is a lin-
guistic readymade, or a variation thereof, a pre-existing phrase with a specific 
relevance to the contents of the chapter.
A book of linguistic commonplaces would be quickly filled, and most of 
its phrases might never enjoy a creative afterlife. Nonetheless, even a casual 
flick through a book of disorganized jottings can be inspirational in itself, as 
disjointed phrases – when shorn of their original contexts of use – are all the 
more likely to suggest surprising new uses. Intriguingly, this is just the kind 
of activity that a computer can perform with aplomb. Imagine a computer 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
150
that scanned all of the daily newspapers, all of the weekly and monthly maga-
zines, and whole libraries of digitized books, keeping a hopeful record of any 
phrase that was both concise and dense with evocative imagery. Later, when 
asked to suggest a pithy way of conveying a given meaning, our computer of 
commonplaces could trawl through its vast collection of phrases to pull out 
the most useful readymades. A phrase would earn its readymade status, in 
the creative sense of Duchamp, whenever the new purpose it is retrieved to 
serve differs from that for which it was originally crafted. Suppose you are 
reading a research article about robotic fish. (Bizarrely, the web contains many 
articles on these mechanical oddities and their scientific uses.53) The idea, and 
the phrase, might strike you as such an odd one that you record it in your book 
of commonplaces, without any explanatory notes. Remember, we want to 
completely free these phrases from their contexts, like a kidnapper cutting out 
words for a ransom note. Later, when looking for an evocative simile for emo-
tional coldness, we may come across the phrase again in our book. Since both 
robots and fish are stereotypically cold (recall our discussion of stereotypes in 
Chapter 4), we can appreciate the phrase as an especially resonant vehicle for 
coldness, and state our target to be ‘as cold as a robotic fish’.
Orwell dreaded the idea of a human writer acting like a machine, mechani-
cally assembling prefabricated strips of language into colourless prose. By 
­recognizing the potential value of linguistic readymades, we can turn the 
standard automation scenario on its head, by training our computers to 
reuse prefabricated phrases that have already been composed by humans. 
In the search for reusable readymades, a computer can work much more effi-
ciently than a human, to quickly scan, snip, store, index and retrieve millions 
of phrases that might one day prove useful as readymades. To demonstrate 
the feasibility of such a system on a large scale, we construct a virtual ware-
house of readymades, each waiting to be called into action. As raw material, 
we exploit a large database of frequent text sequences on the web known as 
the Google n-grams.54 It goes without saying that computers still lack the nec-
essary experience of the real world to see the creative resonances in phrases 
like ‘exit through the gift shop’ and ‘do not adjust your set’. But when it comes 
to using the knowledge it does possess, and exploiting it on a large scale, a 
computer is an information processor without peer.
We showed in Chapters 4 and 6 how a computer can acquire large 
amounts of commonplace information about the world from the similes that 
are used on the web. From these similes a computer can learn that statues 
and libraries are commonplace images for quietness and stillness. So when a 
computer comes across ‘the statue in the library’ in a sample of web-text, it 
can easily recognize this phrase as a more resonant description of quietness 
than either ‘statue’ or ‘library’ alone. The original creator of the phrase may 
well have been describing a real statue in a real library, and had no figurative 

Think like an investor
151
intent whatsoever. However, when the phrase is cut loose from its original 
context, it becomes a pitch-perfect vehicle for our later figurative purposes. 
Though it’s no Fountain, it’s no urinal either, and coinages like ‘as quiet as a 
statue in a library’ capture the true essence of a Duchampian readymade: pre-
­constructed forms with a context-transcending elegance, they mean what 
our new context takes them to mean, and not what they were first made for.
A screenshot of this finder of readymades, named The Jigsaw Bard,55 is 
shown in Figure 7.3. Readers are encouraged to visit www.educatedinsolence.
com to use the Bard for themselves. Figure 7.3 shows the readymades that our 
computational Bard dredges up from the depths of the Google n-grams when 
presented with the property ‘cold’. In the column headed Simple Elaborations, 
we see a list of stereotypes for coldness, modified by adjectives which help to 
draw out the unpleasantness of this particular state. All of the descriptions in 
this column are true readymades, simple phrases uttered in one context but 
put to new uses in another. So, if you want to describe something as cold, 
why not follow the Bard’s advice and compare it to ‘a wet haddock’, ‘a wet 
January’, ‘a heartless robot’ or ‘a bitter storm’? The Bard has acquired each of 
these reinforcing properties from the web, using the query ‘as cold and * as’ 
to seek out the adjectives that are most commonly used to reinforce the idea 
of coldness.
Figure 7.3  Screenshot of The Jigsaw Bard, retrieving linguistic readymades on 
demand.

Exploding the Creativity Myth
152
In the column headed Complex Elaborations, we see readymade phrases 
that contain two mutually-supportive stereotypes for the same property. So 
for ‘cold’ we see not just our ‘robotic fish’ from earlier, but ‘a refrigerator 
freezer’, ‘snow-covered glaciers’, ‘bullet-riddled corpses’ and ‘a snow-covered 
graveyard’, Phrases like ‘a fish-bellied corpse’ and ‘the heart of a fish’ are com-
posed by the Bard itself, jigsaw-style, from the recurring text fragments it has 
collected in its analysis of the Google n-grams. The Bard is clearly on firmer 
ground when dealing with true readymades, but some of its own compositions 
show promise: ‘the heart of a killer’ has the ring of familiarity, and ‘the wall 
of a fortress’ is oddly evocative, and even ‘a fish-bellied penguin’ is naïve but 
apt, if a little comical too. When it comes to linguistic creativity, computers are 
still no better than idiom savants, capable of collecting and manipulating texts 
with great speed and efficiency, but lacking a nuanced sense of the world to 
really leverage what they know. But all of this will change, gradually, as com-
puters acquire increasing amounts of tacit world knowledge. Since the bulk of 
this common-sense will come from language itself, and from the myriad per-
spectives and expressions that can be found on the web, our speed-reading 
savants may yet surprise us all. Meanwhile, applications like The Jigsaw Bard 
show that a computer can even now serve as a useful, if scattershot, muse.
Concluding thoughts: Investing in language
When Britain set up the Bletchley Park code-breaking unit during World War 
II, Winston Churchill insisted that it recruit the most able code-breakers from 
all walks of British life. After meeting the oddball academics and crossword 
fanatics that were recruited to crack the German U-Boat codes, Churchill 
quipped ‘I know I told you to leave no stone unturned, but I didn’t expect you 
to take me quite so literally’.56 Yet by looking further than the usual suspects, 
Bletchley recruited a remarkable team that was to yield dramatic results in 
the war at sea. In a simple but memorable variation of an old cliché, Churchill 
later described Bletchley as ‘the goose that laid the golden egg, but never 
cackled’.57
Creative speakers must turn over some very unlikely stones to reap a sur-
prising reward. The less promising the stone, the more surprising the reward. 
So a creative producer invests in metaphor when literal expression is in abun-
dant supply, and re-invests in literal meanings when the market becomes 
flooded with overused metaphors. It is tempting to think of convention and 
creativity as sworn enemies, each locked in a constant struggle to banish 
the other from our language. But the truth is more prosaic, and altogether 
more useful than this conflict metaphor might suggest. Wherever we see 

Think like an investor
153
convention, we also see the potential for creativity, for convention breeds 
complacency, and complacency is a productive pre-condition for novelty and 
surprise. Investors can profit in the stock market when a good company is 
trading below its fair market value, and when a poor company is trading above 
its fair value. To reap this profit, a savvy investor must overturn the prevailing 
complacency of the marketplace. Successfully overturning preconceptions, 
like overturning stones, requires that we know where best to apply leverage. 
It’s not enough to break with convention for its own sake. The use of rare syn-
onyms or unusual jargon is no substitute for genuine linguistic creativity, just 
as the arbitrary or petulant use of negation is no substitute for real irony. Every 
act of linguistic creativity is a calculated investment, in which the relationship 
between the effort we put in, and the profit we take out, is understood (if not 
always understood fully) in advance.
Linguistic creativity can take many forms, and its results are found on all 
points of the continuum between original insight and clever expression. In 
this book we have primarily focussed on the creativity that emerges from the 
variation of familiar linguistic forms and ideas. Though not the whole story, 
creative variation does account for a significant chunk of our everyday innova-
tion in language, especially as it happens on the web. Not only is this a form of 
linguistic creativity that is amenable to large-scale analysis by a computer, it is 
a skill that is easily honed by a human speaker. For there is no divine mystery 
in the workings of creative variation, and one does not need to be blessed 
by God or by Nature to see the creative potential of the most commonplace 
structures in language. Everything we need to understand an optimal variation 
is right there, in the linguistic record. Neither does one need to be wired dif-
ferently, or to have a brain that runs at a higher clock-speed. One simply needs 
to foster a conscious engagement with language, to appreciate that the most 
valuable resources are often those that are hidden in plain sight. If language 
is an instinct58 – and the automatic urge to habitually use familiar words and 
phrases in specific circumstances does seem to be an instinctive reaction of 
sorts – it is an instinct that the creative producer must learn to consciously 
subdue and control. The key here is control, for the goal of creative variation 
is not to deactivate our instincts and denature our language, but to channel 
our habitual and often unthinking reactions through an intermediate level of 
analysis and experimentation. As we gain insight from the creative variations 
of others, we can re-invest these insights into our own creative efforts, and 
thus experience the thrill of creation for ourselves. Creative variation is an 
investment not just in our own language, but in language overall, for the best 
variations enrich the language for everyone else too.
Many times in this book, we have appealed to the web to provide evi-
dence for particular linguistic forms and creative strategies. Search engines 
such as Google, and databases of web-content such as the Google n-grams, 

Exploding the Creativity Myth
154
have been used to demonstrate the productivity of certain patterns, or the 
viability of acquiring certain kinds of stereotypical knowledge from the web. 
These resources have thus indirectly provided the knowledge base for the 
various software applications we have described here, from the Aristotle and 
Metaphorize systems for generating metaphors to The Jigsaw Bard (each 
of which, and more besides, can be accessed at www.educatedinsolence.
com). In some respects then, search engines like Google or Yahoo or Bing 
already provide some useful services for the creative writer. For instance, the 
Google * wildcard allows us to turn familiar phrases into structured templates, 
so that we might go fishing on the web for creative variations of our favourite 
clichés and metaphors. But these search engines are fine-tuned for commo-
nality at the expense of rarity and diversity. It is still difficult to use an engine 
like Google, say, to find a wide range of variations for a given phrase, since the 
cleverest engines often favour the most authoritative results. In Churchillian 
terms, they prefer to look under the biggest and most obvious stones, while 
a seeker of novelty would prefer them to look under the smallest and most 
obscure. Google’s * wildcard is a minor feature for expert users, but ranking 
pages on authoritativeness is its biggest selling point.
Nonetheless, the best providers are adept at spotting new search trends 
and quickly adapting to the needs of their users. If increasing numbers of peo-
ple use popular search engines to seek out creative uses of language, these 
engines may well respond with new features to aid in the creative information 
retrieval 59 of linguistic innovations on the web. These developments will allow 
users to search for more than superficial textual matches to their queries, but 
for resonant alternatives that have the same deep meaning. Creative users 
will increasingly view the web as a vast and growing treasury of readymade 
expressions that can serve fresh creative purposes for those who retrieve 
them. The web would thus become the ultimate thesaurus and Duchampian 
companion, always on, always responsive, and always changing. For lovers of 
creative language, this would certainly be a golden egg worth cackling about.

Notes
Chapter 1
	
1	 A good introduction to this topic is offered by Jim Steinmeyer’s book Hiding 
the Elephant: How Magicians Invented the Impossible.
	
2	 I refer here to the Vintage collected edition; see Conan Doyle (2009).
	
3	 Conan Doyle (2009:177).
	
4	 In this vein, Colton (2008) considers how our (mis)perceptions guide our 
appreciation of creativity.
	
5	 Conan Doyle (2009:176). Giora et  al. (2005) view this as ‘ironic over-
­statement’, noting that negation merely tones down the irony. We consider 
irony in ­Chapter 6.
	
6	 Boden (1990/2004, 1999).
	
7	 Sawyer (2006) takes a pin to a variety of romantic conceptions. See also 
Sawyer (2003) for an exploration of the collective creativity that emerges 
from group interactions.
	
8	 Conan Doyle (2009:190).
	
9	 Csíkszentmihályi (1990, 1996).
	 10	 Orwell (1946). The essay is freely downloadable from many websites.
	 11	 Bowdle and Gentner (2005). See also Veale and Hao (2007c) for a discussion 
of how some metaphors may begin their careers as similes.
	 12	 Quoted in The Guardian on April 24, 2011 by Hitchens’ friend, Martin Amis.
	 13	 The court’s decision, and the growing role of corpus linguistics in legal 
cases, is discussed by Ben Zimmer in the March 2011 edition of The Atlantic 
magazine.
	 14	 Justice Roberts’ opinion in FCC v. AT&T INC. (No. 09-1279) 582 F. 3d 490, 
reversed, can be read online at: http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/09-
1279.ZO.html.
	 15	 Quoted in G. K. Chesterton (1933:85). Chesterton makes play of Shaw’s dic-
tum here, by noting ‘Mr. Bernard Shaw said that the only golden rule is that 
there is no golden rule. He prefers an iron rule; as in Russia’. Much sport 
can be had by taking the second-hand metaphors of others at face value, as 
Chesterton does here to Shaw, for in playfully dismantling their metaphors 
we can also dismantle their arguments.
	 16	 Kreuz and Glucksberg (1989), Kumon-Nakamura, Glucksberg and Brown 
(1995).

Notes
156
	 17	 Sternberg and Lubart (1995, 1996), Sternberg (2003:106–23).
	 18	 Harry Houdini, born Erik Weisz (later Ehrich Weiss), is such a remarkable sub-
ject that almost any book on the man is worth reading. I refer throughout this 
chapter to the 1997 biography by Kenneth Silverman, Houdini!!! The Career 
of Ehrich Weiss.
	 19	 Silverman (1997:259).
	 20	 Ibid.
	 21	 Ibid.
	 22	 Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty Four: A Novel echoes many of the themes of his 
1946 essay, and imagines how a totalitarian regime might use linguistic 
inventiveness to creatively disguise the insidious levers of state control.
	 23	 Harry Houdini was the stage name of Ehrich Weiss. In a minor act of linguis-
tic creativity, he chose the name to honour his hero, the French magician 
Robert-Houdin.
	 24	 Silverman (1997:111).
	 25	 Ibid.
Chapter 2
	
1	 L. Frank Baum’s The Wonderful Wizard of Oz was first published in 1900.
	
2	 Wittgenstein (1969) notes ‘One is often bewitched by a word. For instance, 
by the word “know” ’. Wittgenstein (1953, para 29) declares: ‘Philosophy is a 
battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of language’.
	
3	 Wittgenstein (1953, Section 38).
	
4	 The designer, affectionately dubbed ‘Kaiser Karl’, was quoted on VOGUE.
com on 9 February 2009: ‘[my sunglasses] They’re my burka . . . I’m a 
little shortsighted, and people, when they’re shortsighted, they remove 
their glasses and then they look like cute little dogs who want to be 
adopted’.
	
5	 Aristotle’s Poetics. S. H. Butcher’s 1895 English translation of the original 
can be read online at MIT’s Internet Classics Archive: http://classics.mit.edu/
Aristotle/poetics.html.
	
6	 De Oratore (‘On the Orator’), book III. This passage is translated in McCall 
(1969).
	
7	 Ortony (1979).
	
8	 See Richard Ellmann’s 1988 biography for a discussion of Wilde’s work ethic.
	
9	 Dennett (1991).
	 10	 For example, this waggish retort occurs in Carruthers (2005:247).
	 11	 Google’s founders describe the workings of their search engine in Brin and 
Page (1998).

N﻿otes
157
	 12	 Lady Ada Byron’s notes on Babbage’s proposal for an analytical engine 
were published in Taylor’s Scientific Memoirs in 1843, under the pseudo-
nym A. A. L.
	 13	 Amabile (1983).
	 14	 Amabile (1996:35). Teresa Amabile’s 1996 book, Creativity in Context: Update 
to the Social Psychology of Creativity. Westview Press, Colorado/Oxford.
	 15	 In one episode of Star Trek titled Return of the Archons (season one), Kirk 
persuades a nefarious computer to commit suicide, citing the computer’s 
lack of appreciation for creativity as a reason for its failure.
	 16	 Penrose (1989, 1994).
	 17	 The researcher Rosalind W. Picard popularized the term Affective Computing 
in her 1997 book of the same name.
	 18	 This research area within Computer Science goes by the name Sentiment 
Analysis. See Pang and Lee (2008) for a survey.
	 19	 Quoted in the San Francisco Chronicle,14 May 2003.
	 20	 In Aristotle’s Rhetoric, book II. See also Morreall (1983:5).
	 21	 Sawyer (2006).
	 22	 Hennessy and Amabile (1988:13).
	 23	 From Odes 1.11 by Quintus Horatius Flaccus, better known as ‘Horace’.
	 24	 Hanks’ definitive book on TNE, Lexical Analysis: Norms and Exploitations, 
is forthcoming. For now, the key references are Hanks (1994) and Hanks 
(2004).
	 25	 Giora (2003), Giora et al. (2004).
	 26	 Maxson (1997:55).
	 27	 Frost (1995:304).
	 28	 From the Central Internal Affairs Directorate in Kemerovo. The thief was 
armed with an awl. The English is creative in parts and unintentionally hilari-
ous in others. See http://eng.mvdrf.ru/news/13827/?print.
	 29	 Gottlieb and Kimball (2000).
	 30	 Hitchens (2010:165).
	 31	 We can trace Hitchens’ development process by comparing different drafts 
of his text. Curiously, the phrase ‘paintbubbling hangover’ was used in the 
Sunday Times extract of his book on 28 February 2010, prior to its official 
publication, but this was then changed to ‘paint-stripping hangover’ when 
the book was subsequently published.
	 32	 Okakura (1964:15).
	 33	 Chabon (2008:7).
	 34	 Quoted in Behan (1965:159). The play in question was The Hostage. Behan’s 
outburst serves as a forceful renunciation of what Michael Reddy (1979) has 
called the conduit metaphor of language.
	 35	 Kavanagh (1972).

Notes
158
Chapter 3
	
1	 For example, Bruner (1962) suggests that creativity often produces both an 
‘effective surprise’ and the ‘shock of recognition’.
	
2	 The verdict from the West-End Whingers blog was ‘Dull. Like watching 
paint dry, and as we all know, paint never dries’. http://westendwhingers.­
wordpress.com/2010/03/02/review-love-never-dies-Adelphi-theatre/.
	
3	 Newell et al. (1963).
	
4	 For a technical analysis of IBM’s Deep Blue system, see Campbell et  al. 
(2002).
	
5	 Perkins (2001:46–96).
	
6	 Everdell (1997:265).
	
7	 Boden (1990, 1999). For a more formal treatment, see Wiggins (2006).
	
8	 Ritchie (2006) offers a probing critique of Boden’s transformational hypoth-
esis.
	
9	 See Douglas Hofstadter et al. (1995) for a good cross-section of Hofstadter’s 
research.
	 10	 Quoted in Newsweek, January 30, 1956, p. 56.
	 11	 Quoted in Squire (2004:54).
	 12	 See Douglas Hofstadter (1997) for an entertaining tour through the 
­constraint-laden processes of creative translation.
	 13	 Guilford (1950) gave renewed impetus to the field of creativity research with 
a paper simply titled ‘Creativity’. Coincidentally, Alan Turing also published his 
seminal paper on AI in 1950. Guilford (1967) outlines the structure-of-intellect 
(SI) theory, in which divergent production is identified as 1 of 6 key intellec-
tual processes.
	 14	 Turner and Fauconnier (2002).
	 15	 Ann Richards, July 18, 1988. Keynote address to the Democratic National 
Convention.
	 16	 See Hofstadter and Mitchell (1995) for a description of the CopyCat 
project.
	 17	 The March 2008 issue showed a picture of the governor with the caption What 
Obama, McCain, Clinton and the rest can learn from Arnold ­Schwarzenegger.
	 18	 ‘The Governator’ was the title of an article about Schwarzenegger in The 
Guardian newspaper, on August 8, 2003.
	 19	 Crevier (1993).
	 20	 McCarthy (1999).
	 21	 See Koestler’s masterful 1964 book The Act of Creation.
	 22	 Attardo & Raskin (1991).
	 23	 Schank & Abelson (1977).
	 24	 Chafe (2007).

N﻿otes
159
	 25	 Raskin (1985).
	 26	 For a skeptical view of the explanatory power of script conflict, see Veale 
(2004a).
	 27	 Norrick (1986).
	 28	 Suls (1972).
	 29	 Attardo and Raskin (1991).
	 30	 Oring (2003).
	 31	 Goffman (1961) notes that ‘As every psychotic and comic ought to know, any 
accurately improper move can poke through the thin sleeve of immediate 
reality’.
	 32	 Ritchie (1999).
	 33	 Attardo (1994:144) is careful to point out that ‘the “resolution” of a joke is not 
supposed to get rid of the incongruity, but to co-exist and accompany it’. So 
resolution does not explain away incongruities, rather it enriches them with 
meaning.
	 34	 The comedian Stewart Lee (2010:197) describes this means of joke produc-
tion as The Pull Back and Reveal: ‘the first part of a sentence creates a 
certain set of expectations . . . which is then reversed in the second half 
of the sentence as the frame of the picture, so to speak, widens to include 
details that, had they been evident initially, would have clarified the situation 
immediately’.
	 35	 Hofstadter (1997), Hofstadter and Gabora (1989).
	 36	 Though see Ritchie (2003) for a counter-balanced, critical view of the 
GTVH.
	 37	 Attardo et al. (2002).
	 38	 This is an anecdote widely told about Wolfit. For instance, see the Daily Tel-
egraph on 12 April, 1993: ‘The too, too divine days of Sir Donald.’
	 39	 The Economist letters page, 25 March, 2010. See www.economist.com/
node/15767227.
	 40	 See Paulos (1982:97) for a less ‘graphic’ graphical interpretation.
	 41	 For an introduction, see Saunders (1980).
	 42	 Paulos (1982:75–97).
	 43	 Quoted in Simon Hoggart’s column in The Guardian newspaper, November 
28, 2009.
	 44	 Rozin et al. (2006).
	 45	 See http://www.lyricstime.com/tab-benoit-garbage-man-lyrics.html.
	 46	 The full text of the October 5, 1988 debate is available online from the Com-
mission on Presidential Debates at http://www.debates.org.
	 47	 Loewenstein and Heath (2009).
	 48	 Thomas Scheff (2009:185–98).
	 49	 Ricks (1980:54).

Notes
160
Chapter 4
	
1	 The Independent newspaper ran an article by Andy Kershaw on September 
23, 2005 titled Bob Dylan: How I found the man who shouted ‘Judas’.
	
2	 Used on page 62 of Matt Skinner’s Thirsty Work. Octopus Publishing Group.
	
3	 The term vehicle was popularized by the metaphor scholar Ivor A. Richards 
(see Richards, 1936). The term seems especially apt when you consider that 
metaphor literally means ‘to carry over’.
	
4	 Fauconnier and Turner (2002, chapter 8), and Turner (1993, chapter 9). [Read-
ing Minds. Princeton University Press].
	
5	 Glucksberg (1998, 2008).
	
6	 Glucksberg and Keysar (1990) and Glucksberg and McGlone (2001).
	
7	 See http://www.vegansoapbox.com/red-meat-is-the-donald-trump-of-cancer/.
	
8	 In the work that first introduced the word-concept ‘stereotype’, Lippmann 
(1922:12) notes that ‘Great men, even during their lifetime, are usually known 
to the public only through a fictitious personality’.
	
9	 In a 1962 commencement address to Yale University.
	 10	 A history of the Encyclopédie can be found in Blom (2005).
	 11	 H. T. Price (1919).
	 12	 Outlined in Montesquieu’s monumental De l’Esprit des lois (‘The Spirit of the 
Laws’), published in Geneva in 1748.
	 13	 This hypothesis is advanced in Collins (2004).
	 14	 Reissued by Filiquarian Publishing in  2007. The text of Lippmann’s book 
is accessible via Project Gutenberg at http://www.gutenberg.org/cache/
epub/6456/pg6456.html.
	 15	 Lippmann (1922/2007:88).
	 16	 Putnam (1975:256) argues ‘Communication . . . does not presuppose that 
any particular stereotype be correct, or that the majority of our stereotypes 
remain correct forever.’
	 17	 Putnam (1975:256).
	 18	 The idea of ‘inference-rich categories’ as containers of social knowledge 
comes from Harvey Sacks (1995:41).
	 19	 Pinker (2008:418).
	 20	 Svennevig (1999:59–60).
	 21	 Jung (1978:57).
	 22	 Rosch (1975), Lakoff (1987:79–114) and Geeraerts (2006:146–65).
	 23	 Tarantino (1994).
	 24	 Lakoff (1987:79–114).
	 25	 McLuhan and Watson (1970:20).
	 26	 Ibid. and (p. 21)
	 27	 Dickens (1845:1).

N﻿otes
161
	 28	 Ibid. (p. 153).
	 29	 Norrick (1986).
	 30	 Moon (2008).
	 31	 Taylor (1954).
	 32	 This computational work is described in Veale and Hao (2007a, 2007b, 2008). 
A multilingual version for Chinese similes is described in Veale, Hao and Li 
(2008).
	 33	 Peacock (1816:154). Online at http://www.thomaslovepeacock.net/Headlong.
html.
	 34	 In line with the salience-imbalance view of Ortony (1979).
	 35	 Adam Kilgarriff (2007).
	 36	 Nonetheless, Keller and Lapata (2003) have shown that the web can be used 
as a reliable source for the general frequencies of simple phrases that do not 
occur in a local corpus.
	 37	 The Aristotle system is described in Veale and Hao (2007b).
	 38	 Orwell (1949).
	 39	 Quoted in Ricks (1995:356).
	 40	 Ricks (1995:357).
	 41	 For example, Ricks (1995:356) admires William Empson’s ‘audacious com-
pacting of clichés’.
Chapter 5
	
1	 Ford and Crowther (1922).
	
2	 Brown (2003).
	
3	 Lee (2010).
	
4	 Reported in an article in The London Times by Andrew Collins on August 15, 
2009.
	
5	 Afterword to King (1982).
	
6	 The Observer, Sunday, September 20, 2009.
	
7	 The Orwellian idea that some language is ‘junk’ is the guiding conceit of Junk 
English by Smith (2001).
	
8	 Lakoff and Johnson (1980) and Lakoff (1987).
	
9	 Johnson (1987).
	 10	 Gibbs (1994).
	 11	 Barnden (2006).
	 12	 Lakoff and Johnson (1980:44).
	 13	 Clarke (1997). The song is called ‘Daisy Bell’, and it contains the telling line 
‘I’m half crazy, all for the love of you’. HAL, of course, goes half crazy too.

Notes
162
	 14	 Crouse and Trusheim (1988) provide a sceptical take on the SAT.
	 15	 The analogies component of the SAT test has now been dropped. Adam 
Cohen’s Op-Ed in the New York Times on March 13, 2005 (‘An SAT Without 
Analogies Is Like: (A) A Confused Citizenry. . .’) offers an interesting response 
to the decision.
	 16	 Boryslawski (2004:191–4).
	 17	 See, for example, the translation by Seamus Heaney (2001).
	 18	 Freud (1905:93), Attardo (2001a:25), Veale (2007:191).
	 19	 WordNet is described at length in Fellbaum (1998).
	 20	 Veale (2004b) uses the lightweight lexical ontology WordNet (Fellbaum, 
1998) to solve the SAT analogy set in Turney (2006), achieving approximately 
40 per cent performance.
	 21	 Turney (2006).
	 22	 Quoted in That’s Shanghai magazine, January 5, 2010.
	 23	 The Independent newspaper, October 2, 2004. The article, by James Sher-
wood, is titled ‘Orient express’.
	 24	 Gentner (1983).
	 25	 BBC News, November 4, 2002. See http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/ 
2270642.stm.
	 26	 For example, Gentner and Toupin (1986).
	 27	 Glucksberg (2001), with a contribution from his colleague Mathew 
McGlone.
	 28	 Glucksberg (2001:46).
	 29	 Bowdle and Gentner (2005). See also Veale and Hao (2007c) for a discussion 
of how some metaphors may begin their careers as similes.
	 30	 The 1950 film Sunset Boulevard was directed and co-written by Billy Wilder.
	 31	 Rolling Stone, issue 1076, April 3, 2009.
	 32	 Sadly, Amy Winehouse passed away in 2011, two years after Hawke offered 
this implied comparison to Janis Joplin, adding yet another layer of ­resonance 
to his blend.
	 33	 Robert Mankoff (2002:88).
	 34	 Obvious ‘blend’ movies are crossovers such as 2004’s Alien vs Predator.
	 35	 See, for example, Seth Grahame-Smith’s 2009 parody mashup Pride and 
Prejudice and Zombies.
	 36	 The Twitter hashtag #KanyeNew-YorkerTweets is used to mark tweets in 
which users pair cartoon images from the New Yorker with gnomic tweets 
from rapper Kanye West.
	 37	 Fauconnier and Turner (1998, 2002).
	 38	 Fauconnier (1994, 1997:42).
	 39	 Veale (2006c) and Veale and Butnariu (2010:399) describe how blended word 
forms on the Web can be automatically harvested and interpreted.
	 40	 Pass notes No 2,707: Sam Mendes. The Guardian, January 6, 2010.

N﻿otes
163
	 41	 Fauconnier and Turner (2002:332–3).
	 42	 Wilde (1890/1988).
	 43	 This is also the conceit at the heart of Irvine Welsh’s 2006 novel, The Bed-
room Secrets of the Master Chefs.
	 44	 Fauconnier and Turner (1994).
	 45	 See Geeraerts (2006) for a selection of basic readings.
	 46	 Veale (2006a) and Veale et al. (1999).
	 47	 For example, see Wilks (1978), Martin (1990), Fass (1991), Way (1991), Veale 
and Keane (1992), Veale & Hao (2008) and Shutova (2010).
	 48	 For example, see Falkenhainer et  al. (1989), Holyoak and Thagard (1989), 
­Hofstadter et al. (1995), French (1995) and Veale and Keane (1997).
	 49	 Veale and Hao (2007a, 2007b, 2008) and Veale et al. (2008).
	 50	 Veale and O’Donoghue (2000) and Pereira (2007).
	 51	 Metaphorize is described in algorithmic detail in Veale and Li (2011).
	 52	 Lenat and Guha (1990).
	 53	 This manual coding effort is described in Veale (2006b).
	 54	 Quoted in Preston (1997:223).
Chapter 6
	
1	 Carroll (1871/1992:198).
	
2	 Martin (1990) provides good coverage on conventional metaphors.
	
3	 Engel (1982:90).
	
4	 Ibid. (1982:84).
	
5	 Ibid. (pp. 104–42).
	
6	 Ibid. (p. 105).
	
7	 Ibid. (p. 108).
	
8	 Ibid. (p. 128).
	
9	 Ibid. (p. 132).
	 10	 Ibid. (p. 137).
	 11	 This quip is widely attributed to the late George Carlin; see Kessler 
(2007:188).
	 12	 John Donne (1624) Devotion XVII, Devotions upon Emergent Occasions.
	 13	 The song, by the band Lazlo Bane, is called ‘Superman’ and can be found on 
their 2002 album All the Time in the World.
	 14	 Reddy (1979).
	 15	 The notion that speakers must constantly take account of what they believe 
to be the intentions and beliefs of those they are communicating with, so that 
they can achieve successful communication by aligning their ­interpretation 

Notes
164
of each utterance to this inter-speaker model, is often called intersubjectivity 
(e.g. Verhagan, 2005). Intersubjectivity thus assumes that speakers can con-
struct a good working theory of what is in the mind of others (e.g. Tomasello, 
1999).
	 16	 Though it is tempting to think of interpretation as a process performed solely 
by the listener, successful communication needs the speaker and the listener 
to work jointly toward a shard meaning. An influential theory of joint action in 
language is outlined by Herbert Clark in his 1996 book, Using Language.
	 17	 Goffman (1961).
	 18	 Giora et al. (2010).
	 19	 Glucksberg (2001:46).
	 20	 Quoted in the New York Times Op-Ed by Roger Cohen, July 8, 2009.
	 21	 Grice (1975).
	 22	 Clark and Gerrig (1984).
	 23	 Attardo (2001b).
	 24	 Kumon-Nakamura et al. (1995).
	 25	 Giora et al. (2005).
	 26	 Kumon-Nakamura et al. (1995:4).
	 27	 Speir’s (1981) biography of Chandler discusses his often-parodied way with 
similes.
	 28	 Raymond Chandler (1940).
	 29	 Raymond Chandler (1954).
	 30	 Moon (2008).
	 31	 Taylor (1954).
	 32	 Veale and Hao (2010) and Hao and Veale (2010) present a Web-based compu-
tational mechanism for automatically detecting irony in similes.
	 33	 The document in question is accessible at www.dummocrats.com/
archives/000928.php.
	 34	 Fishelov (1992).
	 35	 From his 1969 album Songs from a Room. See leonardcohenfiles.com/
album2.html#10.
	 36	 Esuli and Sebastiani (2006).
	 37	 Fellbaum (1998).
	 38	 Whissell (1989).
	 39	 More computational detail is provided in Veale (2011).
	 40	 From Michael Jackson’s 1987 Bad album, on the Epic record label.
	 41	 Veale and Hao (2007a, 2008) show that Whissell’s dictionary gives consist-
ent results when assessing the pleasantness of Web stereotypes and their 
properties.
	 42	 Ritchie (1999, 2003:46–58) argues that the foundational notion of incongruity 
in humour corresponds to a range of different logical criteria.
	 43	 Conan Doyle (2009:111).

N﻿otes
165
Chapter 7
	
1	 Orwell (1946).
	
2	 Sternberg and Lubart (1995, 1996) and Sternberg (2003).
	
3	 Sternberg (2003:106).
	
4	 Any roster of the most famous super-bombs in cinema history will inevitably 
include films that are actually quite good, such as 1963’s Cleopatra (which 
cost $250 million in today’s money, but recouped just $150 million), or 1987’s 
Ishtar (which cost over $50 million and recouped just a quarter of that).
	
5	 Quentin Tarantino is perhaps the most famous exponent of the investment 
theory in Hollywood. Recall his timely and profitable investment in John 
­Travolta in Pulp Fiction.
	
6	 Obendorf (2009:202).
	
7	 Trott (2008:275).
	
8	 Stephens and Brynner (2001:123).
	
9	 Kuenzliand Naumann (1989:73).
	 10	 Taylor (2009).
	 11	 As decided in a 2004 survey of 500 ‘art experts’ in the run-up to that 
year’s Turner Prize award. See the BBC report, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
entertainment/4059997.stm.
	 12	 Writing in The Independent on December 3, 2004, Richard Cook assumes it 
was written by Duchamp himself, while others assume it was written by the 
magazine’s editor, Beatrice Wood. See http://www.independent.co.uk/news/
world/europe/how-duchamp-made-a-splash-and-changed-art-forever-675093.
html.
	 13	 The original half-page article, which is unsigned and uncredited, can be 
viewed here: http://sdrc.lib.uiowa.edu/dada/blindman/2/05.htm.
	 14	 Indurkhya (1992:359).
	 15	 Joyce (1922/1990:55)
	 16	 Giora (1997).
	 17	 Giora and Fein (1999:242).
	 18	 Though widely attributed to George Carlin, the late comedian appears to dis-
avow the quip on his official website: http://www.georgecarlin.com/home/
not_carlin.txt.
	 19	 Ricks (1980:54).
	 20	 The double-grounding evident in newspaper headlines and cartoon captions 
is analysed in Brône and Feyaerts (2005) and Brône and Coulson (2010).
	 21	 The Economist, April 18, 2002. http://www.economist.com/node/1087375.
	 22	 The Economist, September 21, 2011. http://www.economist.com/node/ 
21530163.
	 23	 This mocking sub-title for the Von Braun film was attributed to Mort Sahl in 
an article in Time Magazine, August 3, 1998 by Lance Morrow. However, the 
waggish remark ‘but sometimes I hit London’ also appears in the film itself.

Notes
166
	 24	 Burke (1987:444), ‘Reflections on the Revolution in France’.
	 25	 This anecdote is recalled in Haffner’s 2003 biography of Churchill, p. 142.
	 26	 See Veale et al. (2006) for the first use of the term trumping in this sense.
	 27	 Trumping might be seen as a deliberate misunderstanding of a complacent 
speaker’s use of formulaic language by a sharper and more insightful inter-
locutor. However, as argued in Brône (2008), the ability to delve deeper into 
the true meaning of a cliché is actually a form of hyper-understanding.
	 28	 Recounted in Stanford (1984:174).
	 29	 F or instance,Verhagen (2005) argues that the understanding of linguistic 
expressions primarily consists of ‘making inferences that lead to adequate 
next (cognitive, conversational, behavioral) moves’.
	 30	 Hosting the 2010 Golden Globes awards while holding a glass of beer in 
his hand, British comedian Ricky Gervais welcomed the next announcer on 
stage with the quip: ‘I drink as much the next guy . . . unless the next guy is 
Mel Gibson’.
	 31	 Post on the Language Log site by contributor Geoffrey Pullum, October 27, 
2003. See http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/∼myl/languagelog/archives/000061.html.
	 32	 The Economist, October 9, 2003, in an article on Germany’s bureaucracy titled 
‘Breathe or be Strangled’. See http://www.economist.com/node/2127649.
	 33	 Language Log post by Geoffrey Pullum, January 16, 2004. Online at http://
itre.cis.upenn.edu/∼myl/languagelog/archives/000350.html.
	 34	 ‘The battle of Rourke’s drift’. Article in The Guardian newspaper, January 
2, 2009. See http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2009/jan/02/drama-wrestler-
­mickey-rourke.
	 35	 Variety calls it ‘slanguage’. http://www.variety.com/static-pages/slanguage-
dictionary/.
	 36	 On The Guardian newspaper’s Sports blog. Article by columnist Marina Hyde 
on January 29th, 2009 titled ‘Wrestling with the boundaries of taste’.
	 37	 Title of article in The Guardian newspaper’s Lost in Showbiz blog by column-
ist Marina Hyde, published on July 30, 2008.
	 38	 Recounted in Hauser (1992:479).
	 39	 This Ali example is analysed as an instance of Figure-Ground-Reversal in 
Veale (2009).
	 40	 The stewardess appears to agree with Ali here, by echoing his words, yet 
she ironically undermines him. See Kreuz and Glucksberg (1989) for a discus-
sion of echoing in irony.
	 41	 Mach (1976) and Gendler (2000).
	 42	 Gendler (1998).
	 43	 Koestler (1959/1990) puts this in stronger terms, and describes scientists 
prior to Kepler and Galileo as ‘sleepwalkers’.
	 44	 Incongruity resolution is argued to be a common feature of jokes and thought 
experiments in DeMey (2005).
	 45	 Koestler (1959/1990:500).

N﻿otes
167
	 46	 Moss (1993:294).
	 47	 Gould (2000). See http://www.toutfait.com.
	 48	 The phrase is used resonantly in the AAA Essential Guide: Greece, p. 43.
	 49	 Warren (1946).
	 50	 Bernstein and Woodward (1974).
	 51	 Reported in The Observer newspaper, April 25, 2010.
	 52	 Stallybrass et al. (2004). Some scholars suggest that Hamlet’s ‘the table of 
my memory’ is a reference to his book of commonplaces.
	 53	 See, for example, http://www.robotic-fish.net/.
	 54	 Brants and Franz (2006).
	 55	 Veale and Hao (2011) describe the workings of the Jigsaw Bard in more 
detail.
	 56	 Recounted in Clarke (1997).
	 57	 Recounted in Hill (2004).
	 58	 See, for instance, Pinker (1995). See also Sampson (1999) for the opposing 
view. However, I use the word ‘instinct’ here in a weaker sense than either 
of these authors.
	 59	 To start the ball rolling, Veale (2011) synthesizes many of the concepts in this 
book into a computational framework for Creative Language Retrieval.

168

Bibliography
Amabile, Teresa M. (1983). The social psychology of creativity: A componential 
conceptualization. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45(2):357–76.
— (1996). Creativity in Context: Update to the Social Psychology of Creativity. 
Westview, Colorado.
Aristotle. (335 B.C./1997). Poetics. Translated by Malcolm Heath. Penguin ­Classics.
Attardo, Salvatore. (1994). Linguistic Theories of Humor. Walter de Gruyter, 
­Berlin.
— (2001a). Humorous Texts: A Semantic and Pragmatic Analysis. Walter de Gru-
yter, Berlin.
— (2001b). Irony as relevant inappropriateness. Journal of Pragmatics, 32:793–
826.
Attardo, Salvatore and Raskin, Victor. (1991). Script theory revis(it)ed: joke similar-
ity and joke representational model. Humor: International Journal of Humor 
Research, 4(3):293–347.
Attardo, Salvatore, Hempelmann, Christian F. and Di Maio, Sara. (2002). Script 
oppositions and logical mechanisms: Modeling incongruities and their resolu-
tions. Humor: International Journal of Humor Research, 15(1):3–46.
Barnden, John. (2006). Artificial Intelligence, figurative language and cognitive 
­linguistics. In G. Kristiansen, M. Achard, R. Dirven and F. J. Ruiz de Mendoza 
Ibanez (Eds), Cognitive Linguistics: Current Application and Future ­Perspectives, 
pp. 431–59. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.
Baum, L. Frank. (1900). The Wonderful Wizard of Oz. George M. Hill, Chicago.
Behan, Dominic. (1965). My Brother Brendan. Leslie Frewin, London.
Bernstein, Carl and Woodward, Bob. (1974). All The President’s Men. Simon & 
Schuster, New York.
Blom, Philipp. (2005). Enlightening the World: Encyclopédie, The Book That 
Changed the Course of History. Palgrave Macmillan, New York.
Boden, Margaret. (1990/2004). The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms, 
­Second edition. Routledge, London, UK.
— (1999). Computational models of creativity. In Robert J. Sternberg (Ed.), 
­Handbook of Creativity, pp. 351–73. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Boryslawski, Rafat. (2004). The Old English Riddles and the Riddlic Elements of 
Old English Poetry. Peter Lang, New York.
Bowdle, Brian F. and Gentner, Dedre. (2005). The career of metaphor. Psychologi-
cal Review, 112(1):193–216.
Brants, Thorsten and Franz, Alex. (2006). Web 1T 5-gram Version 1. Linguistic Data 
Consortium, Philadelphia.

Bibliography
170
Brin, Sergey and Page, Larry. (1998). The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual 
Web Search Engine. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on the 
World Wide Web.
Brône, Geert. (2008). Hyper- and mis-understanding in interactional humor. Journal 
of Pragmatics, 40(12):2027–61.
Brône, Geert and Coulson, Seana. (2010). Processing deliberate ambiguity in 
newspaper headlines: double grounding. Discourse Processes, 47(1):1–25.
Brône, Geert and Feyaerts, Kurt. (2005). Headlines and Cartoons in the Economic 
Press: Double Grounding as a Discourse Supportive Strategy. In G. Jacobs and 
G. Erreygers (Eds), Discourse and Economics. John Benjamins.
Brown, Dan. (2003). The Da Vinci Code. Doubleday, New York.
Bruner, Jerome. (1962). The conditions of creativity. In J. Bruner (Ed.), On Know-
ing: Essays for the Left Hand. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Burke, Edmund. (1837). The Works of the Right Hon. Edmund Burke, Volume I. 
Samuel Holdsworth, London.
Campbell, Murray, Hoane, Joe and Hsu, Feng-hsiung. (2002). Deep blue. Artificial 
Intelligence, 134(1–2):57–83.
Carroll, Lewis. (1871/1992). Alice in Wonderland: Alice’s adventures in Wonderland 
and Through the Looking-Glass. J. G. Ferguson, Chicago, Illinois.
Carruthers, Peter (2005). Consciousness: Essays from a Higher-order Perspective. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Chabon, Michael. (2008). Wonder Boys. Harper Perennial (reissue), New York.
Chafe, Wallace. (2007). The Importance of Not Being Earnest: The Feeling Behind 
Laughter and Humor. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Chandler, Raymond. (1940). Farewell, My Lovely. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
— (1954). The Long Goodbye. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
Chesterton, Gilbert Keith. (1974). St. Thomas Aquinas: ‘The Dumb Ox’, Image.
Clark, Herbert H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge University Press.
Clark, Herbert H. and Gerrig, Richard J. (1984). On the pretense theory of irony. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 113:121–6.
Clarke, Arthur C. (1997). Foreword. In David E. Stork (Ed.), HAL’s Legacy: 2001’s 
Computer as Dream and Reality. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Collins, Michael. (2004). The Likes of Us: A Biography of the Working Class. Granta 
Books, London, UK.
Colton, Simon. (2008). Creativity versus the perception of creativity in computa-
tional systems. Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Creative Sys-
tems, Stanford University, California.
Conan Doyle, Arthur. (2009). The Complete Sherlock Holmes. Vintage Classics, 
London, UK.
Crevier, Daniel. (1993). AI: The Tumultuous Search for Artificial Intelligence. Basic 
Books, New York.
Crouse, James and Trusheim, Dale. (1988). The case against the SAT. University 
of Chicago Press.
Csíkszentmihályi, Mihály. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. 
Harper and Row, New York.
— (1996). Creativity: Flow and The Psychology of Discovery and Invention. Harper 
Collins, New York.
DeMey, Tim. (2005). Incongruity-resolution in humor comprehension, scientific dis-
covery and thought experimentation. Logical and Logical Philosophy, 14:69–88.

Bibliography
171
Dennett, Daniel. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Penguin books, Harmonds-
worth.
Dickens, Charles. (1845). A Christmas Carol. Bradbury & Evans, London.
Ellmann, Richard. (1988). Oscar Wilde. Vintage Books, New York.
Engel, S. Morris. (1982). With Good Reason. An Introduction to Informal Fallacies. 
St. Martin’s Press, New York.
Esuli, Andrea and Sebastiani, Fabrizio. (2006). SentiWordNet: A publicly available 
lexical resource for opinion mining. Proceedings of LREC-2006, the 5th Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation, 24:417–22.
Everdell, William. (1997). The First Moderns: Profiles in the Origins of Twentieth 
Century Thought. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Falkenhainer, Brian, Forbus, Kenneth D. and Gentner, Dedre. (1989). Structure-
mapping engine: Algorithm and examples. Artificial Intelligence, 41:1–63.
Fass, Dan. (1991). Met*: a method for discriminating metonymy and metaphor by 
computer. Computational Linguistics, 17(1):49–90.
Fauconnier, Gilles. (1994). Mental Spaces: Aspects of Meaning Construction in 
Natural Language. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
— (1997). Mappings in Thought and Language. Cambridge University Press, 
­Cambridge.
Fauconnier, Gilles and Turner, Mark. (1994). Conceptual Projection and Middle 
Spaces. University of California at San Diego, Department of Computer ­Science 
Technical Report 9401.
— (1998). Conceptual Integration Networks. Cognitive Science, 22(2):133–87.
— (2002). The Way We Think. Conceptual Blending and the Mind’s Hidden Com-
plexities. Basic Books, New York.
Fellbaum, Christiane (Ed.). (1998). WordNet: An electronic lexical database. MIT 
Press, Cambridge.
Fishelov, David. (1992). Poetic and Non-Poetic Simile: Structure, Semantics, Rheto-
ric. Poetics Today, 14(1):1–23.
Ford, Henry and Crowther, Samuel. (1922). My Life and Work. Doubleday, Page & 
Company, New York.
French, Robert M. (1995). The Subtlety of Sameness. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Freud, Sigmund. (1905). Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious. W. W. 
­Norton, New York.
Frost, Robert. (1995). Frost: Collected Poems, Prose & Plays. The Library of 
­America.
Geeraerts, Dirk (Ed.). (2006a). Cognitive Linguistics: Basic Readings. Walter de 
­Gruyter, New York.
— (2006b). Prototype theory: Prospects and problems. In Dirk Geeraerts (Ed.), 
­Cognitive Linguistics: Basic Readings. Walter de Gruyter, New York.
Gendler, Tamar Szabó. (1998). Galileo and the indispensability of scientific 
thought experiment. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 
49(3):397–424.
— (2000). Thought Experiment: On the Powers and Limits of Imaginary Cases. 
Garland, New York.
Gentner, Dedre. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework. Cognitive 
Science, 7(2):155–70.
Gentner, Dedre and Toupin, Cecile. (1986). Systematicity and surface similarity in 
the development of analogy. Cognitive Science, 10(3):277–300.

Bibliography
172
Gibbs, Raymond W., Jr. (1994). The Poetics of Mind. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Giora, Rachel. (1997). Understanding figurative and literal language. The Graded 
Salience Hypothesis. Cognitive Linguistics, 7:183–206.
— (2003). On Our Mind: Salience, Context, and Figurative Language. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford.
Giora, Rachel and Fein, Ofer. (1999). Irony: Context and salience. Metaphor and 
Symbol, 14(4):241–57.
Giora, Rachel, Fein, Ofer, Ganzi, Jonathan, Levi, Natalie Alkeslassy and Sabah, 
Hadas. (2005). On negation as mitigation: The case of negative irony. Discourse 
Processes, 39(1):81–100.
Giora, Rachel, Fein, Ofer, Kronrod, Ann, Elnatan, Idit, Shuval, Noa and Zur, Adi. 
(2004). Weapons of Mass Distraction: Optimal Innovation and Pleasure ­Ratings. 
Metaphor and Symbol, 19(2):115–41.
Giora, Rachel, Fein, Ofer, Metuki, Nili and Stern, Pnina. (2010). Negation as a meta-
phor-inducing operator. In L. R. Horn (Ed.), The Expression of Negation. Mouton 
de Gruyter, Berlin/New York.
Glucksberg, Sam. (1998). Understanding metaphors. Current Directions in Psycho-
logical Science, 7:39–43.
— (2008). How metaphor creates categories – quickly! In Raymond W. Gibbs, 
Jr. (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of Metaphor and Thought (chapter 4). 
­Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Glucksberg, Sam and Keysar, Boaz. (1990). Understanding Metaphorical Compari-
sons: Beyond Similarity. Psychological Review, 97(1):3–18.
Glucksberg, Sam and McGlone, Matthew. (2001). Understanding Figurative Lan-
guage: From Metaphors to Idioms. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Goffman, Erving. (1961). Encounters: Two Studies in the Sociology of Interaction. 
Allyn & Bacon, Boston.
Gottlieb, Robert and Kimball, Robert. (2000). Reading Lyrics. Pantheon books, 
New York.
Gould, Stephen J. (2000). The substantial ghost: Towards a general exegesis of 
Duchamp’s artful wordplays. Tout-Fait, The Marcel Duchamp Studies Online 
Journal, 1(2).
Grice, H. Paul. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and J. Morgan (Eds), 
­Syntax and Semantics 3: Speech Acts. Academic Press, New York.
Guilford, Joy Paul. (1950). Creativity. American Psychologist, 5(9):444–54.
— (1967). The Nature of Human Intelligence. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Haffner, Sebastian. (2003). Churchill. Haus, London.
Hanks, Patrick. (1994). Linguistic norms and pragmatic exploitations, or why lex-
icographers need prototype theory, and vice versa. In F. Kiefer, G. Kiss and 
J. Pajzs (Eds) Papers in Computational Lexicography: Complex–1994. Hungar-
ian Academy of Sciences, Budapest.
— (2004). The syntagmatics of metaphor and idiom. International Journal of Lexi-
cography, 17(3):245–74.
Hao, Yanfen and Veale, Tony. (2010). An ironic fist in a velvet glove: Creative mis-
representation in the construction of ironic similes. Minds and Machines, 
20(4):483–8.
Hauser, Thomas. (1992). Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times. Simon & Schuster, 
New Jersey.

Bibliography
173
Heaney, Seamus. (2001). Beowulf: A New Verse Translation. W. W. Norton, New York.
Hennessy, Beth A. and Amabile, Teresa M. (1988). The conditions of creativity. In 
Robert J. Sternberg (Ed.), The Nature of Creativity: Contemporary Psychological 
Perspectives. Chicago University Press, Chicago.
Hill, Marion. (2004). Bletchley People: Churchill’s Geese That Never Cackled. The 
History Press.
Hitchens, Christopher. (2010). Hitch-22: A Memoir. Atlantic Books, London.
Hofstadter, Douglas R. (1997). Le Ton Beau De Marot: In Praise of the Music of 
Language. Basic Books, New York.
Hofstadter, Douglas R. and Gabora, Liane. (1989). Synopsis of the Workshop 
on Humor and Cognition. Humor: International Journal of Humor Research, 
2(4):417–40.
Hofstadter, Douglas R. and Mitchell, Melanie. (1995). The copycat project: A 
model of mental fluidity and analogy-making. In Douglas R. Hofstadter and 
the Fluid Analogies Research Group, Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies. 
Computer Models of the Fundamental Mechanisms of Thought. Basic Books, 
New York.
Hofstadter, Douglas R. and the Fluid Analogies Research Group. (1995). Fluid Con-
cepts and Creative Analogies. Computer Models of the Fundamental Mecha-
nisms of Thought. Basic Books, New York.
Holyoak, Keith J. and Thagard, Paul. (1989). Analogical Mapping by Constraint 
­Satisfaction, Cognitive Science, 13:295–355.
Indurkhya, Bipin. (1992). Studies in Cognitive Systems. Metaphor and Cognition: 
An Interactionist Approach. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht.
Johnson, Mark. (1987). The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis of Meaning, Imagi-
nation, and Reason. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Joyce, James. (1922/1990). Ulysses. Vintage International, New York.
Jung, Carl G. (1978). Approaching the Unconscious. In C. G. Jung (Ed.), Man and 
His Symbols. Picador, London.
Kavanagh, Patrick. (1972). The Complete Poems of Patrick Kavanagh. Peter 
­Kavanagh (Ed.). The Goldsmith Press, Newbridge, Ireland.
Keller, Frank and Lapata, Mirella. (2003). Using the Web to obtain frequencies for 
unseen bigrams. Computational Linguistics, 29(3):459–84.
Kessler, Greg S. (2007). Internet Wisdom: The Best of Internet E-mail Wit and Wis-
dom. Authorhouse, Bloomington.
Kilgarriff, Adam. (2007). Googleology is bad science. Computational Linguistics, 
33(1):147–51.
King, Steven. (1982). Different Seasons. Viking Press, New York.
Koestler, Arthur. (1964). The Act of Creation. Penguin Books, New York.
— (1959/1990). The Sleepwalkers: A History of Man’s Changing Vision of the 
­Universe. Arkana.
Kreuz, Roger J. and Glucksberg, Sam. (1989). How to be sarcastic: The echoic 
reminder theory of verbal irony. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 
118(4):374–86.
Kuenzli, Rudolf E. and Naumann, Francis M. (1989). Marcel Duchamp: Artist of the 
Century. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Kumon-Nakamura, Sachi, Glucksberg, Sam and Brown, Mary. (1995). How about 
another piece of pie: The Allusional Pretense Theory of Discourse Irony. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: General, 124:3–21.

Bibliography
174
Lakoff, George. (1987). Women, Fire and Dangerous Things. University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago.
Lakoff, George and Johnson, Mark. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lee, Stewart. (2010). How I Escaped My Certain Fate. Faber & Faber, London.
Lenat, Douglas B. and Guha, Ramanathan V. (1990). Building Large Knowledge-
Based Systems. Addison Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts.
Lippmann, Walter. (1922). Public Opinion. Reissued by Filiquarian, 2007.
Loewenstein, Jeffrey and Heath, Chip. (2009). The Repetition-Break plot structure: 
A cognitive influence on selection in the marketplace of ideas. Cognitive Sci-
ence, 33:1–19.
Mach, Ernst. (1976). On Though Experiments. In Knowledge and Error. D. Reidel, 
translated by Thomas J. McCormack and Paul Foulkes. Dordrecht, Holland.
Mankoff, Robert. (2002). The Naked Cartoonist. Black Dog and Leventhal, New York.
Martin, James H. (1990). A Computational Model of Metaphor Interpretation. Aca-
demic Press, Boston.
Maxson, H. A. (1997). On the Sonnets of Robert Frost. McFarland, New York.
McCall, Marsh H. (1969). Cicero, De Oratore, III, 39, 157. The American Journal of 
Philology, 90(2):215–19.
McCarthy, John. (1999). Creative Solutions to Problems. Proceedings of the 
AISB’99 Symposium on AI and Scientific Creativity. Edinburgh, Scotland.
McLuhan, Marshall and Watson, Wilfred. (1970). From Cliché to Archetype. Viking 
Press, New York.
Moon, Rosamund. (2008). Conventionalized as-similes in English: A problem case. 
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 13(1):3–37.
Morreall, John. (1983). Taking Laughter Seriously. State University of New York 
Press, Albany, New York.
Moss, Jean Dietz. (1993). Novelties in the heavens: rhetoric and science in the 
Copernican controversy. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Newell, Allen, Shaw, J. Clifford and Simon, Herbert A. (1963). The process of crea-
tive thinking. In H. E. Gruber, G. Terrell and M. Wertheimer (Eds), Contemporary 
Approaches to Creative Thinking, 63–119. Atherton, New York.
Norrick, Neal R. (1986a). A frame-theoretical analysis of verbal humor: Bisocia-
tion as Schema conflict. Semiotica: Journal of the International Association for 
Semiotic Studies, 60(3–4):225–45.
— (1986b). Stock Similes. Journal of Literary Semantics, XV(1):39–52.
Obendorf, Hartmut. (2009). Minimalism: Designing Simplicity. Springer, London.
Okakura, Kakuzo. (1964). The Book of Tea. Dover Publications.
Oring, Elliott. (2003). Engaging Humor. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Ortony, Andrew. (1979). The role of similarity in similes and metaphors. In Andrew 
Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and Thought. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Orwell, George. (1946). Politics and the English language. Horizon, 13(76), April 
issue.
— (1949). Nineteen Eighty Four: A Novel. Secker and Warburg, London.
Pang, Bo and Lee, Lillian. (2008). Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Founda-
tions and Trends in Information Retrieval, 2(1–2):1–135.
Paulos, John Allen. (1982). Mathematics and Humor. University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago.
Peacock, Thomas Love. (1816). Headlong Hall. T. Hookham, Jun & Co, London.

Bibliography
175
Penrose, Roger. (1989). The Emperor’s New Mind. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford.
— (1994). Shadows of the Mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Pereira, Francisco Câmara. (2007). Creativity and artificial intelligence: a concep-
tual blending approach. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin and New York.
Perkins, David. (2001). The Eureka Effect: The Art and Logic of Breakthrough Think-
ing. W. W. Norton & Co, Pennsylvania.
Picard, Rosalind W. (1997). Affective Computing. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Pinker, Steven. (1995). The Language Instinct. Penguin Books, London.
— (2008). The Stuff of Thought. Viking Penguin, New York.
Preston, John. (1997). Thought and Language. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge.
Price, Hereward Thimbleby. (1919). Boche and Bolshevik: Experiences of an 
­Englishman in the German Army and in Russian Prisons. John Murray, 
­London.
Putnam, Hilary. (1975). Mind, Language and Reality: Philosophical Papers, Volume 
2. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Raskin, Victor. (1985). Semantic Mechanisms of Humor. D. Reidel, Boston.
Reddy, Michael J. (1979). The conduit metaphor: A case of frame conflict in our lan-
guage about language. In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and Thought, pp. 284–310. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Richards, Ivor A. (1936). The Philosophy of Rhetoric. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford.
Ricks, Christopher B. (1980). Clichés. In Leonard Michaels and Christopher B. Ricks 
(Eds), The State of the Language. University of California Press, Berkeley.
— (1995). The Force of Poetry. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Ritchie, Graeme. (1999). Developing the Incongruity-Resolution Theory. Proceed-
ings of the AISB Symposium on Creative Language: Stories and Humour, Edin-
burgh, Scotland.
— (2003). The Linguistic Analysis of Jokes. Routledge Studies in Linguistics, 2. 
Routledge, Abingdon.
— (2006). The transformational creativity hypothesis. New Generation Computing, 
24(3):241–66.
Rosch, Eleanor. (1975). Cognitive representations of semantic categories. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: General, 104(3):192–233.
Rozin, Paul, Rozin, Alexander, Appel, Brian and Wachtel, Charles. (2006). Docu-
menting and explaining the common AAB pattern in music and humor: Estab-
lishing and breaking expectations. Emotion, 6(3):349–55.
Sacks, Harvey. (1995). Lectures on Conversation, Volume 1. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.
Sampson, Geoffrey. (1999). Educating Eve: The ‘Language Instinct’ Debate. Cas-
sell, London.
Saunders, Peter  Timothy. (1980). An Introduction to Catastrophe Theory. ­Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Sawyer, Keith R. (2006). Explaining Creativity: The Science of Human Innovation. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
— (2003). Group Creativity: Music, Theater, Collaboration. Psychology Press. Phila-
delphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
Schank, Roger and Abelson, Robert P. (1977). Scripts, Plans, Goals and Under-
standing. Psychology Press. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Bibliography
176
Scheff, Thomas. (2009). A New Goffman: Robert W. Fuller’s ‘Politics of Dignity’, 
chapter 7. In Jacobsen, Michael (Ed.), The Contemporary Goffman. Routledge, 
New York.
Shutova, Ekaterina. (2010). Metaphor identification using verb and noun clustering. 
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics.
Silverman, Kenneth. (1997). Houdini!!! The Career of Ehrich Weiss. Harper Collins, 
New York.
Smith, Ken. (2001). Junk English. Blast Books, New York.
Speir, Jerry. (1981). Raymond Chandler. Frederick Ungar, New York.
Squire, Jason E. (2004). The Movie Business Book, 3rd Edition. Simon & 
­Schuster.
Stallybrass, Peter, Chartier, Roger, Mowery, J. Franklin and Wolfe, Heather. (2004). 
Hamlet’s tables and the technologies of writing in Renaissance England. Shake-
speare Quarterly, 55:379–419.
Stanford, William Bedell. (1984). Ireland and the Classical Tradition. Irish Academic 
Press, Dublin.
Steinmeyer, Jim. (2003). Hiding the Elephant: How Magicians Invented the Impos-
sible. Da Capo Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Stephens, Trent D. and Brynner, Rock. (2001). Dark Remedy: The Impact of Thalido-
mide and Its Revival As a Vital Medicine. Basic Books, New York.
Sternberg, Robert J. (2003). Wisdom, Intelligence and Creativity Synthesized. 
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Sternberg, Robert J. and Lubart, Todd I. (1995). Defying the Crowd: Cultivating 
Creativity in a Culture of Conformity. Free Press, New York.
— (1996). Investing in creativity. American Psychologist, 51(7):677–88.
Suls, Jerry M. (1972). A Two-Stage Model for the Appreciation of Jokes and Car-
toons: An information-processing analysis. In Jeffrey H. Goldstein and Paul E. 
McGhee (Eds), The Psychology of Humor, 81–100. Academic Press, New York.
Svennevig, Jan. (1999). Getting Acquainted in Conversation: A Study of Initial Inter-
actions. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Tarantino, Quentin. (1994). Reservoir Dogs. Faber and Faber, London.
Taylor, Archer. (1954). Proverbial Comparisons and Similes from California. Folklore 
Studies 3. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Taylor, Michael R. (2009). Marcel Duchamp: Étant donnés (Philadelphia Museum 
of Art). Yale University Press, New Haven.
Tomasello, Michael. (1999). The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition. Harvard 
­University Press, Cambridge.
Trott, Paul. (2008). Innovation Management and New Product Development. 
­Pearson Education.
Turing, Alan M. (1950). Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind, 59:433–60.
Turner, Mark. (1993). Reading Minds. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Turney, Peter D. (2006). Similarity of semantic relations. Computational Linguis-
tics, 32(3):379–416.
Veale, Tony. (2004a). Incongruity in humor: Root-cause or epiphenomenon? The 
International Journal of Humor, 17(4):419–28, a Festschrift for Victor Raskin.
— (2004b). WordNet sits the S.A.T.: A Knowledge-based Approach to Lexical 
­Analogy. Proceedings of ECAI-2004, the 16th European Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence.

Bibliography
177
— (2006a). Computability as a test on linguistic theories. In G. Kristiansen, M. 
­Achard, R. Dirven and F. Ruiz de Mendoza Ibáñez (Eds). Cognitive Linguistics: 
Current Applications and Future Perspectives. Applications of Cognitive Lin-
guistics. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.
— (2006b). An analogy-oriented type hierarchy for linguistic creativity. Journal of 
Knowledge-Based Systems, 19(7):471–9.
— (2006c). Tracking the Lexical Zeitgeist with Wikipedia and WordNet. Proceed-
ings of ECAI-2006, the 17th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
— (2007). Dynamic creation of analogically-motivated terms and categories in lexical 
ontologies. In Judith Munat (Ed.), Lexical Creativity, Texts and Contexts (Studies in 
Functional and Structural Linguistics), pp. 189–212. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
— (2009). Hiding in Plain Sight: Figure-Ground Reversals in Humour. In G. Brône 
and J. Vandaele (Eds), Cognitive Poetics: Goals, Gains and Gaps. Mouton de 
Gruyter, Berlin.
— (2011). Creative language retrieval. Proceedings of ACL 2011, the 49th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Veale, Tony and Butnariu, Cristina. (2010). Harvesting and understanding on-line 
neologisms. In Alexander Onysko and Sascha Michel (Eds), Cognitive Perspec-
tives on Word Formation. Walter de Gruyter, New York.
Veale, Tony, Feyaerts, Kurt and Brône, Geert. (2006). The cognitive mechanisms of 
adversarial humor. Cognitive Linguistics, 19(3):305–39.
Veale, Tony and Hao, Yanfen. (2007a). Making Lexical Ontologies Functional and 
Context-Sensitive. Proceedings of ACL 2007, the 45th Annual Meeting of the 
Association of Computational Linguistics, 31(1):57–64.
— (2007b). Comprehending and generating apt metaphors: A Web-driven, case-
based approach to figurative language. Proceedings of AAAI-2007, the 22nd 
AAAI conference on Artificial Intelligence.
— (2007c). Learning to understand figurative language: From similes to metaphors 
to irony. Proceedings of CogSci-2007, the 29th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive 
Science Society.
— (2008). A context-sensitive framework for lexical ontologies. The Knowledge 
Engineering Review, 23(1):101–15.
— (2010). Detecting ironic intent in creative comparisons. Proceedings of ECAI-
2010, the 19th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
— (2011). Exploiting readymades in linguistic creativity. A System Demonstration 
of the Jigsaw Bard. Proceedings of ACL 2011, the 49th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Veale, Tony, Hao, Yanfen and Li, Guofu. (2008). Multilingual Harvesting of Cross-
Cultural Stereotypes. Proceedings of ACL 2008, the 46th Annual Meeting of 
the Association of Computational Linguistics.
Veale, Tony and Keane, Mark T. (1992). Conceptual scaffolding: A spatially founded 
meaning representation for metaphor comprehension, Computational Intelli-
gence, 8(3):494–519.
— (1997). The Competence of Sub-Optimal Structure Mapping on ‘Hard’ Analo-
gies. Proceedings of IJCAI’97, the 15th International Joint Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence. Nagoya, Japan.
Veale, Tony and Li, Guofu. (2011). Creative Introspection and Knowledge Acqui-
sition. Proceedings of AAAI-11, The 25th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence.

Bibliography
178
Veale, Tony and O’Donoghue, Diarmuid. (2000). Computation and blending. Cogni-
tive Linguistics, 11(3–4):253–81.
Veale, Tony, O’Donoghue, Diarmuid and Keane, Mark T. (1999). Computability as 
a limiting cognitive constraint: Complexity concerns in metaphor comprehen-
sion. In M. Hiraga, C. Sinha and S. Wilcox (Eds), Cultural, Psychological and 
Typological Issues in Cognitive Linguistics. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Verhagen, Arie. (2005). Constructions of Intersubjectivity. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford.
Warren, Robert Penn. (1946). All the King’s Men. Harcourt and Brace, New York.
Way, Eileen Cornell. (1991). Knowledge Representation and Metaphor. Studies in 
Cognitive systems. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht.
Whissell, Cynthia. (1989). The dictionary of affect in language. In R. Plutchik and 
H. Kellerman (Eds) Emotion: Theory and Research, pp. 113–31. Harcourt Brace, 
New York, NY, USA.
Wiggins, Geraint. (2006). Searching for computational creativity. New Generation 
Computing, 24(3):209–22.
Wilde, Oscar. (1890/1988). The Picture of Dorian Gray. Penguin Classics.
Wilks, Yorick. (1978). Making Preferences More Active. Artificial Intelligence 
11(3):197–223.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. (1953). Philosophical Investigations (Philosophische Unter-
suchungen). Translated by G. E. M. Anscombe. Blackwell, Oxford.
— (1969). On Certainty (Uber Gewissheit). G. E. M. Anscombe and G. H. von 
Wright (Eds), translated by Denis Paul and G. E. M. Anscombe. Basil Blackwell, 
Oxford.

AAB pattern  56–8
Abelson, Robert  48
absurdity  11, 49, 109, 111
affective computing  23
algorithms  21–2, 33, 39, 42, 106
of Microsoft Word  22
PageRank algorithm  21
stereotypical algorithm  22
Ali, Muhammad  144
Amabile, Teresa  22, 25
ambiguity,
constructive ambiguity  9, 110
of irony  24
Amis, Martin  22
analogy,
false analogy  51, 110
proportional analogy  93–5, 97
spatial analogy  97
structural analogy  93, 97–8, 100–2
Analytical Engine, The  22
appropriateness  25–6
appropriate incongruity  50, 53, 59
and novelty  26
relevant inappropriateness  115–16
archetypes  72
cliché-archetypes  73, 103, 106, 
137
Aristotle,
Aristotle computer system  67, 80, 
84, 86
on educated insolence  24, 35
on metaphor  99
on physics  146
The Poetics  17, 94
Artificial Intelligence (AI)  21
Cyc (project)  106
Good Old Fashioned AI 
­(GOFAI)  39, 47, 106
aspirin  135
AT&T  9
Attardo, Salvatore  47, 49, 51, 137
automatization  5–6
automatic language  6
Babbage, Charles  22
Banksy  149
Barnden, John  90
Baum, L. Frank  15, 24
Behan, Brendan  34
Benoit, Tab  56
Bentsen, Lloyd  57–9, 63
Beowulf  94
Berlin, Irving  31
Bing  154
bisociation  47–8
blending,
conceptual blending  45–8, 86, 
101–2, 106, 108, 127
counterfactual blends  101, 103
lexical blending  47, 101
middle spaces  105
of scripts  50
Blues music  56
Boden, Margaret  3, 42–3, 47
Bowdle, Brian  8, 99
brainstorming  106–7
Brown, Dan  88–91
Burke, Edmund  140
canned phrases  8
Carlin, George  111, 137
catastrophe theory  54–5
categories  71
category inclusion in 
­metaphor  99–100
creative categorization  78, 82, 95, 
112–14
radial categories  72–3
Chabon, Michael  33, 64
Chafe, Wallace  49
Index

Index
180
Chandler, Raymond  117
chess  39, 43, 45, 141
chunking  11, 101, 103
Churchill, Winston  52, 63, 140,  
152, 154
Cicero  18–19, 27
Clemenceau, Georges  52
clichés  9–10, 27, 37–8, 49, 58–9, 68, 
71–4, 84–6, 103, 116, 118, 
134, 137, 139–43, 145, 148–9, 
152, 154
cliché-archetypes  73–4, 86, 103, 
106, 137
clichés-clichés  59
double-grounding of  139
in printing  71
Clooney, George  66, 102–5
Cohen, Leonard  126–7
combinatorial explosion  44
common sense  8, 48, 54, 81, 106
as knowledge  48, 54, 106
stereotypical scripts  48
complicity  33, 49, 111, 126
in jokes  49
in similes  126
computation  39, 42–4, 86,  
105–6, 151
computationalists  39, 42, 106
computer systems,
Aristotle  67, 80, 84, 86
Metaphorize  106–7, 154
The Jigsaw Bard  151–4
Conan Doyle, Arthur  2, 12–13
concepts,
conceptual blending  45–8, 86, 
101–2, 106–8, 127
conceptual metaphors  89–93
conceptual schemas  90–3
conceptual state spaces  39–43, 
45, 54–5
re-conceptualization  136–9
Conrad, Peter  89–91
constraints  1, 34, 42–5, 47
consumer (perspective of)  4, 10, 34, 
37, 42–4
vs producers  37, 42–4
conventions  8–10, 24–6, 31, 42–3, 
55, 59, 70, 73–4, 86, 108, 110, 
115, 117, 133
subverting convention  9, 11, 20, 
25, 42, 54, 58, 70, 119, 123, 
126, 140, 143
cooperative principle  115
corpora, corpus analysis  77, 81, 117–18, 
120, 122, 124, 128–9, 131
creativity,
creative information retrieval  154
exploratory creativity  43–4
investment model  12, 134, 152
transformational creativity  42–3
cross-quoting structures  74, 101–2
Cryer, Barry  55
Csíkszentmihályi, Mihály  5
Cyc (AI project)  106
De Oratore  18
definitions,
of creativity  1, 11, 47
via simile  79
Dennett, Daniel  21
Dickens, Charles  76, 78, 80, 118
discontinuity  41–2, 54–5
divergence,
divergence in scripts  47, 56, 58, 141
divergent thinking  3, 44–5
Duchamp, Marcel  135–7, 146, 148, 
150–1, 154
Dylan, Bob  62
Einstein, Albert  33, 118
emotion  4–5, 23, 35, 61–2
in metaphor  62, 92
empathy  23
Empson, William  85
Englishness (of English)  6
explanations,
via analogies  98
of creativity  2–3, 12, 21, 42
of metaphors  18, 91–2
exploitation of norms  27–8, 52, 115, 
139
exploratory creativity  43
expression games  58
Falwell, Jerry  9
familiarity  28, 24, 45, 57, 62–4, 66, 
80, 99, 102, 137, 143
obviousness  62–3

Index
181
Fauconnier, Gilles  45, 47–8, 101–2, 
105, 127
figure-ground reversal  51
Fishelov, David  126
flexibility  47
flow (state of)  5–6
fluency  47
Ford, Henry  87–8, 90
Freud, Sigmund  94–5, 99
Frost, Robert  30, 44
Fry, Art  135
Galileo  146–7
games,
expression games  58
game metaphors  92
Gendler, Tamar  145
General Motors  88
Gentner, Dedre  8, 97–9
Gibbs, Ray  89
Giora, Rachel  27–8, 30, 52, 112, 115, 
137, 139
Glucksberg, Sam  11, 13, 63, 99, 112, 
115
goal states  39–40
GOFAI  39, 42, 47, 106
Goffman, Erving  50, 58–9, 112
Google  21, 29, 33, 62, 68, 75, 77–8, 
81, 117–18
Google n-grams  150–1, 153
Googleology  82
PageRank algorithm  21
gossip  25, 92, 103, 105
Gould, Stephen Jay  148
Gray, Dorian (The Picture of)  65, 
102–3, 105–6
Grice, H. P.  115
GTVH (General Theory of Verbal 
­Humor)  47–8, 51–2, 56
logical mechanisms in  51–2
script switching in  50, 53, 56
Guilford, J. Paul  44, 47
Hanks, Patrick  27, 52, 139
Hawke, Ethan  100–1
Heath, Chip  57
Heller, Joseph  142
Hennessy, Beth  25
herding effect  39, 134, 138, 142
Hilton, Paris  63, 65, 82–4, 118
Hitchens, Christopher  9, 32–3
Hofstadter, Douglas  44–7, 51–2
Holmes, Sherlock  2–5, 12–13, 131
Houdini, Harry  12–13, 21
Hyde, Marina  143
idioms  11, 27, 31, 45
idiom savants  152
idiomatic blending  45
incongruity  49–53, 55, 58–9, 110
appropriate incongruity  50,  
53, 59
in jokes  49–51, 53, 55, 58–9, 110
resolution of  49, 95
Indurkhya, Bipin  136
inference  3–4, 71–2, 75, 91, 104
chains of inferences  4, 138
innovation, optimal  27, 34, 47,  
52, 139
insight  2, 4, 10, 26, 35, 41–3,  
45–7, 50, 59, 85, 92–3, 97, 
100, 108, 111, 130, 138, 
140–1, 153
insincerity, pragmatic  11, 13, 115, 137
insolence, educated  24–5, 34–5, 84
intuition  4–5, 23
investment,
as a model of creativity  12, 133–6, 
139, 142–3, 153
short-selling  12, 138–41, 144–5, 
147
in language  139–40, 144–5
up-selling  142, 144
irony  24, 70, 77, 115–17, 119–20, 123, 
125, 129–31
ironic pretence  70, 112, 114–17
pragmatic insincerity  11, 13, 115
in similes  70, 117, 119–20, 123, 
125, 129, 130–1
Jigsaw Bard, The  151
Johnson, Mark  89
jokes  24, 42, 48–53, 56–7, 91, 94, 
110, 134
incongruity  49, 110
incongruity resolution  49, 95
logical mechanisms  51–2
punchlines  49, 54–6, 134, 144

Index
182
from a script perspective  49–51
Ur-jokes  51–2
Jordan, Michael  63–5
Joyce, James  137
Jung, Carl  72–3, 86, 103
junk food metaphors  89–90
Kavanagh, Patrick  34
Kennedy, John F.  57, 63, 66
kenning riddles  94
Kenny, G.  62–3, 99, 118
Kilgarriff, Adam  82
King, Stephen  64, 88, 90
Klondike spaces  40, 43
knowledge,
bottleneck of  106
common-sense knowledge  48, 
54, 138, 152
encyclopaedic knowledge  82
mutual knowledge  72, 86
vector representations of  96
Koestler, Arthur  47
Kristofferson, Kris  100–1
Lagerfeld, Karl  16–19, 35
Lakoff, George  72, 89
lazy writing  6, 8–9, 28, 91, 139–40, 
142–3
lazy stereotypes  66
scorn for  85
lazy variation  58, 142–3
Lee, Stewart  88
Lippmann, Walter  71, 75, 86
Lloyd Webber, Andrew  38
logic  5, 51–5, 110, 113, 130–1, 145
illogical vs ridiculous  131
logical fallacies in humour  110, 
113, 130
logical mechanisms in jokes  51–2
logical thought experiments  145
logical traps  54–5
Love Never Dies  38–9, 46
Lovelace, Lady Ada  21–2
Lubart, Todd I.  12, 134, 139, 142
madness  19, 49, 109
magic  2–3, 12–13, 19–20, 29–31,  
110, 142
Maxson, H. A.  30
McCarthy, John  47
McLuhan, Marshall  73–4, 86, 103
metaphor,
career of metaphor  8, 99
as categorization  99
conceptual metaphors  89–93
conduit metaphor of  
language  111
dead metaphors  7–8
metaphors of creativity  1, 3, 20
mixed metaphors  91
search metaphors  39–40
Metaphorize  106–7, 154
Microsoft Word  22
Milton, John  148
Minsky, Marvin  47
Mirza, Shazia  24
Mitchell, Melanie  45
Monkhouse, Bob  51
Montesquieu  68–9
Moon, Rosamund  77, 117, 119
mystery of creativity  1, 13, 19, 49, 
105, 153
myths of creativity  1–4, 20, 37
name-calling  62
narrative,
choke points in  53–5
in jokes  42, 49–50, 57
repetition-break plot structure  57
negation  55, 57, 111–17, 153
and absurdity  111–12, 126
implicit negation  113–15, 119
Newell, Allen  39
Newton, Isaac  33
Nineteen Eighty Four  13, 85
norms  27, 74
creative departures from  16, 59
and exploitations  27–8, 115, 139, 
148
Norrick, Neal  49, 77
novelty  25–8, 32, 40, 43, 45, 96, 142, 
148, 153–4
and appropriateness  25–6
in scripts  48
in search  43–5
visual novelty  96
Okakura, Kakuzo  32–3, 49
optimality  44, 153
of innovation  27, 34, 47, 52, 139, 153

Index
183
originality  22, 38
Oring, Elliott  49, 59
O’Rourke, P. J.  96–7
Ortony, Andrew  18
Orwell, George  6–11, 13, 34, 76, 
84–5, 88, 90, 134, 143, 150
Oz,
The Great Oz  21
Wizard of  15–16, 19, 21, 24
PageRank  21
Paulos, John Allen  55
Peacock, Thomas Love  79
Penrose, Roger  23
Perkins, David  40, 42
Pitt, Brad  100–1
politics of language  6
pragmatic insincerity  11, 13, 115–16, 
137
pretence  70, 112–17
producer (perspective of)  4, 10, 37, 
39, 42–5, 134, 136, 142, 149, 
152–3
vs consumers  4, 10, 34, 37, 42–4, 
136
of products  25, 134
prototype theory  72–4, 137
psychology  72–4, 105, 130, 134
cognitive psychology  72, 74
Jungian psychology  72–3,  
86, 103
Pullum, Geoffrey  142–3
punchlines  49, 54–6, 134, 144
Putin, Vladimir  52
Putnam, Hilary  72
quantum mechanics  23
Quayle, Dan  57–9
Queenan, Joe  143
Raskin, Victor  47, 49, 51, 137
scripts  49, 51, 137
rationality  39, 41, 91
readymades,
in art  135–6, 148
linguistic readymades  8, 10, 
148–54
The Jigsaw Bard  151–4
Reddy, Michael  111
repetition  56–8
Ricks, Christopher  59, 85, 139
riddles,
comparisons as riddles  32, 66, 95
kenning riddles  94
Roberts, Chief Justice  9
rules  1–4, 22, 42–3, 59, 70, 130
rule-breaking  3, 130
Sahl, Mort  140
salience  3, 18, 30, 71–4, 80–3, 106, 
119, 136–9
Graded Salience hypothesis  137
gradients of  137–9
of properties  71–4, 80–3, 106, 
119, 136–9
salience imbalance  18
in stereotypes  71–4
sarcasm  24, 27, 55–6
SAT test  93–6
Sawyer, Keith  3, 25
Schank, Roger  48–9
Scheff, Thomas  59
schemas,
conceptual schemas  90–3
schematic understanding  48,  
55, 71
Schoenberg, Arnold  42–3
Scotus, John (Eriugena)  141
scripts  48–53, 56–8, 137
script opposition  49
in SSTH  49, 51
triggering scripts  50, 56
search,
of abstract spaces  37–45, 54–5
combinatorial explosion  44
constraints on  1, 34, 42–7
creativity as search  39–40
in discontinuous spaces  41
divergent search  45
in Klondike spaces  40, 43
on the web  62, 68–70, 82–3, 106, 
117
creative information 
­retrieval  154
sense-making  4, 30–1
sentiment analysis  24, 128
of similes  120, 123, 128–9
serendipity  35
Shakespeare, William  8, 53, 142–3, 
148–9

Index
184
Shaw, Cliff  39
Shaw, George Bernard  11
short-selling  12, 138–41, 144–7
in language  139–40, 144–5
in science  147
Silver, Spencer  135
similarity  18, 46, 52, 57, 73, 96,  
141, 147
similes,
as cultural wisdom  76, 78, 118
ironic similes  116–17
proverbial/stock similes  10, 76–7
stereotypes in  67, 75
on the web  77–84
Simon, Herbert  39
slippage, semantic  45–7
in a SlipNet  46
Smith, Winston  85
snowclones  58, 143, 148
Sopranos, The  28
sprezzatura  20
SSTH (Semantic Script Theory of 
­Humor)  49–51
Star Trek  23
stereotypes  22, 26–7, 59–86, 117–18, 
125–6, 139–41, 145–6, 150–2
of algorithms  22
as mental categories  71
in metaphors  63
as mutual knowledge  72
in printing  71
proper-name stereotypes  64–5, 
118
in routine scripts  48
in similes  67
of simple objects  146
social stereotypes  67–70
in XYZ constructions  63
Sternberg, Robert J.  11, 134, 139, 142
stipulation (of meaning)  25
structure-mapping  97
Suls, Jerry  49
Superman as metaphor  111, 144–5
surprise  10, 22, 25, 35, 53, 56–8, 
108, 137, 153
systematicity  97
taboos  24
Taylor, Archer  77, 118
Technicolor  15
tension, creative  35, 44, 58
Thalidomide  135
Thom, René  54
thought experiments  145
transformational creativity  42–3
Trump, Donald  66
trumping  140–7
Turner, Mark  45, 101, 105, 127
Turney, Peter  96
typicality  72
prototypicality  72–4, 137
variation, novel  15, 30
AAB variation  57–9
creative linguistic variation  26, 153
deliberate variation  34
in jokes  51
pleasurable variations  26
surprising variations  53
Viagra (Sildenafil)  135
von Braun, Wernher  140
Walpole, Horace  52
Weiner, Matthew  28
Welles, Orson  44
West End Whingers  38
Whissell, Cynthia  128
Whitman, Glen  143
Whitman, Walt  27
whodunit stories  48
Wilde, Oscar  20, 52, 102, 148
Wittgenstein, Ludwig  16
Wolfit, Donald  53
words,
dual reference  99
word clouds  74, 78
WordNet  95
SentiWordNet  128
World Wide Web (WWW)  21,  
62, 82
as a corpus  82
PageRank algorithm  21
web search  62
XYZ constructions  63
figurative XYZs  64
Yahoo  77, 154

185

186

187

188

