
Daniel Köhler
The Mereological City
               
Architecture  |  Volume 36

 
               
Daniel Köhler (Dr.) teaches urban design at the University of Innsbruck and digi-
tal design strategies at the Vilnius Academy of Arts. His research incorporates
digital methods into the study of the city, its history and architecture.

Daniel Köhler
The Mereological City
A reading of the works of Ludwig Hilberseimer
               

This publication was printed with financial support from the funds of
the Vice-Rector for Research, the Faculty of Architecture and the
Institute of Urban Design at the Leopold-Franzens-Universität Innsbruck.
 
               
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Natio-
nalbibliografie; detailed bibliographic data are available in the Internet at
http://dnb.d-nb.de
© 2016 transcript Verlag, Bielefeld
© 2016 transcript Verlag, Bielefeld
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or uti-
lized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known
or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any infor-
mation storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publisher.
Cover layout: Kordula Röckenhaus, Bielefeld
Cover illustration: Daniel Köhler, Plan of Chicago, according to Ludwig Hil-
berseimer’s schema of removing street segments, 2015
Proofread by Emanuel Binder, Lucie Sedlaková
Printed in Germany
Print-ISBN 978-3-8376-3466-2
PDF-ISBN 978-3-8394-3466-6

Contents
1
Prologue: Architecture as a Discipline of Composition | 7
1.1
Acknowledgements | 16
2
Introduction: Topic, State of Knowledge, Method | 19
2.1
Ludwig Hilberseimer: Life and Work | 19
2.2
Scientific Recension of the Work Hilberseimer’s | 23
2.2.1
Society follows Form: Society is predetermined by form | 25
2.2.2
Form follows Society: The form as product
of social factors | 28
2.2.3
The Schemata of Design | 34
2.3
The method: A mereological reading | 34
2.3.1
The term form in philosophy and architecture | 35
2.3.2
The house and the city: a classic formal thesis | 38
2.3.3
An introduction to Mereology | 42
2.3.4
A mereological composition of a line | 47
3
The Large City: The will to elemental architecture | 61
3.1
Creation and development | 61
3.1.1
The Kunstwollen as frictional contrast | 62
3.1.2
The Dionysian and the Apollonian | 73
3.2
Groszstadt Architecture | 79
3.2.1
The abstraction as a discursive experiment | 81
3.2.2
The large city as an elemental task | 84
3.2.3
The Vertical-City as vertical composition | 87
3.3
Towards an Autonomous Architecture | 116
3.3.1
The definition of the smallest architectural element | 118
3.3.2
The city as a new compositional task  | 119

4
The unfolding of a planning idea | 123
4.1
From Vertical-City to Flat-Building | 123
4.1.1
The Welfare City | 123
4.1.2
The Proposal to City-Building | 125
4.1.3
Flat buildings | 128
4.2
Flat-building and city space | 131
4.2.1
In the shadow of Mies | 141
4.3
Studies on room insolation | 143
4.4
Elements of City Planning | 148
5
The punctualisation as architectural method | 165
5.1
The concept of form in the work of Hilberseimer | 165
5.2
Punctualisation as method | 168
5.2.1
The punctualisation at Hilberseimer | 172
5.3
Room, House, Town, Region: a mereological analysis | 182
6
Conclusion: The Art of City-Planning | 209
Notes | 215
Prologue: Architecture as a Discipline of Composition | 215
Introduction: Topic, State of Knowledge, Method | 217
The Large City: The will to elemental architecture | 223
The unfolding of a planning idea | 229
The punctualisation as architectural method | 233
Conclusion: The Art of City-Planning | 237
List of Figures | 239
Bibliography | 247

1 Prologue:
Architecture as a Discipline of Composition
Forms are no longer superimposed but the result of
order which in itself has already to some extent form
quality.
LUDWIG HILBERSEIMER. ARCHITECTURE: STRUC-
TURE AND FORM
Architecture is about the many, the composition of a collective1. Architecture starts
when a plurality, more than two, enter into relations with each other, on a longer term
basis without an ascertainable horizon. Architecture is the physical constitution, the
attempt of a translation, and at best, a projection of a collective. Regimes of content
articulate architectural features according to their speciﬁc will and Zeitgeist. Howe-
ver, architecture always deals with the arrangement and joining of ﬁgures. The basic
scheme of the disciplinary being remains the same. But what is the nature of joining
and arranging? Which speciﬁc methods are used in the discipline of architecture?
In order to present my work clearly, I will narrow down the discussed topic to the
work of the art critic, architect, urbanist, teacher and curator Karl Ludwig Hilbersei-
mer. I will clarify and discuss my question in the following way: What is Ludwig
Hilberseimer’s understanding of architectural order? What is the relationship of his
architectural elements to each other? And more precisely: What is the relationship
between the individual house and its arrangement in a settlement in the work of Lud-
wig Hilberseimer?
I will mereologically consider the work of Ludwig Hilberseimer’s, that is, in the re-
sonance of the determining parts of his project. I will come to the conclusion that
Ludwig Hilberseimer developed a design method, which describes the parthood re-
lations of house and settlement circularly rather than hierarchical. The description of
a settlement as a whole as part of the part as a whole provides a new urban deﬁniti-

8
The Mereological City: a reading of the works of Ludwig Hilberseimer
on of ground as ﬁgurative composition. A settlement as a compositional intervention
is designed with speciﬁc architectural elements. The design of the house depends
on its projection as Many, the settlement. This is the punctualisation as architectural
method.
The actuality of my search is based on an already ordinary question of our time,
which in my opinion has only just started to be considered seriously : It is the question
of the possibility of an ecological architecture. The common sense – in the following
the ﬁrst hits of a simple search of the internet – today gives us a response of ex-
clusively technical artifacts, such as solar panels, heat registers, K-values, U-values,
thatched roofs, hemp ﬁberboards, wood casement windows, mud bricks, rainwater
cisterns, geotherms, waste paper insulations. Whether on the house, in the house, or
under the house: In any case, the ecological integrity of an architectural object is jud-
ged by means of a technical, extra-disciplinary artifact. But not by the articulation of
the architecture itself. And so the question arises: Can we show an architectural stra-
tegy that is congruent with the essence of ecological thought? Is there a disciplinary
knowledge in architecture that can be described as ecological?
The work of Ludwig Hilberseimer and its previous review seems to me to be a
good start to look for an answer. In architecture Hilberseimer’s drawings take a kind
of key position when it comes to show the method of modernity and their failure. It
is precisely because the work Hilberseimer is an example of an epoch, which need to
be overcome, I want to search for approaches here. If we declare global urbanization,
the project of modernity, as complete, external criticism is no longer possible. Ever-
ything is interiority2, based on modernity. Therefore, here I would like to propose a
different approach: instead of a negative departure as the project of postmodernism, I
recommend the revaluation of modernist method3.
Several times was the work Hilberseimer a fruitful source of friction, the basis of
various architectural positions. The list of recipients is long and impressive: Oswald
Matthias Unger’s city-archipelago4, Christopher Alexander’s anti-tree-city5, Andrea
Branzi’s weak urbanism6, Archizoom’s non-stop-city7, Aldo Rossi’s city in the ci-
ty8, Albert Pope’s eliptical urban space9, Rem Koolhaas’s imagine nothingness10,
Manfredo Tafuri’s critique of the assembly line11, Michael Hays’s analysis of mass
ornament12, Pier Vittorio Aureli’s project of autonomy13, Patrik Schumacher’s ﬂuid
urbansim14, to name just the most inﬂuential. All the above mentioned critiques are
dealing in a way with the work Hilberseimer, which seems typical to me for the post-
modernist discourse: The critique of the content of the formal ﬁgure. In the words
of Marx these analyzes builds on a direct link between praxis and practicing, ie in-
frastructure and social fabric15. Each approach accepts the direct, but dichotomous
combination of content and ﬁgure. Each consequential argument remains a further

Architecture as a Discipline of Composition
9
alteration of the two opposites. Similar to a mathematical equation, an argument on
one side leads to a conclusion on the other. In architecture we are familiar with this
equation in the framework of typology: On the one hand we comprehend content with
its ﬁgure, e.g. the patio-house, or on the other hand we comprehend the ﬁgure with
its program, e.g. the Single-family-house. As postmodernists we learned from Robert
Venturi to adress these both sides ironically as the duck or the shed. An illustration:
Through the linear coupling of social interaction and the pattern the roads, Christo-
pher Alexander concludes an argument against modernist building assemblies, due to
lack of interaction (=intersections) of roads. The monotone facades in Hilberseimer
highrise city Hays deﬁnes as a mass ornament of a mass society, which as a further
conclusion Schumacher draws on for the demand for a variable architecture for a ﬂe-
xible society. None of the analyzes deals satisfactorily with the architectural design of
the ﬁgure in itself: the study of the composition of parts, as an alternative to a purely
opposing coupling between content and form. With the semantical steps of critique
and improvement is connected the idea that each crisis keeps inherent an account of
criticism as the necessary fruit of progress, growth and wealth. But such rhetorical
eloquence as a negative departure from modernism seems to be more and more ir-
relevant. In this sense, I propose the reorientation of the architectural type that is an
historical product of modernism16. I propose the reading of the architectural design
of the ﬁgure in itself: its mereological composition.
The search for an alternative is not new and is at the core of our epoch of crises, or
more precisely the ecological crisis. We ﬁnd approaches in other disciplines under the
deﬁnition of ecological politics17, within the texts of the theoretican of science, phi-
losopher and sociologist Bruno Latour18, and the anthropologist Philipe Descola19.
Ecological politics does not attempt a response to a crisis of nature, but ontologically,
to a crisis of objectivity, naturalism and its dichotomy between nature and society. An
initial enrichment of society with concerns of nature led to new compositions. The
development demanded new ontological schemes, caused by their mixing and equal
treatment of human and non-human beings. These schemes are engaged in the com-
mon deﬁnition of human and non-human beings, their groups, types of relationships
and institutions20. In a ﬂat ontology, an equal coexistence of people, institutions, crea-
tures, ecosystems, machines, so objects, it is on the one hand not the representation,
the hierarchization of content: the One, or on the other hand the formal characteri-
stic21 which is the material expression of the Many, but the negotiation of the One
and the Many: the resonance of parts22.
Here, I will mereologically consider the work of Ludwig Hilberseimer’s, that is,
in the resonance of the determining parts of his project. I will come to the conclusion
that Ludwig Hilberseimer, coming from a scale based dialectic, developed a design

10
The Mereological City: a reading of the works of Ludwig Hilberseimer
method that weaves together the needs and scales of a house and a settlement, so that
the ﬁgure of a settlement is always in a state of transition between part and whole.
One can also say: The ground is in itself a ﬁgurative composition. Even more: the
operations that are necessary to link the scale of the single house and a settlement
accept no scale. In Hilberseimer’s settlement-studies, the whole of a city is only ne-
gotiable as part of the part, so the house as a whole. The class of a settlement can
only be understood by the consistency of its houses. There is no settlement without
its elements: its houses and their consolidating negotiation. Sense of scale undergoes
a revaluation and becomes the disposition of One and the colocation of Many. In such
a reading the form of the architectural type is the way of composing parts.
Of course, Hilberseimer is rooted in his era. His layout of the world is clearly
based on the dichotomous opposition between nature and culture. But by shifting
his focus to a dialectic of part and whole, Hilberseimer developed a synthesis of
form, which does without the question of content. Content alters form quantitatively.
However, form is not determined by content, neither morphologically, typologically
or topologically. Alone architectural operations on architectural ﬁgures create (more
complex) architectural ﬁgurative compositions. The architectural object is deﬁned
by its simultanity of that in which it is and that which is in23. It is therefore also a
difference between the One and the Many. Another aspect is crucial here: The ar-
chitectural object, as poietic object is not created theoretically by its assumption, but
poietically: in its design. The operational step which summarizes a ﬁgural compo-
sition to an object epistemologically, in the philosophy of science is deﬁned by the
concept of punctualisation24. This work builds transdisciplinary on this deﬁnition and
translates it into architecture.
If architecture as poietic discipline25 communicates knowledge through the deve-
lopment and reference of architectural design-objects, a disciplinary scientiﬁc work
should also use their speciﬁc media to communicate. Thus, in addition to a textual
description, the work consits of complementary drawings and associative constructi-
ons. These representations serve as architectural explanations for poietic examination
of the theoretical description. Designed objects are not limited to physical objects,
ﬁgurations may exists textual as well. The format of the Poietics in this way can ar-
ticulate the theoretical side of an investigation. This is another point that speaks for
Hilberseimer’s work as an object of investigation. Hilberseimer’s planning was al-
ways criticized as unrealistic by its degree of abstraction and hermeneutic coherence.
But it is precisely the accusation of the hermeneutic approach that can be used as
an advantage here. The planning method in itself is treated by Hilberseimer as poie-
tic object. This process can be divided into three design steps: The theoretical texts

Architecture as a Discipline of Composition
11
of Hilberseimer ﬁrst of all, are descriptions of the zeitgeist, the phenomena of the
city or region. The analysis is used for abstraction of an era or a territory in their
recognizable, historical, cultural, social, economic or technical factors. In the follo-
wing, the abstracted factors are related to each other. They become a presentation
of a territory as ﬁguration. Thus, it is possible for Hilberseimer to provide criticique
compositional. The critique becomes a requirement for the fabric of the territory. It
is translated in a parthood-relationship to be established within the represented ﬁgu-
ration of the region. In his planning Hilberseimer transforms theoretically-abstracted
ﬁguration into urban schemata; as compositions of architectural elements and their
parthood towards each other. The application of a schema leads to speculation about
compositional interventions in the city. Indirectly, through the parthood-relationship
the speciﬁty of the city can be sensed. The speculation of the city is expressed in the
design of a speciﬁc architectural element.
Both sides, theory and design, build the instrument of composition: The theore-
tical abstraction leads to the idea of ﬁguration. Critique is translated into a parthood
relationsship to be designed. The urban scheme generates speculation to the city by
proposing speciﬁc elements described by the raised parthoods of the schema.
I will divide this study into ﬁve chapters. The study begins with an introduction to
the work of Ludwig Hilberseimer, his person and the recent scientiﬁc review of his
work. Because this study is a formal reading, I will also introduce the concept of
form and mereology. In the second chapter, I shall cite aspects on why the project
of Ludwig Hilberseimer can be read mereologically. This is apparent from an art-
historical and philosophical classiﬁcation Hilberseimer’s. The third chapter describes
Hilberseimer’s low rise building studies. In the fourth chapter, I compare the method
of punctualisation with the design method of the low rise building studies and thereby
translate the sociological method of punctualisation into the architecture. The method
of punctualisation is a key element to analyze the urban structure Hilberseimer’s of
room, house, settlement and region mereologically. The ﬁfth chapter concludes this
study with a categorization of the work and outlook on the value within the ﬁeld of
architecture.
As already mentioned, in the ﬁrst chapter I will carry out that previous reviews
either make conclusions on architectural form with regards to content such as cultural
analyzes, or criticize social aspects by means of an analysis of form. An examination
of the form of Hilberseimer’s work, as the schema of an architectural design in itself,
is still pending. In order to assess the schema of Hilberseimer properly, in the follo-
wing I will give a transdisciplinary overview of the concept of form. I will present
approaches to form in the aesthetics to speciﬁc deﬁnitions of form in architecture.

12
The Mereological City: a reading of the works of Ludwig Hilberseimer
In this regard, I will point out parallels between the work of Hilberseimer and Leon
Battista Alberti. In the comparative study of both works can be seen, that Hilbersei-
mer worked on a classical problem of form in architecture: the relationship of parts to
a whole. The relationship between the house and a settlement, Hilberseimer designs
as a parthood-relationship. For this reason, this work is a mereological examination.
I will extensively introduce philosophical and mathematical deﬁnitions of mereolo-
gy. Based on the geometric example of a line, I want to discuss how mereology can
also be applied transdisciplinary on to architecture. In doing so, I am going to trans-
form the line and its possible ﬁguration into a mereological model, analoge to Bodo
Rasch’s and Frei Otto’s wool-threads-model, and discursively position it as an al-
ternative to spline curve. The wool-threads-model serves as a design analogy to the
model of the settlement Hilberseimer’s. As a model of form-ﬁnding, it is closest to
the model of the settlement.
Before Hilberseimer became acquainted with urban designs, he was mainly an
art-critic. Therefore, I will place, in the second chapter, the project of Hilberseimer
art-historical and philosophical based on his early theoretical texts. That is not been
done in this detail. Hilberseimer integrated formal methods of art history in his work.
To be speciﬁc: methods of the art historian Alois Riegl. Analoge into Alois Riegl,
Hilberseimer puts the materiality of a time in a tense relationship to artistic expressi-
on, the so called Kunstwollen. The tension between the material and the artist opposes
the real with representation by the method of abstraction. Works of art are not imi-
tations of nature, but compositions of ﬁgurations from simple elements. In a similar
way Hilberseimer describes the history of architecture as compositions, as increasin-
gly complex arrangements building on each other. The column as a design evolution
of a pillar, building typologies as the result of various transformation of architectu-
ral elements or even as a composition of different building types. In order to assess
works of art as compositions, Riegl used the relation of form to plane. The ratio sets
the ﬁgure in contrast to their ﬁguration. Riegl’s formal relationship between ﬁgure
and ﬁguration will play a central role in Hilberseimer’s design of the mixed develop-
ment (Mischbebauung) and the subsequent settlement unit. In Riegl’s writings, we
also ﬁnd the origin of Hilberseimer’s distinction of geometric and organic order. The
geometric order is the view of the nomad, a magical and centripetal: a planning from
the outside. The organic order is the view of the farmer, a mystical and centrifugal:
a planning from the inside. Geometric and Organic are no descriptions of an expres-
sion, whether perpendicular or amorphous, but formal descriptions of part-to-whole
relationships. Hilberseimer himself uses the organic order. This is evident in the de-
sign of the Vertical City. The design is a critique of Le Corbusier’s Ville Radieuse as

Architecture as a Discipline of Composition
13
geometric, horizontal harmonization of the city. In contrast, Hilberseimer describes
the Vertical City as a collection of relations between the various parts of the city.
The second major theoretical inﬂuence on Hilberseimer’s work is the philosophy
of Friedrich Nietzsche. This can be veriﬁed by direct transfer of text passages Nietz-
sche’s in Hilberseimer’s early texts. The tension between Kunstwollen and material
also corresponds to Nietzsche’s writings struggle between Apollonian and Dionysi-
an. The contrast between the corporeal and sensual, body and idea in its union leads
Nietzsche to the Rausch: the eternal return of perpetual sameness. Through Nietz-
sche’s Rausch, for the ﬁrst time the concept of form can be deﬁned in the work of
Hilberseimer: As the zone of content. On the example of the design of the Chicago
Tribune Tower is noticeable that the facade of the skyscraper is the expression of the
addition of ceilings and columns. As a close of an interior the facade is the closure
of an autonomous element. The facade is not a hull, no interface to an outside and
therefore no information carrier of a society. There is no direct connection between
the bare representation of the facades in Hilberseimer’s visualizations and a cons-
cious social expression and criticism, as mentioned in earlier reviews of his work26.
In terms of Alois Riegl’s method of abstraction as representation of the real Hilber-
seimer developed his geometrically rigid high-rise concept from the perception of
existing, American skyscrapers. The design of the skyscraper becomes the schema of
the American metropolis.
As deﬁned region of form, the sensual-corporeal is distinguished from others by
the end of the self. With this form creates duration and continuity. The random pro-
perties of a thing become the contrast to form. A recognition is only possible from
the corporeal view. The recognition of a corporeal is therefore an interpretation, a
perspective on others, participating in the other. For the design this means, that ar-
chitectural elements as compositions are described by a speciﬁc part-hood-in-the-
other, thereby mereologically. In subsequent designs Hilberseimer reduces buildings
to representations of consciously designed parthood relationships. Buildings become
placeholders, the city becomes a schema. The schema character of Hilberseimer’s
designs is presented on several examples. As schemata, they are no architectural re-
presentations and despite their rigid representation they contain an idea of variation.
The comparison of plan-schema and perspectives of the Vertical City will show that
the punctuated facade shown in the perspectives is not the perforation of a wall with
window openings, but an opening signiﬁes a loggia, and thus it is the signiﬁcant of an
apartment. The perspectives show no architectural parts of a structure, but the dispo-
sition of residential units into a major ﬁgure. As schema, the design of Vertical City
includes enough free space to design each unit of the city individually. Especially
the reduction of representation embodied the idea of variation. In the Vertical City, a

14
The Mereological City: a reading of the works of Ludwig Hilberseimer
house is described by limits. So the city block stretches between two metro stations,
the house is described as the distance of two staircases. The whole is described as a
partial relationship for the part of the whole.
In the third chapter I will show, that the decentralized planning of Flat Housing
and Settlement-Units not represent a break with the Vertical City. By the skyscraper
as stacking of workshops, ofﬁces and housing in one unit, a solution for the dense city
is found for Hilberseimer. The model of the Welfare City as concentric representation
of urban morphology at different density, shows that high- and low-rise buildings for
Hilberseimer coexist. If Hilberseimer begins to develop single storey settlements, the
ﬂat is the urban theme of his time. In a textual discussion, I will describe the mereo-
logical links in the Flat Housing. I shall suggest that the so-called L-Houses are to be
regarded as a schema. As schemata they are representations of parthood-relationships
of house and settlement. This is evident in comparison to the atrium houses of Mies
van der Rohe. Atrium- and L-house studies both emerged at the same time as stu-
dent projects in the so-called Bauseminar at the Bauhaus, under the direction of Mies
and Hilberseimer. While L-houses represent simple and mostly minimum solutions
for family homes, the atrium buildings are architecturally highly differentiated. Ho-
wever, both are mereologically congruent. The questions of Hilberseimer’s semester
tasks show: The house is designed as an axiom in itself, but always in its simultaneous
arrangement of a settlement. The projected settlement is part of the planning of a hou-
se. The evaluation of the One through the Many is Hilberseimer’s implementation of
Riegl’s ratio of form to plane. The difference between axiomatic and quantitative
evaluation of a design is architecturally the difference between Poché and linear ex-
pression. In studies of Flat Housing Hilberseimer changes from the representation of
Poché, as a distinction from One and the Other, to representations of the linear, as a
distinction from One and the Many. Vertical City and studies of ﬂat housing are de-
scribed by Hilberseimer as associative models.This makes Hilberseimer a precursor
of associative design strategies in the ﬁeld of urban design.
With reference to the study of Room-Insolation, I will give an example, how ex-
ternal parameters are transformed into speciﬁc parts of an architectural element. By
transferring human characteristics to the space, the assessment of the ﬁgur moves
from the external view of a subject in the form of the designed house. The shift is a
transfer of Kant’s synthetic model. The relationship between subject-object transfor-
mes into a relationship between object-object. The architectural scale of modernity
always designed with humanistic roles: The form of existence of an object is reﬂected
in its form of effect as part of a subject. The urban operation of the shift of the form
of effect in the architectural ﬁgure ﬁnally allowes a revaluation of modernity, as a
contrast between nature and culture. By multiplying the form of effect in the neigh-

