HTW BERLIN - UNIVERSITY OF APPLIED SCIENCES
Bachelor's Thesis
Facilitating the use of Wikidata in
Wikimedia projects with a
user-centered design approach
by
Charlene Kritschmar
03. March 2016
Matriculation Number: 537961
Faculty IV:
School of IT, Communication, and Business
Program of Study:
International Media & Computing
First Examiner:
Prof. Dr. Debora Weber-Wul
Second Examiner:
Dr. Michael Minge

HTW BERLIN - UNIVERSITY OF APPLIED SCIENCES
Abstract
Facilitating the use of Wikidata in Wikimedia projects with a user-centered
design approach
by Charlene Kritschmar
Wikidata is a Wikimedia project which stores semantical data in its knowledgebase, to
be used by other Wikimedia projects. In its current form, the data is not used to its full
potential for a multitude of reasons, as user acceptance is low and the process of data
integration is unintuitive and complicated for users.
This thesis aims to develop a concept using user-centered design to facilitate the editing
of Wikidata data from Wikipedia. With the involvement of the Wikimedia community,
a system is designed which integrates with pre-existing work ows. The implementation
makes use of various tools and design methodologies from the eld of Usability Engi-
neering, with which a solution is created that satises dierent types of users in regards
to their past volunteering experience for Wikimedia projects.
The thesis concludes with a solution which may serve as a basis which may be im-
plemented into various Wiki projects in the future and thus help make the editing of
Wikidata from within another Wikimedia project more user-friendly and improve its
acceptance in the community.
i

Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to express my deep gratitude towards Lydia Pintscher, for her
continued support and encouragement throughout the thesis. For introducing me
to this project and trusting me with its execution. Without her none of this would
have been possible.
I would also like to thank my supervisors, Prof. Dr. Weber-Wul and Dr. Michael
Minge, for their patient guidance, encouragement and advice they have provided
countless times throughout my thesis. I have been extremely lucky to have super-
visors who cared so much about my work, and who responded to my questions
and queries so promptly.
Furthermore, I would like to extend my gratitude to the whole software devel-
opment team at Wikimedia Deutschland e.V. for their enthusiasm, support, and
encouragement. You made me feel at home. A special mention goes to Lucie,
Julia and Jeroen, for helping me stay sane by entertaining me when I needed a
break and sharing countless meals and laughs.
I would also like to thank the Wikipedia editors, that took their time to test the
prototype and give me their honest feedback. I am very grateful of your support
and you've been a crucial part in the developmental process and hopefully continue
to be.
Finally, I would like to thank my parents, family, and friends, for their uncon-
ditional support, spending hours proofreading my work and enduring me in my
moodiest times. And a special thank you to Tim. You are appreciated.
ii

Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Table of Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Initial Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objective targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Fundamentals
4
2.1
Wikipedia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Infobox
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
VisualEditor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Wikidata
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
About Wikidata
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Previous work on editing Wikidata from a client
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
User-centered Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Requirements Analysis
13
3.1
Status Quo Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
User Proles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
Who are the users? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.2
Personas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.3
User Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Requirements Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.1
Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2
Non-Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.3
Prioritization of Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Design and Prototyping
24
4.1
Design principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Mock-Up Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Design Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
iii

Table of Contents
5
Evaluation
33
5.1
Usability testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.1
Structure and Planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1.3
Functional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.4
Non-Functional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Conclusion and Outlook
40
6.1
Critical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2.1
Usefulness in other Wikimedia Projects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
List of Figures
43
Bibliography
46
Appendix
A Persona: Miriam Weiland
B Persona: Sam Doughty
C Persona: Sven Kueppner
D Persona: Peter Wellington
E Persona: Tanja Brinks
F Persona: Jamie Morgenstern
G Persona: Max Senkmann
H Usability Test Evaluation
I
Questionnaire
J
Self-Assessment
Declaration of Authorship
iv

Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Wikidata, is a project by the Wikimedia Foundation [40]. It is a free linked knowledge-
base. The Wikimedia Foundation was founded in 2003 as a non-prot organization whose
goal it is to create and support open content to the public for free [19]. Launched in 2012,
it aims to support its Wikimedia sister projects, for example Wikipedia and third-party
projects, like Histropedia, a tool to visualize anything on a timeline, or Platypus, an
open question answering tool.
A machine and human readable knowledge base means that much of the data used
throughout the dierent Wikipedias could be stored in a central location and accessed
from there, language-independent and free [40]. Especially the generation of infoboxes
structured metadata summarizing the respective articlewould prot immensely due
to the fact that they consist of pure data and no continuous text.
To illustrate with an example, one can look at the population of Berlin throughout
various language Wikipedias.
The German Wikipedia will be updating the number
quite regularly, while other Wikipedias might use older numbers, creating inconsistent
and outdated pieces of information. Even when comparing a selected featured articles in
other languages which are articles that have been promoted for their high quality by
Wikipedia editorson Berlin to the German article, it quickly becomes apparent that
almost all values for the Berlin population dier from each other. This problem could
easily be solved by importing such data from Wikidata, making the available information
in infoboxes consistent throughout the dierent language sites. Populating the infobox
on Wikipedia with data from Wikidata was a main goal of the creators[25, 27].
1

Introduction
Unfortunately, at this time, the utilization of the existing data is very minimal. Roughly
three million of the articles in the English Wikipedia and almost half a million in the
German Wikipedia use data from Wikidata in one form or another (for example in the
infobox or for geo-coordinates)[41].
These numbers are far below its potential when
compared to the amount of articles the English and German Wikipedia have, that could
make use of the data.
The lack of use has many reasons, such as being too complicated or not well enough
documented, which will be discussed in the following section. This thesis aims to create,
explain and implement a concept and design of infoboxes whose goal it is to increase the
usage of the data in Wikidata. This is achieved with a user-centered design approach,
since ultimately, the local Wikimedia communities will be using it.
1.2
Initial Problem Statement
Currently, the editing process involves being directed away from the client (unless oth-
erwise specied client is referring to Wikipedia), Wikipedia to Wikidata, and, after
submitting changes to a page, being redirected from Wikidata back to the client. This
makes many users uncomfortable as Wikipedia editors are being forced to leave their
local Wiki [26].
One also has to take into consideration that many Wikipedians do not know what Wiki-
data is, much less how to make use of it. This goes hand in hand with the ongoing
issue of "not my Wiki!" [44]. It is often the case that Wikipedians as well as people
from other Wikis prefer not to leave their local Wiki to avoid outsourcing information.
Similar events have occurred when Wikimedia Commons was launched in 2004. It is an
free-use repository for all types of media les, such as images for example, and it used
used across all other Wikimedia projects [5].
Many Wikipedians initially refused to upload media les to Wikimedia Commons, due
to a lack of understanding the advantages which a common media repository brings,
amongst other concerns. However, eventually the popularity of the project increased
to the extent that it is now widely accepted in the Wikipedia and other Wikimedia
communities [10].
2

Introduction
1.3
Objective targets
To improve the current editing situation, a concept is needed which will ease the editing
process for the editors when working from a client such as Wikipedia. The eld of user-
centered design yields many methods and tools to approach this problem. In the scope
of this thesis, some will be tested and used to narrow down the possibilities to nd an
optimal solution.
Furthermore, if the community were not to be involved in the concept development, it
can be assumed that an implementation of any kind would not be successful. This can be
expected because of the fact that the community does not only represent the main user
group but also have a vital role in the development process of all Wikimedia projects,
due to its Web 2.0 nature.
3

Chapter 2
Fundamentals
2.1
Wikipedia
Wikipedia is a Wikimedia Foundation project which was initially created in 2001 to
serve as a free and multilingual online-encyclopedia. The community working and main-
taining the project consists almost entirely of volunteers. Anyone can contribute to its
content anonymously, or pseudonymously [15]. As of January 2016, across all language
Wikipedias, there are more than 38 million articles maintained by about 75,000 active
(more than 5 edits per month) contributors [43]. Writing and editing articles has to
follow certain guidelines that the respective language community agrees upon. Changes
are made after discussions are being held for a certain period of time, where anyone
can voice their opinion. Since opinions vary, there are often large disputes about what
belongs in an article, and what does not[9].
All the editing work is written in wiki markup, also known as wikitext language and
wikicode. It is a markup language that is converted by Wiki software to HTML. Most
language Wikipedias oer the use of a WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get)
editor called VisualEditor. It lets users directly see the changes they made to an article
and does not require any knowledge of wiki markup.
4

Fundamentals
2.1.1
Infobox
Infoboxes are an optional source of information displayed next to the text of an article.
They are exclusively located in the top right corner, for all left-to-right languages, and
are commonly based on a template the community agreed upon beforehand. Infoboxes
hold facts and statistics [8] about the article in a mostly machine-readable format. They
function as fact-sheets to provide an overview about the subject of an article so the reader
can quickly compare and grasp what the article is about. The values of the elds are
written in wikitext, however, the Infobox itself is pre-built, thus it is not a requirement
to know the necessary elds for the current article when creating an infobox, just the
correct template suces.
The exemplary article used throughout this thesis will be Douglas Adams. The infobox
template used Infobox:Writer.
field
field name
Wiki markup
Figure 2.1: Infobox: Representation in VisualEditor on Wikipedia
2.1.2
VisualEditor
Unless otherwise specied, editing refers to editing with VisualEditor throughout this
thesis. Firstly, it is important to mention that VisualEditor is not available by default on
all Wikipedias. However, it is available as an experimental beta feature on all Wikipedias
with the only exception being the English Wikipedia, where it is enabled by default [16].
5

Fundamentals
The VisualEditor is an editing tool that lets users make edits through a graphical user
interface
 GUI), rather than constructing the complete article in wikitext. When editing
an infobox, the expected elds are provided, thus an editor does not have to look them
up and write them down manually. The elds are provided by the infobox templates
which consist of information the community agreed upon as shown in this template
documentation for a person [13, 16].
2.1.3
Community
In the environment surrounding the Wikimedia project, the word Community refers
to the many people who volunteer their free time to maintain and create content in
their local Wikis or contribute in another way, for example writing software [17]. As
mentioned before, the community of the English Wikipedia consists of around 31 000
active contributors, the German Wikipedia has around 6000 active editors averaged over
the year 2015 [42]. An editor counts as active when they contribute 5 or more times a
month.
It is important to understand the structure of the community as this aects how much
inuence editors have over articles but also changes in the design. Within the commu-
nities there are dierent roles each member can have within a hierarchical structure. A
new user without an account is called unregistered user and occupies the lowest position
in the structure. Therefore, they have the least rights. The highest position a member
can occupy is the one of a Steward. In between these two extremes are regular registered
users, administrators, bureaucrats and many more. Each role grants the user special
rights, but also brings certain responsibilities with it [14, 17].
2.2
Wikidata
2.2.1
About Wikidata
Launched in 2012, Wikidata has been providing a free linked database of structured data
[40]. Structured data is machine readable and usually stored in a relational database [6].
All data is community-generated, maintained and published under a no-attribution CC-0
license, waiving all rights making their data public domain [1]. It is inherently multi-
lingual and thus can be used across many platforms. Similar to Wikipedia, Wikidata
can be edited anonymously or with a Wikimedia account [40].
As of February 2016, Wikidata has over 16 million entries[39]. The data is not as heavily
utilized as hoped for by the organization and its community[41]. It has been hypothesized
6

Fundamentals
that this is most likely caused by a multitude of reasons which possibly include the lack
of usability of the data integration and editing functions and their visibility as well as a
lack of trust in the quality of the data [21].
2.2.2
Structure
To understand how Wikidata works, it is helpful to take a look at the structure of an
item. Items, in Wikidata, are representative of an entity which has properties. To give
an example, an item could be anything from a specic person, to a concept or a place.
Everything that has an entry in Wikipedia can also be an item in Wikidata. Every
item on Wikidata has a human-readable name called label as well as a unique identifying
number which follows a pattern of the letter Q followed by a numeric value (e.g. Q12345)
[35]. Throughout this thesis the exemplary item of Douglas Adams (identifying number:
Q42) is used.
Every item can also have one or more aliases, which represent additional names under
which the item may also be known. In the case of Q42 two aliases are set, one of which
is Douglas Noele Adams, while the second alias Douglas Noël Adams is a similar variant,
both including the middle name of the subject. A description can be added to every
item, as in the case of Adams, it is English writer and humorist [35].
Figure 2.2: Composition of an Item in Wikidata: with missing sitelinks.
Every item can have a list of statements about that item. Statements encompass elements
which describe details about the item.
It does this with properties and values [38].
Properties can be seen as categories for the data values of statements [36]. For a person,
7

Fundamentals
this could be, but is not limited to, gender, parents, rst and last name, date of birth,
sex, siblings, occupation and children. These properties are paired with a value. Values
hold the exact data of the statements. To name an example, the statement with the
property last name has Adams as a value. If we look at the property spouse, one can
see that the value is Jane Belson. Values can have qualiers, to expand or contextualize
the statement, for example to specify when exactly the value was true [37]. To name
an example, in the case of Adams' spouse it is a start time and an end time, since after
Adams' death, Jane Belson was no longer his spouse.
Each statement can have multiple values. For example, one can have multiple spouses
or multiple children, each with their own qualiers and these do not have to be mutually
exclusive, while each new property makes a new statement.
A property with a value and its qualiers combined is referred to as a claim. Each of these
claims should preferably have one or more references to back it up. These references are
very important for Wikidata, since it is a platform for free knowledge specically trying
to avoid imposing the one truth on anyone. Unlike Wikipedia, where it must be agreed
upon one concensus which will be published, in Wikidata multiple values for the same
statement can exist side by side. An example would be the statement with the property
residence. Adams has lived in many places throughout his life and having multiple values
for residence is possible without being mutually exclusive.
When a statement has multiple values it is sensible to rank them, in order to show
which one is the currently most agreed upon, for example. In the case of Adams the
current residency would hold the primary rank, and all other residencies would hold the
normal rank. In the case of multiple children, for example, all of the statements would
be ranked 'normal' because one is not more correct than the other. The third available
rank is 'deprecated' which is used for known wrong values. At this point, one can see
how qualiers and ranks play an important role in Wikidata. Qualiers help to clarify
when, where or under which circumstances a value of a statement is accurate and ranks
help make sense of them in relation to each other.
An item additionally functions as a link between all Wikipedia articles on the same topic
throughout the dierent languages. This means that an item is language-independent to
a certain extent. All referenced pictures and all other references to one of the Wikimedia
projects are also interlinked at Wikidata. This makes it a secondary knowledge base
because it allows to store all data with a reference to an original source.
8

Fundamentals
2.3
Previous work on editing Wikidata from a client
The Russian Wikipedia developed a so-called gadget to edit Wikidata from Wikipedia.
It is not possible to import this data to use in the article but solely to edit the respective
item of the article. Since the infoboxes on the Russian Wikipedia have been partially
modied to use Wikidata in some places, the edits potentially have an impact on the
Wikipedia article, but indirectly.
Analyzing the design, it becomes clear that the gadget is relatively user-unfriendly to
users new to Wikidata. This is because there are many buttons, which all look very
similar to each other. This makes none of them stand out which results in a lack of clues
for the user, where to start or what to do at all. When looking at the dialog principles
dened by the ISO 9421-110 the self-descriptiveness is being entirely overlooked. Self-
descriptiveness is the ability of any element or an entity as a whole to describe itself
to the user and giving them a sense of locality and possible functionalities [29]. When
hovering over the button, one gets a short explanation of the functionality of the button.
Unfortunately, this is not consistent throughout all buttons since some lack any kind of
explanation. The same disregard of the dialog principle can be applied here.
Figure 2.3: Screenshot: Wikidata editing gadget on the Russian Wikipedia
9

Fundamentals
When hovering on the button to the immediate left of the text elds, the text says:
select snak type. This could be a problem for inexperienced Wikidata users since they
do not know what a snak type is and how to make use of it properly. Again, the self-
descriptiveness is not sucient.
Another example of bad design is the information the user gets when hovering over the
double sided arrow button. This button has the functionality of changing the rank of the
statement. This is not the symbol currently used on Wikidata for ranks, thus it would
arguably even be confusing for experienced Wikidata editors. The dialog principle of
Conformity with user expectations is not met here. This principle describes how a desired
behavior should conform to agreed upon conventions [29]. However, the information it
gives when being hovered over is only the current rank, which in most cases is normal.
The user is not given any information as to what this is, and how to use it. Furthermore,
it does not oer the possibility of getting more information on that functionality since
the user is not given a name for this function.
Generally, one can say that the design elements are not being used eciently to com-
municate helpful information to the user. It is important to mention that this gadget
yields much editing power, meaning that all editing functionalities known from Wikidata
directly, can be found here too. This explainsbut does not justifythe design choices
that were made. Since the goals of the tool developed by this thesis vary from the goals
of the gadget used in the Russian Wikipedia, they can not be easily compared. The goals
will be elaborated on in the following chapter.
The gadget is an interesting experiment and the rst of its kind. There is more work
to be done, in order to improve it, nevertheless it is a great rst step to Wikidata more
accessible and hopefully an inspiration to other language Wikis.
2.4
User-centered Design
User-centered design (UCD), also known as human-centered design (HCD), is an ap-
proach to interactive systems development which aims to make systems usable and use-
ful by focusing on the users, their needs and requirements, and by applying human
factors/ergonomics, and usability knowledge and techniques." [30] Usability is dened
by the International Organization for Standardization as the "extent to which a product
can be used by specied users to achieve specied goals with eectiveness, eciency and
satisfaction in a specied context of use." [28] Eectiveness is the "accuracy and com-
pleteness with which users achieve specied goals", eciency is the "resources expended
10

Fundamentals
in relation to the accuracy and completeness with which users achieve goals", and sat-
isfaction is dened as the "freedom from discomfort, and positive attitudes towards the
use of the product." [28]
Furthermore, UCD is founded on principles, which need to be followed in order to success-
fully implement the UCD-process. Thereby it is crucial for the designers to understand
the users, their tasks and working environment. The users should be involved in the
developmental process and product should be continuously adapted and improved on
that basis. The process should be iterative and continuously take into account the whole
user experience [18, p.109-110]. Usability should make a product easier to use while
increasing productivity and decreasing training, cost and errors [23, p. 1-2].
The eld encompassing usability, is called usability engineering. It is described as the
framework to provide structured methods for achieving usability [23, p.2], rather than
improving the specics of design.
The usability engineering lifecycle
 UEL), as sug-
gested by Mayhew in 1992 can be seen in her book The Usability Engineering Lifecycle,
1999. The UEL is made up of 3 main steps: Requirements analysis, design/testing/de-
velopment, and installation. For this thesis, the requirements analysis and parts of the
design/testing/development will be important. It is not always necessary to follow the
exact steps described, but it is rather suggested to individually adapt the process to the
project requirements.
The requirements analysis is accomplished by working through the following steps. Firstly,
creating user proles. This is possibly the most important step in user-centered design,
since they will drive further decisions on design and functionality throughout the pro-
cess. Furthermore user proles are crucial when devising the next step, the contextual
task analysis. In this step, the goals and needs of the users are acquired by observing or
questioning users on their work-ow and problems. Next, the platform capabilities and
constraints are determined. These will function as restrictions for feature implementa-
tions. Lastly, general design principles play an important role. They function similar to
the platform capabilities in constraints, by setting restrictions on the design possibilities.
These four steps, user proles, contextual task analysis, platform capabilities and general
design principles, are all combined into forming the usability goals. These are qualitative
and quantitative goals which are extracted from the four previous steps. These goals
help focus the process in a desired direction, pushing it towards a more optimal outcome.
The requirements analysis is the base for the whole design process. Everything that is
developed later, especially in the rst iteration which mainly encompasses this thesis,
builds on the establishment of the requirements and its analysis.
11

Fundamentals
As mentioned before, the second stage of the cycle, the design/testing/development
stage, is the most exible and should be molded according to the needs and the scope
of the project. Generally, this part consists of three levels which are small iterations in
themselves. Each level consists of several tasks of which the successful completion should
be checked when the end of the level is reached. Only after the decision point at the
end of a level is answered positively, one should proceed to the next level, otherwise one
should re-iterate.
In the rst level a conceptual model of the system is created, implemented to a prototype
and evaluated. Level two deals with setting standards, and level three is based on the
results of the rst two levels [23, p.5-9]. For this project tasks from several levels were
selected for the rst iterations, since the scope of the thesis would only allow for one level.
It should also be made clear, that this thesis in no way suggests, that one iterations is
sucient for a successful development of this product, but rather emphasizes that several
more iterations are necessary to produce a successful result.
Following this process will help to create a product, which will put the needs and wishes
of the users into focus, thus leading to higher eciency and satisfaction for the users
while decreasing frustration and errors.
12

Chapter 3
Requirements Analysis
3.1
Status Quo Analysis
Creating a concept for an editing tool requires an understanding of the editing process
and the capabilities of the system it will be implemented on. This is necessary to develop
a feasible and functional tool for most ecient usage.
All modications to the data stored at Wikidata are done on Wikidata directly, by editors
who are familiar with it. Edits are also made by bots, which are computer programs
that fulll certain tasks when executed, which are usually repetitive and too large in
volume for humans to handle in a time-ecient manner [34]. Most editors and authors
on Wikipedia are uncertain of the data quality on Wikidata and therefore have trouble
trusting it [21]. The main arguments named in this ongoing discussion against Wikidata
are the lack of referenced statements, and the low quality of the references for those
which are referenced [21].
These arguments are not wrong, as a matter of fact, around half the statements on
Wikidata are unreferenced, but this is a one-sided way of analyzing this issue. It should
be taken in into account that Wikidata has, over the course of 2015, raised the amount
of referenced statements from 12.7% to 20.9%. The previously made argument also does
not take into account that many statements on Wikidata are self-evident and need no
referencing. One such example are the links to images on Wikimedia Commons or the
more than three million items with the statement instance of: human [26].
Nonetheless, these and other misconceptions exist in the minds of the Wikipedia editors
and keep them from contributing to the project, and yet an increase in contribution is
what Wikidata needs to be able to grow to its full potential according to the project
manager of Wikidata, Lydia Pintscher [26].
13

Requirements Analysis
For the editors that have no or almost no knowledge of Wikidata, it is not necessarily
a project or concept they are willing to grasp. It will not be the task of the thesis to
change their attitude towards Wikidata, but rather to implement the tool seamlessly
with the already existing work-ow. The goal is for the aforementioned editors to not
have to fully understand Wikidata, while nevertheless being able to contribute to it.
Presently, the extraction of information from an item to use in a Wikipedia article is only
possible when knowing the exact Wiki text and syntax for implementing information from
Wikidata. This leads to a less than average amount of usage of the items throughout the
Wikimedia projects, since most editors do not know the specic rules of implementation,
in addition to it being poorly documented, if available at all. Therefore, the items are
rarely, if at all, used to populate the infobox or otherwise used in Wikipedia or other
Wikimedia projects, which results in editors adding information manually.
Wikidata and Wikipedia are connected through so called sitelinks, that link an item on
Wikidata to an article on Wikipedia throughout the dierent languages. When con-
nected, one can access the Wikidata item directly through the respective article and
vice versa. As a side eect, this sometimes leads to the discovery of duplicated articles
when they are linked to the Wikidata item [12]. Despite this connection, the structural
concepts of Wikidata and Wikipedia dier in many ways from each other, which will
make a unication rather challenging, as well as making sure the editors have a correct
understanding as well.
3.2
User Proles
As mentioned in section 2.4, when designing a product or a tool in a user-centered design
manner, the user is the focus point during the complete design process. Thus the rst
step in the design process is to determine the dierent users. This is usually done with a
questionnaire, the consultation of an expert or a combination of both. With the pieces of
information gathered from this approach, personas can be created and rst requirements
can be derived.
Personas are dened by Alan Cooper (1995) [2, p.
55] as "not real people that are
based on the behaviors and motivations of real people and represent them throughout the
design process." Personas are based on data, which is gathered through interviews and
observation of actual users. When designing for a user group, personas serve as specic
users that can be referred to, when thinking of their wishes and needs regarding the
product in question.
14

Requirements Analysis
3.2.1
Who are the users?
In order to get a valid representation of the user group, a question page was set up on
the Wikidata project pages [7]. Project pages on Wikis function as a discussion page
where anyone can discuss current projects and other specics of the respective Wiki with
other users. This means that anyone who is interested in the topic of this thesis can
contribute their input. Naturally, this would not bring forth every type of user, but yield
a good overview of users that the tool is targeting. The questions are also a meant to get
an idea of the wishes of the users and their expectations. The categories for user input
were:
• Current state and existing solutions
• What are the major problems you see right now with editing on a client?
• Do you have any general or specic ideas on how editing should work?
• Other input
After the helpful answers are ltered out, organized and broken down to their core
message, following pieces of information could be learned from them:
• There is a similar implementation in ruwiki.
• A strong wish for it to be integrated with VisualEditor.
• There should be a focus on Wikipedia.
• Must not have a high learning curve like Wiki markup does.
• Must be careful not to facilitate vandalism.
• Restrict the editing power to a useful minimum.
• Include descriptions and helpful information on items, properties and their use.
• Automatic extraction from Wikidata to infobox.
• Make sure statements do not get overwritten but added.
• The templates of the infoboxes in Wikipedia will need to be edited.
The information gathered from the initial input will be crucial when creating the re-
quirements for the tool, since they were extracted directly from potential user who have
dealt with this subject to some degree.
15

Requirements Analysis
As for narrowing down the user group, three types became apparent through the project
page:
Firstly, users that would appreciate a tool to integrate data from Wikidata into their
articles and are interested in its development.
Secondly, users that like Wikidata but do not want to invest time into learning something
new and want the import of Wikidata's data in the infobox to be automated.
Lastly, very skeptical users that generally support Wikidata but are very suspicious of
all changes and only look at the negative aspects.
It was fairly clear that the whole user spectrum is not included in these three types,
so a common practice is to get expertise from someone who knows the community and
its user very well [23, p.36]. In this case, a very good source of information is Lydia
Pintscher, the Product and Community Manager for Wikidata at Wikimedia Germany
e.V. After questioning her, it became apparent that three important users are missing.
A Wikidata editor as well as a non-user trying to abuse the system.
3.2.2
Personas
Personas as a design tool, were introduced in 1995 by Alan Cooper in his Book About
Face: The essentials of interaction design. There he describes personas acting as stand-
ins for real users [2, p.59]. They are supposed to give the developers a clear picture on
the needs and expectations of the user group, rather than representing specic users as
well as help uncover the requirements. The benet of using personas is that they give
the user group a face and a name, they become relatable. They put the needs of the
users into context by giving them a motivation and a background, and thus a driving
behavior [2, 4, 31, p.59].
Personas can generally be separated into six dierent types of which ve will be relevant
to this thesis [2, p. 71-73]. Primary personas receive the most attention of the target
group and cannot be satised by a design aimed at any other type of persona of the
target group. Typically, if the primary personas needs are met, the other personas are
satised to some extent or even fully. There can be multiple primary personas, whose
needs all have to be met.
Secondary personas dier only marginally from the primary personas, by at the maximum
a couple of diverging needs of the primary personas. Nevertheless they are too important
to neglect.
16

Requirements Analysis
Supplemental personas are the users that do not t the primary or secondary personas,
but would be satised by either the interface of the primary or secondary persona.
Served personas are not direct users, but prot from a good user interface. In this case
this would be the Wikidata editors who would have to deal with an inux in vandalism
if developed poorly.
The nal type of personas, relevant for this thesis, are the negative personas. Negative
Personas are not users of the product either, but rather serve the purpose for the devel-
opers to know who to not make the product for. In this case this would be users who
aim to vandalize content on Wikidata through the tool.
An example of a primary persona which was created for this thesis:
- male
- 54 years old
- lives in seattle, washington
- married to Tom Cohen
- two daughters: Franscene and Rebecca
- science teacher at local highschool
- speaks english and dutch
- likes hiking and birdwatching
- organzies editing sessions in his community
- knows Wikidata but has a hard time using it
- involved in multiple wiki projects
- admin/editor on a larger scale
- very community oriented
- likes to help people
- likes to organize things
- likes time to himself
- fatherly figure
- want to see the projects grow and improve
- expanding free knowledge
- help people have access to free knowledge
- concerned whether he's making a difference
- frustrated about the senseless vandalism
- fears that Wikipedia will stagnate at some point
Demography:
Behaviors:
Needs and goals:
"In en-wiki, there is no way any ordinary editor would have the slightest clue when creating an article that wikidata even exists and even less than the slightest
clue how to create it. I've been editing nine years, nothing to help me other than talk page chitchat and completely incomprehensible instructions. Wiki markup
syntax is complex enough for non-programmers, to go to a different web site and input something is too steep a learning curve for me..."
Jeff Cohen
Figure 3.1: Persona: Makeup of a persona on the example of Je Cohen [33]
Je is 44 years old and works as a science teacher at a high school mainly teaching biology
and chemistry. He has been teaching for almost 20 years and he still enjoys his job. He
sometimes worries that the kids nowadays take the access to free knowledge for granted
and thus wants to make sure that there will be enough future contributors out there. He
runs a monthly open editing session to which he encourages his students to come as well.
He has been involved in community work for a long time and is a respected member. He
is not the most tech-savvy person but that has not stopped him from learning the Wiki
markup language.
17

Requirements Analysis
Fortunately, since December 2012 he can use VisualEditor which makes it much easier
for him to maintain his pages. He loves the idea of Wikidata and would love to see the
community use it more actively but he struggles with the usage and often can not be
bothered to nd out how to use it with the little instructions he can gather scattered
around dierent pages. This results in him referring to the old ways. He would love a
tool that is as easy to use as VisualEditor to integrate Wikidata into his infoboxes.
Altogether eight personas are used for the project of the thesis, of which 3 are primary
personas. Their detailed information can be found in Appendices A - G. Following is a
short overview of them:
The second primary persona which was developed for this thesis is Miriam Weiland. She
is a highly specied editor though not very involved in the community and just wants to
write her articles as eciently and quickly as possible. Miriam would not be satised by
the needs of Je, since she desires more automation than Je, and values eciency over
simplicity.
The last primary persona relevant to this thesis is Sven Küppner. He is very skeptical of
outsourcing data to a dierent Wiki project and generally prefers to be in control of all
edits made, much unlike Miriam.
Two secondary personas emerged in this thesis. The rst one is Sam Doughty. He is
a sporadic editor who is is almost entirely satised by the needs of the primary per-
sonas. Since he goes long periods without editing, he would need extra reminders or
introductions to the tool unlike the frequent editors before him.
The second one is Jamie Morgenstern. She just started editing in general and is not very
tech-savy as it is. She will need all the extra help to understand the tool and be able to
use it appropriately.
Served personas include Peter Wellington and Tanja Brinks. Peter is a template creator
on Wikipedia and would need to make adjustments to the templates, so the new func-
tionality could be integrated into the infoboxes. Tanja is a Wikidata editor, whose main
priority is to keep the Wikidata vandalism-free and raising the quality of the data.
The negative persona included in this thesis is Max Senkmann.
Further on, all the above mentioned personas are mapped on a spectrum in dierent
categories, such as their experience in editing Wikipedia or their level of community
engagement. This is done to make sure there are no major areas in the user group which
were not covered as identifying potential duplicate personas [20].
18

Requirements Analysis
3.2.3
User Scenarios
After creating every persona, user scenarios for each of them are developed based on
the requirements extrapolated from each user.
User scenarios are written under the
assumption that the product already has all necessary functionalities and does what is
expected of it. It includes details of the system and how the users might experience it.
By engaging the user with the product, it helps to put them into a context with the
product. [2, 3, 32, P. 80].
• Right after having dinner, Je decides to do some editing on Wikipedia. He boots
up his computer and logs into Wikipedia with his account.
There were some
new discoveries in Ornithology and he would like to adjust the information in the
respective articles. A new common ancestor was found and it turns out that there
is a whole other new genus which requires an article of its own.
• Je prefers VisualEditor for editing. He long switched to using Wikidata for his
articles because it saves him time and trouble. He calls up the article of the bird he
wants to edit and clicks on VisualEditor. It boots up and he clicks on the infobox
which then opens the editor. He scrolls down to the part where the genus can be
edited and sees the little symbol signaling him that this information is coming form
the respective Wikidata item. He can even hover over it to have this information
displayed to him.
He then is faced with two boxes asking him whether the information displayed has
been correct at any point in time or whether it is just entirely wrong. He choses
the rst one because until the discovery of the new shared ancestor it did belong
to the former genus. He then is asked to type in the name of the new genus and, if
known, a date when it became the new accurate term. He is also asked to submit
a reference.
In this eld he also has the option of looking at the entire list of values for that
specic property. After conrming, he is informed that he added a value to the
respective property.
When he looks at the infobox the correct genus is being
displayed.
• He checks if there is already an article for the new found common ancestor and
nds out that there is not. He decides to start writing it, rst writing all the text
for the article, and then proceeding with the infobox. When he types in the name
of the article it automatically suggests to use the corresponding Wikidata item
instead.
In this case, there is no item yet so it suggests to create one. He chooses to do
so and a separate box opens up for him to add properties to the newly created
19

Requirements Analysis
item. For now these are restricted to the infobox templates elds. All he needs to
do, is ll out the elds as he would in VisualEditor and press ok. They are then
automatically transferred and at the same time the item gets created, so the article
can refer to the label's unique identier.
• Je decides that he wants to add another property which is not part of the template.
He clicks on the usual button at the bottom of VisualEditor to add another one.
He types in the property's name and is automatically asked if he would like to add
it as a value for the Wikidata item. He chooses yes and lls in the value for it.
• Because he used the Wikidata item in his infobox and text the item and the article
are now automatically linked to each other. If anyone wants to create an article
about this new genus in another language they already have all the information
available.
Based on what was learned about Je, the following expectations can be extrapolated
for the project:
• keep vandalism low
• have a low entry barrier
• should be usable with the knowledge he already has
• does not want too much to change since it took him so long to learn everything
• should be instantly doable
• should be the same language
• showcase the connection with Wikidata
• explain what Wikidata is briey
• easily understandable tutorials and explanations should be oered
• should clearly dierentiate that this is Wikidata data
3.3
Requirements Analysis
3.3.1
Functional Requirements
A feature that is important for all personas are the tool tips, but especially for Je, Sam
and Jamie since they either have trouble picking up on new functionalities, edit very
20

Requirements Analysis
rarely, or are unexperienced. It is important to design the product in order for it to
blend in seamlessly with VisualEditor and can be used intuitively, but nevertheless, all
users would appreciate tips when rst trying to integrate Wikidata in their infoboxes.
Another necessity is to be able to switch all elds to import data from Wikidata with
one click, whereas editing the actual data should require extra steps in order to prevent
vandalism. Statements that get edited by default should get added instead of being over-
written. This requirement is derived from Miriam and Sam since they most appreciate
eciency when editing, and do not require control as the other personas.
A requirement concerning all personas is the ability to only use Wikidata in selected
elds. This is especially important for Sven, since it grants a higher level of control,
unlike switching all elds at once.
Furthermore, certain functions should not be allowed like deprecating statements and
deleting whole statements.
These features should still only be possible on Wikidata
directly in order to prevent harsh vandalism, which would result in a degradation of
the data quality. This requirement is relevant to all personas, however this is especially
important for Max and Tanja.
It functions as a barrier to prevent the most severe
vandalisms.
The adding and editing of references, qualiers and ranks should be possible. This is
a general requirement, needed for the functionality of the tool that is relevant to all
personas.
3.3.2
Non-Functional Requirements
There are many non-functional requirements which need to be met in order to ensure a
positive user-experience. The learning curve should be kept as low as possible, in order
to animate users to continually utilize the new feature rather than avoiding it. The users
already completed a steep learning curve learning mark up and may not be willing to
invest time to familiarize themselves with a new work ow, meaning the entry barrier
should be low. Although all personas would have a great advantage from this requirement
being met, Je, Jamie and Sam would prot the most, since they would most likely be
deterred from using it if the requirement is not met.
The previous requirement should be realized with the following requirement in mind. It is
imperative to not facilitate intended or unintended vandalism. This is not only important
for Tanja and Max, since the quality of the data depends on it. Dierentiating between
vandalism makes sense, since it can be committed purposefully and happen accidentally.
21

Requirements Analysis
In the latter case the user may not be fully aware of the implications of their edits and
thus cause destruction of data.
Hence, the consequences an edit on Wikidata will have must be made clear to the user,
since an edit would cause an alteration in every place the same item is being used, unlike
edits made locally in an article.
Another important issue is locality. Edits, that are made locally must also convey that,
as well as edits that are being made remotely. Otherwise, the user can get confused
about where the edits will occur. This is, as most other requirements, relevant for all
personas.
It will also be important to convey the two separate features the extension brings. Firstly,
it will be possible to import the data from Wikidata into the elds and then it can be
edited or secondly, it can also be edited, without being used in the elds. These two
features can be entirely separate from each other.
The usability of VisualEditor should not be impaired for users who wish to not utilize
the new set of features, as existing editing processes must not be disrupted or interfered
with. This must be especially ensured for skeptical users, such as Sven.
3.3.3
Prioritization of Requirements
To more eectively create a product in a strict time frame as it is the case for this thesis,
it is helpful to prioritize the requirements, in order to know where to put the focus and
make the most valuable progress. A common method in software development is the
MoSCoW Prioritisation.
MoSCoW stands for Must have, Should have, Could have
and Won't have [11]. It is important to keep in mind that this method was applied to
the scope of the thesis, and not the actual rst time deployment of the product. This
means that the requirements were sorted according to what was possible to achieve in
one iteration and not the whole design process.
MUST Must itself stands for Minimum Usable Subset. These are the requirements which
make the product a viable solution in the rst place. Without them it would be illegal,
and/or unsafe to use. If deploying the product without having fullled the requirements
in question would be pointless they must be classied as MUST requirements. All other
requirements, even if they seem crucial on the surface, should be placed in one of the
following categories.
SHOULD Unlike MUST requirements, SHOULD requirements are not vital to the
viability of the product. Nonetheless SHOULD requirements would cause a signicant
22

Requirements Analysis
drop in user satisfaction and product eectiveness when not implemented. Therefore it
should be avoided to neglect them, potentially forcing the users to do a workaround and
thus being more error prone.
COULD The main dierence between COULD and SHOULD requirements is that if
left out, COULD requirements would have less of an impact on the overall satisfaction
of the user and the product's eectiveness.
They are also often being referred to as
'nice to have' requirements. If they do not get implemented then the overall success of
the product would not be much aected. When the project runs into trouble and an
unforeseen interruption occurs, COULD requirements are the rst to be eliminated.
WON'T The requirements labeled WON'T are agreed upon to not be delivered. They
are recorded for future deployments, and act as a means to keep the focus on the three
requirements categories above.
Functional requirements:
MUST:
integration into VisualEditor, two distinct input methods, toggling
each eld separately
SHOULD:
only show statements that are in the template, no statement
deletion, no statement deprecation, check if corresponding item is blocked for
editing
COULD:
tooltips, auto completion, blinking dot in tool bar to draw at-
tention to the new feature, editing should be deactivatable by admin if con-
troversial topic
WON'T:
preview of changes
Non-Functional requirements:
• suppression of vandalism
• low entry barrier / shallow learning curve
• sense of locality
• sense of consequences
• sense of ownership
23

Chapter 4
Design and Prototyping
4.1
Design principles
After creating the Personas and evaluating their needs and basing the functional and non-
functional requirements on this evaluative process, initial design concepts were sketched
out. Since the mock-up has to seamlessly integrate into VisualEditor. Moreover, it was
important to not overload the current design, in order for the new appearance to not be
overwhelming for the users.
To start a design process, one needs design guidelines as mentioned by Mayhew in [23,
p.7]. For this thesis the dialog principles laid out by ISO 9421:110 [29] and Nielsen's ten
heuristics from 1995 [24] were used as a guideline.
As the name already suggests, the ten heuristics by Nielsen consist of ten separate prin-
ciples. The dialog principles consist of seven dialogs. For the purpose of the thesis, both
guidelines will be merged since their core messages overlap in most areas. The dialog
principles have been added in brackets, to ensure separate referencing if necessary.
Visibility: (Self-descriptiveness)
The system should always inform the user of the current occurrences though timely
feedback for example.
Match between systems and the real world:
The system should speak the language of the user and it should be using phrases
and words the user would understand instead of technical terms.
User control freedom: (Controllability)
Users should always be able to navigate the interface freely and be in control of
24

Design and Prototyping
movement and speed. An important example would be to always include an undo
button in case the user accidentally navigated to an unwanted place.
Consistency and standards: (Conformity with user expectations)
The way elements are presented, positioned and react should be done in a consistent
manner. If they get introduced in one way, they should not change throughout the
product.
Error prevention: (Error tolerance)
Instead of having good error messages, it is even better to not let the mistakes
happen in the rst place. This can be achieved by giving very clear instructions or
restricting a moving further if the correct input was not given.
Recognition rather than recall:
The user should not be forced to remember details throughout multiple steps.
Navigational tools should always be clearly visible.
Flexibility and eciency of use: (Suitability for individualization)
Features for use optimization and maximizing eciency should be available for
advanced users. Though these should not be in plain sight, as to not overwhelm
new users.
Aesthetic and minimalist design: (Suitability for the task)
Interfaces should not contain superuous information, since this would distract
from the relevant information and unnecessarily confuse the user.
Help users recognize, diagnose and recover from errors: (Encouragement of learning)
Error messages should never include codes and be written in a human readable
format, clearly stating the nature of the error.
Help and documentation:
Help should always be searchable, easy to nd and should be focused on potential
user tasks and provide concrete steps to solving the issue.
4.2
Mock-Up Development
Initial quick sketches are made on paper, and then sketched out with the software Pencil,
also known as Pencil Prototype, developed by Evolus.
It is a free GUI-prototyping
software usable across all platforms.
25

Design and Prototyping
The nature of the problem asks for a solution with two visually distinct modes. Through-
out this thesis, the two modes will be referred to as as Wikidata mode and Wikipedia
mode, where the latter is the already known state which the editors are used to, where the
input is all manual using Wiki text. Wikidata mode is the new additional mode, where
the values comes directly from Wikidata. The actual editing of Wikidata is restricted to
this mode only.
The locations which needs to represent mode most clearly are the elds of the infobox.
Based on this insight, the rst design idea makes switching between modes possible at
the elds.
Figure 4.1: Initial sketches: on the left the drop-down version, on the right the sidebar
version.
As one can see from Figure 4.1, there is a little corner symbol which is supposed to make
the toggling between the two modes possible. When gray, one is in the normal Wikipedia
mode and when clicked, it changes its colors to match the Wikidata design and Wikidata
mode becomes activated. Furthermore, there are two tabs on the button of each eld
which become active when Wikidata mode is activated. The selected one at that time
will be Edit on Wikidata. The other one says Change to manual and would lead back to
editing manually in Wikipedia mode.
When clicking on the tab, a drop-down menu will open, which reveals several options,
which are also available when editing Wikidata. One has the options to add references
to the values, add qualiers to the values, delete the entire value and thus potentially
the statement, and change the rank of the value. The Wikidata corner at the bottom
of the infobox changes all possible elds to get their data from Wikidata and clicking it
again will revert all elds back to the manual mode.
A problem which became apparent when trying to place further required elements was
the lack of space. A drop-down does not allow for a display of all current references and
26

Design and Prototyping
qualiers, for example, and end up being cluttered and thus illegible. Additionally. this
solution would not yield enough space for tool tips and other potential information that
would need to be conveyed to the user.
In the second approach, the drop-down was replaced with a sidebar, as seen on the right-
hand side in Figure 4.1. This is a feature the current infobox already has, thus utilizing
mechanisms familiar to the user. Currently, when clicking on the lower left button Show
Options, a sidebar slides out to the left, oering more editing options for the user. The
idea with this approach is to have a sidebar for editing Wikidata on the right, using
a functionality which the editor is already comfortable with to minimize the necessary
readjustment. When in Wikidata mode, by clicking the triangular stripes in the right
corner of a eld, the sidebar to the right slides open and reveals the tools to edit the
item on Wikidata.
The functionalities found in the drop-down in the earlier draft, can now be found in
the sidebar. The advantage of this design is that there is more space to display all the
editable information of a statement. The sidebar can easily be retracted when the data
does not need to be edited itself, but only the import of data is relevant. This is arguably
also a more elegant solution, since it visually blends in easier than the drop-down.
One idea which was not further explored as part of the Pencil sketch was to initially have
none of the aforementioned buttons and functionalities of Wikidata visible, except for
one clearly dened button to activate Wikidata mode. Only when activated the buttons
and functionalities become available. Every time the editor is opened, the hidden buttons
would light up in a manner of a light-box, and then disappear again, leaving only the
Wikidata button behind.
The problem with this concept is that the incentive to use Wikidata might not be great
enough, since it is not readily available from the start and a quick switch of one eld
to use Wikidata would not be possible without changing into Wikidata mode entirely.
Furthermore, it would not be easily visible which eld uses which data, and thus lead
to accidental edits, which were not intended by the user. For these reasons mainly this
concept was not further pursued.
After completing the initial sketches with the sketching software, the two initial sketches
are examined and evaluated. In this case, it makes sense to only implement one sketch
into a functioning prototype, since creating one is a lot of work and the scope of the thesis
does not allow for more than one. For reasons mentioned in the previous paragraphs,
such as opening up more possibilities for edit functionalities, and the option of keeping
it closed when not needed, the latter sketch is going to be realized as a prototype.
27

Design and Prototyping
4.3
Design Process
For the next step it is important to design the specic elements and functionalities of
the tool, since the sketches do not cover these with enough detail, if at all. The scope of
the thesis only allows for a rather rudimentary prototype, where functionalities are not
implemented in all parts, but just enough to showcase the functions and make it usable.
This means that not every eld gets a proper implementation of its future abilities.
The software used to create the clickable prototype is Axure. The prototype is modeled
after the design which was previously made with Pencil. Axure RP is a wireframing,
prototyping software developed by Axure Software Solutions, Inc. It is used to test and
validate a concept in a usability test. Clickable prototypes feel real to the user, since
they have no way of knowing what goes on in the background.
Using Axure makes it possible to create a clickable version of the concept fairly quickly,
compared to the time it would take to implement it with code, as well as being more
exible for any necessary adjustments.
The design of a prototype undergoes several
minor adjustments regarding the structure and integrated features before it is tested
with users in a usability test.
First, all the elds from the original infobox are copied into the mock-up, as well as
all the details that are part of the elements of VisualEditor. It is important to begin
with the current design as a base, in order to not deviate too far from it, since it is of
utter importance to not disturb the current design too much. From there, all necessary
elements can be added, or subtracted if necessary.
Figure 4.2: Comparison: on the left the infobox currently in use, on the right, the
prototype.
28

Design and Prototyping
Next, the sidebar was implemented, so whenever the corner is active, being in Wikidata
mode, the sidebar opens. Since the main window usually contains more elds than t into
its predened size, the other elds become reachable through a scrollbar. Unfortunately
this scrollbar visually functions as a barrier between the selected eld and the sidebar. A
main goal had to be to connect the information in the sidebar visually with the selected
eld, so the user does not get confused about which value their currently editing.
When selecting a eld, the border of the eld turns blue to indicate the selection. One
idea was to use this color to visually link the eld and the sidebar. The title of the
sidebar changes, depending on the value of the selected eld. One way to link these two
visually is to make the title the same color as the eld border. This will help the user
draw a connection between the two elements.
Figure 4.3: Prototype: in Wikipedia mode.
Furthermore, it is imperative to make clear to the user in which mode they are currently
located. The color change in the corner alone is not enough of an indicator especially
because that would not be very accessible for the colorblind. The idea is to not only
have the eld name written above the eld, but also add in the unique identier for the
corresponding property in Wikidata.
If a eld has a eld name and a property eld name, one for each mode, it is possible to
visually toggle between the two in addition to the color change. The title corresponding
29

Design and Prototyping
to the active mode will be displayed in bold and in the color black, whereas the inactive
mode will be grayed out and displayed in a regular weight.
Since a goal of the project is not only to facilitate the use of Wikidata, but also encourage
to use it, an indicator needs to be added, informing the user of the new mode, when in
Wikipedia mode. When selecting a eld in Wikipedia mode, the sidebar will slide open
as well, displaying a short message, informing the user of Wikidata mode and how to
switch to it.
Figure 4.4: Prototype: in Wikidata mode
This message, and the sidebar in general, can be opened and removed by clicking the
button in the lower right corner with the Wikidata logo.
The reason for using the
Wikidata logo on the button is due to the fact that it is the clearest representative of
Wikidata and thus representing Wikidata mode, as well as being visually interesting so
the user is inclined to click on it.
When it comes to implementing the tool tips, a few were created to support the user
when they were at a loss. Looking at the information in the sidebar, it a redundancy
became apparent. To test whether this information might even be sucient, as to not
clutter up the tool, the tooltips are going to be left out for the rst run.
30

Design and Prototyping
The corners for toggling between the two modes are implemented exactly like in the
sketch.
When clicking the corner of a eld, and the user is in Wikidata mode, the
sidebar changes to display the property name and the unique identier of the property
as the title in the color of the border of the eld. There are three editing options for
the user: Adding and editing references, adding and editing qualiers, and changing the
rank of the statement. Each of these options is collapsed. When clicking on one of them,
the actual information opens, and the editing options become visible.
For instance, when the user clicks on References for Place of Death
 P20) in Figure ??
they will see the current references already existing for that statement in Wikidata, an
option to edit them, and an option to add another reference. The reference addition
follows a similar process to the one on Wikidata itself. The user chooses the type of
reference, in this case from a drop-down, and in another eld, adds the actual reference,
be it a URL or a book or another type of reference.
Figure 4.5: Prototype: sidebar when editing references and ranks
Qualiers follow a similar pattern, where the ones which are already associated with the
value are displayed with the option of adding new ones. The user usually picks a type
of qualier, for example a start and/or end date, and then, in an empty eld, adds the
actual values.
The rank of a claim in a statement can only be changed when there is more that one
claim, and therefore more than one value for the eld. If this is the case, the claim can
be preferred, normal, or deprecated. The ranks are visualized by three squares on top of
31

Design and Prototyping
each other, of which two are empty, and one is colored in, representing the rank of the
claim amongst the other claims of the statements. It is possible to have anything from
all claims ranked normal, to only one being preferred, or even all preferred except for
one, since in that case, they would all be ranked normal.
The changes made to the actual item, in this case Douglas Adams need to be saved
separately from the actual changes made to the infobox. The editing of the data on
Wikidata and the integration into the infobox, and editing there represent two individual
actions. Additionally, an extra step to saving the changes also works towards minimizing
accidental and purposeful vandalism.
Figure 4.6: Prototype: adding another eld to the infobox.
When adding a new eld, one will get suggestions of other elds available to that template
in a auto completing drop-down. Once the preferred eld is chosen, the user is presented
with an empty text box with the chosen value. This decision is primarily to prevent
vandalism on Wikidata.
Were the text eld immediately lled with the value from
Wikidata it might lead to confusion if the user is not aware of the changes made, which
could easily lead to accidental vandalism. Furthermore, inserting this extra step to get
to the Wikidata value also acts as a further means to inhibit intentional vandalism.
32

Chapter 5
Evaluation
After ensuring that all requirements have been met by the prototype, it can be tested by
potential users who t the user group. This procedure is called usability testing [22, p.
135]. The goal of such a test is to evaluate the usability of the product and identifying
problems. The main criteria with which the success is determined is overall eectiveness,
eciency and satisfaction.
This usability test mainly tries to collect heuristic data, which is a type of analytical
evaluation, compared to empirical evaluation. The latter concerns itself solely with the
result of the usability test, where it does not play a role how these result came to be.
Analytical evaluation concern itself with the specics and the work-ow. If we take the
usability of a pen for example. The analytical approach would be to look at what the
pen is made of, the ergonomics of it, how it glides over dierent surfaces and so on. An
empirical evaluation would only focus on how many words per minute the user can write
with it and how long it lasts before being used up or broken for example.
5.1
Usability testing
5.1.1
Structure and Planning
The goal is to test a group of about 5-10 people with a varying degree of experience in
editing on Wikipedia and Wikidata. Every participant is questioned separately using the
same questions and tasks. The screen and mouse movements, as well as the voice was
recorded with a free software called CamStudio Recorder v2.7 for later review if necessary.
After the scenario was set for them and they were informed about all formalities the test
started.
33

Evaluation
First, every user was asked to describe what they see without clicking. This was useful,
in order to give them some time to immerse themselves in the new environment and get a
feeling for the product, before having to use it straight away. Additionally this is helpful
to get a feeling for the level of comfort and experience the user has. Next, each user
was asked to click around freely while restraining from editing anything. It makes sense
to make this an extra step after the rst one, so when the user starts clicking about,
they are already familiar with everything to some extent and can make more educated
decisions about where they want to go next.
Following these two steps, they were given 7 small tasks and where observed while com-
pleting them. They ranged from very easy to moderately advanced. After completing
the tasks the users were asked another set of questions on their opinion of the product.
Questions like What exactly did you like, What did you not like, What was missing and
so on. These questions are helpful in determining the overall satisfaction of the user and
often bring further requirements to light.
Lastly, each user was asked to ll out a short questionnaire that will help mapping
them to a persona and thus evaluating if their needs have been met. These scales were
similar to the one that the personas got mapped on in their development. More detailed
information on the questionnaire and further materials of the usability test can be found
in Appendices H - J.
5.1.2
Results
For the usability test, ten voluntary participants were chosen to cover a large range in
regard to editing experience in Wikipedia, ranging from no experience to a very high
experience as one can see from gure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Results from usability test: Graph showing the participant's editing ex-
perience on Wikipedia.
34

Evaluation
Furthermore, the range of knowledge of Wikidata was also represented throughout all
ranges as one can see in gure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Results from usability test: Graph showing the participant's editing ex-
perience on Wikidata.
The questioning times ranged from twenty minutes to one hour, yielding various amounts
of helpful information. Each participant was faced with every question, however not all
questions were answered by each participant. What one can gather from the answers
is that people nd it easier, pointing out aws that bother them, yet have a hard time
naming the features they like. If a question was not answered at all, one can assume
that the opinion of the user towards it is neutral.
5.1.3
Functional
Starting with the functional requirements, it turns out that most of negative points that
users brought up were of a functional nature, since these are the easiest to name when
questioned.
The issue addressed by most users, 7/10 times, was the lack of tooltips. As mentioned in
section 4.3, the tooltips were purposefully left out to see if the explanation in the sidebar
would be sucient, hence seeing if the design was able to convey a clear enough picture.
The initial intentions were to satisfy the principle of aesthetic and minimalist design, by
not overcrowding the interface and minimizing redundancy. As it turns out, the lack of
tool tips was a negative aspect to most users, since they were confused at times about
the meaning of certain elements, especially the property title above the text eld. Users
unfamiliar with Wikidata, such as 3, 5, 6, and 8 all did not know what the p stood for
since no explanation was given.
The same goes for the ranks. If a user is unfamiliar with Wikidata, they will not know
what ranks are and how to properly use them. After discussing this with Lydia Pintscher,
35

Evaluation
the product manager of Wikidata, it was decided to rework ranks in the editor altogether.
This, as well as all other points made in this chapter, will be further discussed in section
5.2.
Another feature the users missed regarding to images was a thumbnail preview of the
image selected, so the user can be sure, that the correct image was chosen for the infobox
before committing any changes. This was not really a criticism of the implementation,
but rather an new requirement that only became apparent to the users when using the
tool.
The by far most misunderstood design element was the Wikidata button in the lower
right corner. 7/10 users expected to be redirected to the Wikidata web page or the
respective item on Wikidata when clicking the button. In chapter 4.3 it was established
that it represents Wikidata the best, since it is the actual logo and could easily stand for
the Wikidata mode but the association with Wikidata directly seems to be too strong.
It did not suggest to them, that it might be used to switch between the two modes in
the editor. This can partially be attributed to standards, since users generally expect to
be taken to the main page of the project or site behind the logo, thus it was recognized
as a link rather than a button with a functionality in the infobox.
A second main issue with standards became clear, which was a misinterpretation of the
corner symbol on the text eld. When in gray mode 3/10 people thought that it was a
text eld size adjusting element. This is a clear indicator of the failed fulllment of the
conformity with the expectations of the user. This is clearly something that needs to be
addressed in the next iteration, since this functionality is a key element of the tool and
not being recognized as such can be very harmful to its usability.
Another issue were the colored words in the sidebar. 3/10 users recognized them as links
and tried to click them in order to switch to Wikidata mode. This is not a major issue,
but would still overall have a negative impact on the user experience.
Furthermore, 4/10 users mentioned that they were not certain enough through the
feedback of the toolif their changes were saved at all, and if they would be informed if
they were to exit the infobox with unsaved edits. It became apparent, that the visibility
of the status was not being communicated suciently to the user.
On the positive side, 4/10 users clearly stated that they found the toggling between
the two modes was being communicated very clearly.
The change in the colors and
the boldness of the text as well as the change in the sidebar helped them with placing
themselves locality wise i.e. being aware of which mode they were in.
36

Evaluation
5.1.4
Non-Functional
Unlike the negative ndings, most positive ones were of the non-functional kind.
Starting with the negative comments, the main issue that stood out was a navigational
one. 3/10 users put forth diculties "trying to get back" to the Wikipedia mode or
when trying to close the sidebar. This goes hand in hand with the misinterpretation of
the Wikidata button [a] since that was the navigational link they were missing. This is
a prime example of a lack of user control freedom where the user feels trapped in some
way by the product and does not have the feeling that they are fully in control of the
navigation.
3/10 users voiced their concerns regarding the impact of their edits. To be precise, when
editing Wikidata, they were uncertain if the edit was also happening on Wikidata directly
or just locally on Wikipedia. This is a result of a lack of feedback to the user, thus the
visibility of the state of the system is not communicated clearly enough to the user.
Moving on to the positive feedback, 2/10 users pointed out that they nd the vandalism
barrier was high enough to be successful, while feeling that the measures that were taken
were not interfering with their editing work.
Furthermore, 7/10 users commented that they appreciated the easy access to the items
on Wikidata through the automation, hence providing a greater level of comfort when
making edits which will signicantly facilitate their work. Furthermore, they pointed
out that the editing power, which the tool gives, makes it very comfortable to edit.
5/7 of these users were the ones who gave themselves the highest rating out of the 10
participants on the questionnaire for the last two questions regarding Wikidata.
Many of the positive comments were directed at the immediate design decisions. 3/10
users found the colors, the graphical elements and the general structure visually pleasing
or just generally appreciated the design details. This may not seem as important as the
previous points, however creating a visually pleasing product contributes to a successful
product just as much as it minimizes work for the user. [2, p.92]
Another comment was that 2/10 participants pointed out that they appreciated the quick
input possibility of references, which is a step that should be entirely barrier-free, since
referencing should be encouraged where possible.
37

Evaluation
5.2
Evaluation
Focusing on the information gathered from the design process, following measures need
to be taken to improve the prototype:
The lack of tooltips has become very clear in multiple places during the usability tests.
Mainly all Wikidata related specics need to be explained separately, like the property
identiers, qualiers and ranks. Having information on the usage in the sidebar was not
sucient, and thus needs revision.
The Ranks should be removed the way they are implemented currently, since it was
decided not to allow for deprecation and it is dicult to convey the concept of them
with little eort. Instead the idea is to have a check box for every value, to verify if
there is supposed to be a preferred one. If nothing is checked, the default, which is
ranked normal, is active. In the template for certain properties the check box would
not be available at all, as for example for the property children since there can not be a
preferred one. The template editors should also have the possibility to have certain elds
in their infobox demand at least one preferred value, for example the property mayor in
a city infobox or the population number.
The next point is about the representation of values. It needs to be possible to represent
multiple values per eld like it is possible in Wikidata. For the current prototype the
aspect of editing several values for one eld has not really been considered, since this is
not often the case and it possibly is the most complicated part to implement.
The idea is to have all values as separate entities in the eld, and each of them will be
clickable to then edit them in the sidebar. There is an option to set the rank with each
of them individually, but this would mean, when changing ranks one would have to go
through all of them in the worst case, and nd the one that is currently preferred and
set it back, in order to set another one to preferred. It could not just reset the other
value automatically, since it is possible to have multiple values at this rank.
Of course the preferred value could be highlighted visually in the eld so the search would
not take up any time. The other option would be, when clicking into the eld, but not
on a specic value, the sidebar would open all values side by side and then let the user
set a preferred value there, when having an oversight over all the values. This would of
course require an extra step and the user might not nd it since he would have to click
in between the values to get to this value display.
Moreover, the Wikidata button should be reworked and the functionality of it should be
made clearer, meaning that it needs to showcase more that it makes the sidebar slide out
and that it toggles between the two modes. The button itself as a tool should denitely
38

Evaluation
stay. A possibility could be to present users with a handful of options regarding the style
of the button, to nd out which one conveys the message best.
The corners were misinterpreted by 33 percent of the users as text eld resizers. Their
existence makes sense but not the design choice. The corner needs to be either turned
around, or converted to vertical lines or be reworked completely. The two eld labels
could be reworked as tabs to allow for an even more visual toggling.
Another idea that would be great to try in the next iteration would be to make a new
eld according to which mode it was in, when it was created. When the editor is in
Wikidata mode, chances are that when he creates the new eld he would like the value
already in place, unlike the editor in Wikipedia mode, who most likely does not want to
make use of Wikidata.
It would probably also be important to label the modes somewhere, make it even more
clear where the user is located and thus disperse the confusion about locality.
After making aforementioned changes, a new set of users would be invited to test the
new prototype. The results would then be evaluated, just like it was done earlier in this
thesis, and the necessary changes would be made. At this point it would be up to the
team to decide, whether the product needs another round of iteration or whether the
users were suciently satised, that the products could be rolled out.
39

Chapter 6
Conclusion and Outlook
6.1
Critical Analysis
The end result of this thesis should denitely not be seen as an end result to the whole
project. The scope of the thesis did not allow for a single iteration, although it would
be recommended to at least have one, or more if possible. Without re-iterating through
the process after the rst evaluation, there is no chance to improve the product with all
the knowledge gained from the usability test. As mentioned in previous chapters this is
crucial for developing user-centered.
6.2
Future Work
After the conclusion of this thesis, the project will undergo further iterations. This will
include updated revisions of the prototype which incorporate the results obtained by the
usability test. This updated prototype will then undergo further usability testing, to
optimize the product in order to meet the previously established requirements and reach
an improved eectiveness, eciency and satisfaction for the users as discussed in section
2.4.
This process is repeated until a satisfactory level is reached on all three aforementioned
points which determine the usability of the product. When this point is reached, the
product will be implemented and oered as a beta feature to the English and German
Wikipedias at rst, followed by other languages.
At this point, there is much criticism and rejection to be expected, just as it was the
case when Wikimedia Commons rst launched. Nonetheless, it can be assumed that the
40

Conclusion and Outlook
positive prospect the tool holds will be able to convince most community members of its
potential and advantages.
Since this tool was developed for an agile environment such as Wikipedia with an active
community, its development will never permanently conclude. It is to be expected that
adjustments will have to be made continuously throughout the lifetime of the project,
especially when adapting it to t the needs of further Wikimedia and third-party projects.
6.2.1
Usefulness in other Wikimedia Projects
Wikimedia has several projects that could benet from the work done in this thesis, since
Wikipedia is not the only project that has a type of infobox on its page.
An example of a Wikimedia project that would benet from the previous work is Wikivoy-
age. This project is an online travel guide and like the other Wikimedia projects, free
and editable by anyone. Wikivoyage uses infoboxes on their articles to showcase the
most important facts about its topic, much like on Wikipedia.
Moreover, Wikispecies could make use of this research. It is a free online directory on
species, aiming to create a complete catalog for anyone to use. As a directory, there is
no continuous text used for the articles, but only information in a structured way, which
makes it perfect for use of data from Wikidata.
The last example is Wikinews, which is an online news source providing free content,
just like its sister projects.
Most news articles include an infobox which may have
additional information on the topic, or headlines of other stories about the same topic.
The supplementary information on the topic could be drawn from Wikidata, and hence
prot from being editable from the client directly.
6.3
Conclusion
The implementation of a user interface within other Wikimedia projects to edit Wikidata
has revealed itself to be a subject with many complex facets. Due to the involvement of
the community and having to design onto an already running and established system, the
requirements were rather strict, thus creating a challenging design process. Nevertheless,
this thesis has created a solid basis which, after further iterations, will be implemented
into various Wiki projects in the future.
Implementing the solution this thesis has brought forth will provide a remedy to the
current situation where the data across the dierent Wiki projects and all the language
41

Conclusion and Outlook
Wikipedias is incoherent and partially inaccurate. With the hurdle removed, of having
to leave the local Wiki to make edits, the users can now comfortably edit on the spot
and do not have to revert to using local data for comfort reasons.
The major advantage of a localized system is that not every community needs to know
about everything. Smaller language Wikipedias can easily use correct data maintained
by editors or communities concerned with a specic topic. This results in more time each
community and editor can dedicate to the interests and subjects relevant to them.
Not only would the implementation of the concept of the thesis result in more coherent
and accurate data for all Wikimedia projects, but it would also increase the quality and
quantity of data on Wikidata. Editors from other Wiki projects, especially Wikipedia,
would be adding new data directly to Wikidata instead of storing it locally. Furthermore,
it would then automatically be maintained by these communities resulting in a one
could saysymbiotic relationship.
Overall, this project could be the missing puzzle piece for Wikidata, to take its usage to
the next level and thus helping it rise to its full potential and improve the data quality
across all Wikimedia projects.
42

List of Figures
2.1
Infobox: Representation in VisualEditor on Wikipedia . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Composition of an Item in Wikidata: with missing sitelinks. . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Screenshot: Wikidata editing gadget on the Russian Wikipedia . . . . . .
9
3.1
Persona: Makeup of a persona on the example of Je Cohen [33] . . . . .
17
4.1
Initial sketches: on the left the drop-down version, on the right the sidebar
version.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Comparison: on the left the infobox currently in use, on the right, the
prototype. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Prototype: in Wikipedia mode.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Prototype: in Wikidata mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Prototype: sidebar when editing references and ranks . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Prototype: adding another eld to the infobox.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1
Results from usability test: Graph showing the participant's editing expe-
rience on Wikipedia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Results from usability test: Graph showing the participant's editing expe-
rience on Wikidata. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
43

Bibliography
[1] 1.0, CC0:
Public Domain Dedication. https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/
zero/1.0/, 2014
[2] Alan Cooper, Robert R.: About Face 2.0 - The essentials of interaction design. Wiley
Publishing Inc., 2003
[3] Butler, Christopher:
How to Tell the User's Story.
https://www.newfangled.com/
how-to-tell-the-users-story/, .  [Accessed 4. December 2015]
[4] Calabria, Tina:
An introduction to personas and how to create them.
http://www.
steptwo.com.au/papers/kmc_personas/, .  [Accessed 18. December 2015]
[5] Commons, Wikimedia:
Commons:Welcome.
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
Commons:Welcome, .  [Accessed 06. November 2015]
[6] Community, English W.:
Wikipedia:Wikidata.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Wikidata, .  [Accessed 12. January 2016]
[7] Community, Wikidata:
Wikidata:Client editing input.
https://www.wikidata.org/
wiki/Wikidata:Client_editing_input, 2015.  [Accessed 30. October 2015]
[8] Community, Wikipedia: Help:Infobox. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Infobox,
[9] Community, Wikipedia:
Why Wikipedia is not so great. https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Wikipedia:Why_Wikipedia_is_not_so_great, .  [Accessed 13. December 2015]
[10] Community,
Wikipedia:
Wikipedia talk:Moving les to the Commons.
https:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia_talk:Moving_files_to_the_
Commons&oldid=29967943,
[11] Consortium, DSDM:
The DSDM Agile Project Framework (2014 Onwards - Chapter
10).
https://www.dsdm.org/content/moscow-prioritisation, 2014. 
[Accessed 14.
February 2016]
[12] EN, Wikipedia:
Help:Interlanguage links.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:
Interlanguage_links, .  [Accessed 05. January 2016]
[13] EN, Wikipedia: Template:Infobox person. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:
Infobox_person, .  [Accessed 06. January 2016]
44

Resources
[14] EN, Wikipedia:
Wikipedia:User access levels.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:User_access_levels, .  [Accessed 02. February 2016]
[15] EN, Wikipedie: Wikipedia:About. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:About, .
 [Accessed 01. November 2015]
[16] EN, Wikipedie: Wikipedia:VisualEditor. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
VisualEditor, .  [Accessed 28. November 2015]
[17] EN, Wikipedie:
Wikipedia:Wikipedians. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
Wikipedians, .  [Accessed 05. December 2015]
[18] Florian Sarodnick, Henning B.: Methoden der Usability Evaluation - Wissenschaftliche
Grundlagen und praktische Anwendung. Hans Huber, 2011
[19] Foundation, Wikimedia:
Frequently asked questions. https://wikimediafoundation.
org/wiki/FAQ/en, .  [Accessed 03. November 2015]
[20] Gothelf, Je:
Using Poto-Personas for Executive Alignment.
https://uxmag.com/
articles/using-proto-personas-for-executive-alignment, May 2012.  UX-Mag
[21] Kolbe, Andreas:
Whither Wikidata?
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
Wikipedia_Signpost/2015-12-02/Op-ed, December 2015.  The Signpost
[22] Krug, Steve: Don't make me think - A Common Sense Approach to Web Usability. New
Riders, 2006
[23] Mayhew, Deborah J.: The Usability Engineering Lifecycle - a practitioner's handbook for
user interface design. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 1999
[24] Nielsen, Jakob: 10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface Design. https://www.nngroup.
com/articles/ten-usability-heuristics/, 1995.  [Accessed 19. Februar 2016]
[25] Perez, Sarah: Wikipedia's Next Big Thing: Wikidata, A Machine-Readable, User-Editable
Database Funded By Google, Paul Allen And Others. http://tcrn.ch/H0aO9U, .  [Accessed
06. February 2016]
[26] Pintscher, Lydia:
Wikidata:
Knowledge from dierent points of view.
https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Wikipedia_Signpost/2015-12-09/Op-ed, Decem-
ber 2015.  The Signpost
[27] Pressemitteilung, Wikimedia G.:
DATA REVOLUTION FOR WIKIPEDIA. https:
//www.wikimedia.de/wiki/Pressemitteilungen/PM_3_12_Wikidata_EN, March 2012. 
[Accessed 06. February 2016]
[28] Standardization, International O.:
Ergonomic requirements for oce work with visual
display terminals (VDTs)  Part 11: Guidance on usability. https://www.iso.org/obp/
ui/#iso:std:iso:9241:-11:ed-1:v1:en, 1998.  [Accessed 14. December 2015]
45

Resources
[29] Standardization, International O.: Ergonomics of human-system interaction  Part 110:
Dialogue principles. https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:9241:-110:ed-1:v1:
en, 2008.  [Accessed 1. December 2015]
[30] Standardization, International O.: Ergonomics of human-system interaction  Part 210:
Human-centred design for interactive systems. https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:
iso:9241:-210:ed-1:v1:en, 2010.  [Accessed 14. December 2015]
[31] usability.gov:
Personas.
http://www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/methods/
personas.html, .  [Accessed 17. December 2015]
[32] usability.gov:
Scenarios. http://www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/methods/
scenarios.html, .  [Accessed 4. December 2015]
[33] Vos,
Dick
de:
By
Dick
de
Vos
(Own
work)
[CC
BY-SA
4.0
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)],
via Wikimedia Commons.
https:
//commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ADick_de_Vos.JPG,
2011.

[Accessed
1.
November 2015]
[34] Wikidata:
Help:Bots. https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Help:Bots, .  [Accessed 13.
October 2015]
[35] Wikidata: Help:Items. https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Help:Items, .  [Accessed 13.
October 2015]
[36] Wikidata:
Help:Properties.
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Help:Properties, . 
[Accessed 13. October 2015]
[37] Wikidata: Help:Qualiers. https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Help:Qualifiers, .  [Ac-
cessed 13. October 2015]
[38] Wikidata:
Help:Statements.
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Help:Statements, . 
[Accessed 13. October 2015]
[39] Wikidata:
Wikidata Main Page.
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Main_
Page, .  [Accessed 25. February 2016]
[40] Wikidata:
Wikidata:Introduction.
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:
Introduction, .  [Accessed 18. October 2015]
[41] Wikimedia:
Grafana - Wikidata Entity Usage.
https://grafana.wikimedia.org/
dashboard/db/wikidata-entity-usage-project, .  [Accessed 01. February 2016]
[42] Wikimedia: Wikipedia Statistics - Active Wikipedians. https://stats.wikimedia.org/
EN/TablesWikipediansEditsGt5.htm, .  [Last accessed 29. February 2016]
[43] Wikimedia:
Wikipedia Statistics - Edit activity levels of registered users.
https://
stats.wikimedia.org/EN/TablesWikipediaZZ.htm#editor_activity_levels, .  [Last
accessed 29. February 2016]
[44] Wikimedia: Not my wiki. https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Not_my_wiki, June 2014.
 [Accessed 02. February 2016]
46

Appendix A
Persona: Miriam Weiland
Demography:
• Female
• 36 years old
• Lives in Heidelberg, Germany
• Married
• Studied veterinary medicine Uni Heidelberg
• Lives in a single apartment in quite neighborhood
• Works as a veterinarian at Uniklinik Heidelberg
• Has two dogs
• Apartment in city center
Behaviors:
• Calm personality
• Very assertive
• Very sociable
• Pragmatic/ goal oriented
• Helper personality
• Spends a lot of time in forums answering users questions

Appendix A - Primary Persona
Needs and Goals:
• Protecting animals
• Spread awareness
• Likes the feeling to be needed and help
• Would like more regular working hours
• Worries that her marriage might fall apart
• Scared of failing at her job and thus hurting someone
Miriam is 36 year old veterinarian working at the University clinic of Heidelberg. She
often has to work long shifts and sometimes also night shifts. Often when she comes
home her husband is already asleep and so their marriage has not been very stable for a
while. She's thinking of changing to a regular veterinarian's oce so she can have normal
working hours. She lives for her job because helping animals is what drives her. When
she sees a suering animal, that needs help, she is unable to resist. She tries to extend
her knowledge of animals, their illnesses and their potential treatments to the outside
world because she wants that as many animals as possible nd help. That's the reason
why she spends hours in forums, when she comes home from work, answering people's
questions about their animals.
A couple of years ago she discovered Wikipedia as a tool to also spread knowledge. When
she started editing she found that many articles on animal illnesses were incomplete or
entirely missing. Over the years she has written and edited 20+ articles hoping that
someone will make use out of them. Most of her articles are rather scientic and thus
often require an infobox. Miriam knows about Wikidata but has no idea how to integrate
the information and no time to gure it out. Right now she always types everything
by hand but she would appreciate the help of not having to do so by just integrating
Wikidata's item. She also already encountered the situation where there was an English
version of her article but she did not know how to connect both of them. She often
worries that people don't take care properly of their pets. She has seen many situations
in her work where mistreat them without even them knowing it.
She sometimes thinks about having kids, but the way her marriage is going she does not
think that would be a good idea. She feels bad for not being home often and letting her
marriage slip but she is incapable of giving up on her animal care. She is determined
to make a dierence, even when it is just one article at a time. She loves her two dogs,
Lilo and Stitch. She tries to spend as much time with them as possible taking them for
extensive walks as often as she can and taking them on her run every morning.

Appendix A - Primary Persona
Expectations and desires:
• Make editing easier
• Less information to update
• Save her time
• Easily understandable
• Would appreciate an auto-generation button for the infobox
User scenario:
1. After Miriam comes home from work she sits down to answer questions that people
might have asked her in one of the many forums that she's active in. In response to
a specic issue she wants to link the relevant Wikipedia article. She notices a small
mistake in the infobox though and quickly wants to change it, before sending the
link. She logs in and opens the VisualEditor as usual. She sees that the value used
in there is still typed in by hand. She much prefers the infobox to use Wikidata
so she goes ahead and switches the box to "use Wikidata item for this value" and
when she saves the correct value for that property it's displayed in the infobox.
2. She sits down to do some research on a disease she encountered today at the vet's
oce. She nds some information in veterinary journals but sadly no Wikipedia
article. She knows that people would never read those journals to get informed
about a disease so she decides to write an article. She writes the text rst which
she derives from multiple of the scientic papers she has read on this issue. It
always takes so much time to write the articles accurately and not get any of the
facts wrong so all she really wants is to have to do as little as possible. The new
function of auto-generating an infobox is exactly what she wants. She just has to
open the visual editor and click on create infobox from Wikidata item, type in the
Item ID and the infobox template she wants to use and everything is generated
for her. She then goes through all the information to make sure it's correct before
saving.
3. There is a short article on the English Wikipedia, so she wants to make sure later,
to link those two together. She used to have to do this manually, but because she
used the Item in the infobox generation it automatically suggested to her to add
this article to the item since it realized that there is no German article linked to
this item yet. She clicks yes and is relieved that yet another task is taken of her
hands. She gets to go to bed earlier than expected which makes her very happy.

Appendix B
Persona: Sam Doughty
Demography:
• Male
• 22 years old
• Lives in Leeds, UK
• Studies physics
• Parents support him nancially
• Freelances a bit on the side doing some minor programming work
• Loves to bike
Behaviors:
• Does not develop emotional attachments easily
• Relaxed/easy going
• Very sociable
• Lives into the day
• Avoids most confrontation
• Night owl
• Hangs out a lot with friends and gf
• Never hangs on to something for a long period of time

Appendix B - Secondary Persona
Needs and Goals:
• Explore the world
• Do something new all the time
• Fears that he will never nd something that fascinates him enough
• Would like to be able to hold on to one thing for long
• Worries that he won't nish his studies
• Wants more challenges in life
Sam is a 22 year old student who lived in Leeds all his life and is now studying physics
at the local university. He loves to take his bike everywhere and since the city is rather
small that's usually not a problem.
He has always been very uncertain about most
things in life and has changed his major twice. He has started playing 4 dierent music
instruments already and always quit after a couple of months. He's in university listening
to his professor speak about spaghettication in regards to black holes and for once nds
it easy to listen to the lecture. After he gets home he checks Wikipedia to read up on
it more. He nds that there is no section on the black hole article yet so he decided
to edit it. He mistypes his password a couple of times because he has not logged in in
such a long time. He likes editing but only from time to time and when there's a reason.
He can't be bothered with always keeping everything up to date and having to worry
about whether the information is still accurate but when he has something to say he
enjoys writing it down for everyone to read. He's meeting his girlfriend in 30min at the
cinema to watch the new bond movie. After they get home he reads up on the article of
the movie and notices that it's missing some crucial information which he then quickly
adds. He sometimes worries that he'll never nd anything that he loves so much, that
he'll stick with it for longer. At least he has been editing on Wikipedia sporadically for
a while now.
Expectations and desires:
• Intuitive enough to understand after not having used for a long time
• What is Wikidata
• Wants not to think just do

Appendix B - Secondary Persona
User scenario:
1. In between two appointments Sam wants to quickly edit an infobox of an article. He
only has very little time of which he spends 5 minutes remembering his login details.
When he goes to edit the information in the visual editor he quickly sees that the
value is not derived from Wikidata. He changes the settings to use the information
from Wikidata and the information in the infobox is corrected automatically.
2. When he goes to change another mistake he nds that the property's value is
already taken from Wikidata but the value is still wrong. From the drop-down
he selects that it's a wrong value. He's asked if the value is inherently wrong or
was ever right at one point. He picks the rst and is asked to type in the correct
value. Suggestions are made for him. He picks one but unfortunately does not
have a reference at hand. Before he selects 'ok' he is asked whether he is sure that
he wants to remove the old value from that property. He selects 'ok' and the new
value appears in the box.
3.

Appendix C
Persona: Sven Kueppner
Demography:
• Male
• 28 years old
• Lives in Mannheim, Germany
• Single for 2 years
• Studied economics at Uni Mannheim
• Lives in a single apartment in quiet neighborhood
• Works at a white collar job in a non-leading position
Behaviors:
• Gets into heated discussions a lot
• Has problems handing of control
• Thinks his opinion is being overheard a lot of the time
• Very suspicious of people and their Behaviors
• Avid twitter and facebook user
• Likes to comment on most things to display his opinion
Needs and Goals:

Appendix C - Primary Persona
• Receiving the respect he feels he deserves
• Wants more control and responsibility
• Wants to be admired
• Wants to have something to show for
• worries that he won't "make it" in life
• Scared of being compared to other people
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/User:Sicherlich
"If you nd (how ever) your way from the Wikipedia-Artikel Warszawa to
Q270 - then what? If I would like to use the coordinates then what am I
supposed to do? clicking on it? - no. edit? - no. Well so what? how? ? - the
free encyclopedia that anyone can edit...."
Sven is a 28 year old male who works as an accountant in a big company. He is the
younger brother of two and always strives to be as successful as his older brother. He
does not like the level of responsibility he has at work and always tries to impress everyone
with his knowledge. Usually his co-workers ignore what he has to say or don't take it
too seriously. That really upsets Sven but he feels like he's powerless against it. He feels
like he's really good at his job and deserves a promotion. He wishes that his co-workers
would acknowledge his abilities and thus would look up to him more. When his brother
was his age he was already head of a department of his company. That really bothers
him. When he gets home from work he tries to meet a friend for drinks but he's busy.
He feels like lately his friends have less and less time for him because they all seem to
be so occupied with their jobs and their relationships. Since his relationship ended two
years ago, he has had a hart time meeting the right person. This only adds up to his
frustration. He knows that it is not healthy but he does not know what to do about
it. Even in his editing community he is not very respected and he's been editing for
over 6 years. He likes to participate in discussion because he feels like that way he can
make a change, but often the reaction to his comments is not very positive. He hates it
when people mess with his articles. He does not like sharing the editing powers although
he knows that Wikipedia is a community contribution but he feels like it's almost a
personal violation when his words are being edited. He usually maintains the English
and German Wikipedia articles and is often annoyed that he has to retype the change
twice when things change. He is very skeptical about the infobox information coming
from Wikidata but on the other hand it would really relieve him from a lot of typing.

Appendix C - Primary Persona
Expectations and desires:
• Wants to keep a say in what will be written there
• Does not want it to be easier for other people to edit his article
• Straight forward Wikidata integration
• Does not want to be made feel stupid
• No transfer to Wikidata itself!
User scenario:
1. When Sven comes home from work he goes to check on his ongoing discussions
with other editors. He sees that someone edited something in one of his articles
again. There has been an ongoing discussion for a while for a specic value in the
infobox on which no one can agree. Sven decides that it's time to settle this now
and choses to nally implement Wikidata for his infoboxes. He opens VisualEditor
and uses the convert to get information from Wikidata button. All the properties
that are available are changed to receive their information from there. Fortunately
for Sven the value which was disputed, is the same as his in the Wikidata item, so
it is now changed back to his desired value.
2. Later that evening Sven realizes that an article he follows does not have an infobox
so he decides to add one. He opens the VisualEditor and decides to just let it
automatically generate it, although he does not fully trust that yet but it's just one
button click away and he can still edit all the information afterwards if necessary.
3. He is surprised at how easily the changes are possible without requiring any knowl-
edge about Wikidata. He decides to go through some more infoboxes to see if
Wikidata is being used yet. He nds one where most values are still manually
written in. He sets all possible boxes to 'get from Wikidata'. Before hitting the
'save' button he can see how it would look with the values to make sure everything
is correct. He really likes that feature so he does not have to commit to something
that might be wrong.

Appendix D
Persona: Peter Wellington
Demography:
• Male
• 54 years old
• Lives in San Francisco, USA
• Married with kids
• Software developer
Behaviors:
• Particular about the way he likes things
• Does not like to take orders
• Used to being in a leading position
• Appreciates quiet and calm
Needs and Goals:
• Spreading free knowledge
• Slow and steady wins the race
• Fears that people oversee the obvious because everyone is rushing everywhere
• Prefers emails to instant messaging

Appendix D - Served Persona
• Worries that there's too much constant input overwhelming our senses
• Prefers everything to be neat and sorted
Peter is a mid-fties software engineer who has been working in the industry for so long,
not much can faze him. He does not really appreciate hectic surroundings and prefers
it to be quiet so he can work eciently. He's in control of the software department at
his company and runs everything steadily. He believes that slow and steady wins the
race although he is not opposed to improvements. His day is usually pre-structured and
he avidly avoids makes any chances to it. It does not necessarily bother him. He is a
very calm and stable person and there is not much that can shake him up. He has been
editing Wikipedia articles for 6+ years but never really got into it. He never liked how
everyone could just come in and change everything. He often nds that the guidelines for
the English Wikipedia are not strict enough or at least not enforced rigorously enough.
In the last couple of years he discovered template creation for himself. Usually no one
tampers with his templates and everyone uses them when making an article which makes
him feel good. When people want changes it'll be discussed before they are put in place
so it's not as much out of control like an article would be. The only thing that worries
him when it comes to being able Wikidata from the VisualEditor is that people will want
to change loads of templates signicantly. Other than that he is not opposed to the idea
of it.

Appendix E
Persona: Tanja Brinks
Demography:
• Female
• 33 years old
• Lives in Berlin, Germany
• Open data journalist
Behaviors:
• Heart involved with Wikidata and Wikimedia projects in general
• Fights "the good ght"
• Very tolerant
• Rather shy
• Has problems speaking up
• Goes unnoticed at times
Needs and Goals:
• Spreading free knowledge
• Creating loads of freely accessible data
• Keep Wikidata vandalism free

Appendix E - Served Persona
• Prefers all online contact over real life situations
• Wants Wikidata to be used more avidly
• Worries that it does not get the attention it deserves
• Believes that Wikidata has the potential to change the future
Tanja is a 33 year old journalist who mostly sticks to herself and only goes out when
necessary. The topic she is specialized in is Big Data and open data. She believes that
this type of data is the future and it needs to be expanded and made machine readable
as soon as possible. This is the reason why she supports Wikidata so strongly. She
thinks this might be the most important collection of machine readable data ever. She
vigorously edits and patrols the data and always tries to encourage people to use it.
She is not always very successful at that because she is a very timid person and has
trouble talking to people and often is not taken too seriously.
She always strives to
please everyone and has trouble confronting people about things. That is especially a
problem in hes business because you need to be quite persistent and memorable to be
successful. That's why she tries to stick to the more online approach. She loves the idea
of Wikidata being used in Wikipedia more and integrating the editing functionality into
the VisualEditor. The only worry that she has is that it might facilitate vandalism of
the data but she is denitely willing to give it a try if that means that the data will get
more use and the knowledge of it's existence will be spread further.

Appendix F
Persona: Jamie Morgenstern
Demography:
• Female
• 20 years old
• Lives in Gotenburg, Sweden
• Art student
Behaviors:
• Unproblematic personality
• Usually liked by everyone
• Enjoys people's company
• Likes to try new stu every now and again
• Active on all social media channels
Needs and Goals:
• Being occupied
• Making friends
• Belonging to a part of a group
• Likes the feeling of being included

Appendix F - Secondary Persona
• Fears that she will end alone one day
• Is annoyed by trolls and purposefully evil people
• Tends to nd a person to leech on to
Jamie is a 20 year old student trying to gure out what she wants in life. She's studying
art right now but used to study archeology and before that architecture. Once she nds
something she loves she usually sticks to it though but it does not always work on the
rst try. She is constantly scared to miss out on something and thus tires out many
things before settling. She just started editing on Wikipedia and so far really enjoys it.
She likes the community and appreciates all the help she is getting. Also she has the
feeling that what she's doing actually has a impact which is important to her. She has
been to a women's open editing session in her hometown already where she met loads
of nice women. She is not the most tech-savy person but quite clever so she usually
gures out how something works fairly fast. On the other hand she is so used to all this
user-friendly tech nowadays that it's hard to tell whether she's just generation internet
or if she actually has a good understanding of technology.

Appendix G
Persona: Max Senkmann
Demography:
• Male
• 17 years old
• Lives in Pittsburgh, USA
• Senior in high school
• Lives with his grandma and mother
• Likes to ride his long board
Behaviors:
• Often bored
• Acts very childish at times
• Tests out limits
• Low self-esteem
• Typically shies away from responsibilities
Needs and Goals:
• Seeks attention
• Does not like to be alone

Appendix G - Negative Persona
• Wants to be respected
• Tries to impressing people
• Thinks asserting dominance will make him feel more powerful
• Fears that he is no one
• Avoids being left alone with his thoughts
Max is a bright kid but had not the best upbringing and was not taught how to deal
with all his feelings. All he really seeks is a group that he can belong to. He thinks
he constantly needs to impress people for them to like him, otherwise they'll just leave.
He denitely has abandonment issues which are unresolved. When he has no outlet and
feels alone he tried to trigger any human reactions or interactions possible. For him
trolling is an easy way to establish a connection. He recently discovered that vandalizing
articles on Wikipedia can be fun and triggers peoples reactions easily, and it all occurs
anonymously. He knows he's not gaining anyones respect with that but at least it's some
acknowledgment that he exists. He does not really know where his life is leading. He is
in his last year of high school now and has no plans for later. High school is quite easy
for him although he could have much better grades if he would take it all more seriously
and would not mess about with his friends so much.

Appendix H
Usability Test Evaluation
Graphs sorted by questions:

Appendix H - Diagrams
Graphs sorted by Personas:

Appendix H - Diagrams
Graphs sorted by Usability Test Participants:

Appendix H - Diagrams


Appendix I - Questionnaire
Appendix I
Usability Test
1. Was siehst du?
Nr:____________
1.1 Nur gucken
1.2 Rumklicken, aber nichts editieren
Aufgaben:
1. Hole den Wert „birth date“ aus Wikidata
2. Editieren den „birth date“ wie gewohnt, lokal.
3. Füge eine Referenz zu „death place“ hinzu.
3.1 editiere diese
3.2 lösche diese wieder
4. Füge „spouse“ als field hinzu und fülle mit WD
4.1 gebe ihr einen qualifier

Appendix I - Questionnaire
1. Was hat dir gefallen?
2. Was würdest du verändern?
3. Was hat dir garnicht gefallen?
4. Wie fandest du die tooltips?
5. Unter welchen umständen würdest du davon gebrauch machen?
6. andere kommentare
Checkliste:
O Wikidata button
O Apply changes to Wikidata
O die ecken
O
O
O
O


Appendix J - Questionnaire
Appendix J
Self-Assessment
Wo würdest du deine Technikaffinität einordnen?
Wie aktiv bist du in deiner Community?
Wie offen stehst du Veränderungen gegenüber?
Wo würdest du deine Editiererfahrungen auf Wikipedia einordnen?
Wie häufig benutzt du den VisualEditor?
Wie gut kennst du Wikidata?
Wo würdest du deine Editiererfahrungen auf Wikidata eineinordnen?
sehr
niedrig
sehr
hoch
inaktiv
sehr
aktiv
ver-
schlossen
sehr
offen
sehr
niedrig
sehr
hoch
nie
immer
garnicht
sehr
gut
sehr
niedrig
sehr
hoch
Bevor du gehst...
Nr:___________

Declaration of Authorship
I, Charlene Kritschmar, declare that this thesis titled, "Facilitating the use of Wikidata
in Wikimedia projects with a user-centered design approach" and the work presented in
it are my own. I conrm that:
■Where I have consulted the published work of others, this is always clearly at-
tributed.
■Where I have quoted from the work of others, the source is always given. With the
exception of such quotations, this thesis is entirely my own work.
■I have acknowledged all main sources of help.
■Where the thesis is based on work done by myself jointly with others, I have made
clear exactly what was done by others and what I have contributed myself.
Signed:
Date:

