E D W A R D  
F E S E R
P R O O F S
OF T H E  E X I S T E N C E
of G O D
ARI STOTLE
PLOTI NUS
AUGUSTI NE
AQUINAS
LEI BNI Z



FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD


EDWARD FESER
Five Proofs of the 
Existence of God
IG N A TIU S PR ESS 
SAN  FR A N C ISC O

Front cover images:
First row  (left): Aristotle, bust, R om an  copy after a Greek bronze, 
original by Lysippos, 330  B .c .
National M useum  o f R om e, Ludovisi Collection 
First row  (right): Plotinus, marble bust, Ostia Antica M useo, Italy 
Second row  (left): St. Augustine by Sandro Botticelli (14 4 4 -15 10 ), 
in the church o f Ognissanti, Florence, Italy 
Second row  (middle): St. Thomas Aquinas by Carlo Crivelli (ca. 14 3 0 -14 9 5 ), 
National Gallery, London, England
Second row  (right): Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz by Christoph Bernhard Francke 
(16 6 0 -17 29 ), H erzog Anton U lrich M useum, Braunschweig, Germany 
W ickim edia Com m ons images
C o ver design by Enrique J. Aguilar
©  2 0 17  by Ignatius Press, San Francisco 
A ll rights reserved 
IS B N  9 7 8 -1 -6 2 16 4 -13 3 -9  
Library o f Congress Control N um ber 2 0 179 3270 5 
Printed in the United States o f Am erica ©

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments 
7
Introduction 
9
1 The Aristotelian Proof 
17
2 The Neo-Platonic Proof 
69
3 The Augustinian Proof 
87
4 The Thomistic Proof 
117
5 The Rationalist Proof 
147
6 The Nature of God and of His Relationship to the World 
169
7 Common Objections to Natural Theology 
249
Further Reading 
309
Index 
317


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Father Joseph Fessio for his interest in this book and for 
the many helpful comments he provided on its first draft. Some of the 
material in the book was presented before audiences in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts; Claremont, California; Lafayette, Louisiana; New 
York City; and Sydney, Australia. I thank audience members for 
their comments and questions. I also thank the readers of my blog 
for their feedback on ideas that made their way into the book.
As always, I thank my wife, Rachel, as well as our children—  
Benedict, Gemma, Kilian, Helena, Jack, and Gwendolyn—for their 
patience and love. The writing of this book was especially hectic 
insofar as it overlapped with work on several other major projects. It 
could not have been accomplished had my wife not handled so much 
of the business of our family. O f course this is true of my work in 
general. Anyone who has found anything of value in that work owes 
a debt of gratitude to Rachel for making it possible.
My friend Father Thomas Joseph White has been at the forefront 
of the revival of interest in natural theology among Catholic theolo­
gians, as evidenced by his fine book Wisdom in the Face of Modernity: 
A Study in Thomistic Natural Theology.1 I have profited much from his 
work and from our conversations over the last few years. It is with 
gratitude and admiration that I dedicate this book to him.
T h om as Joseph White, O.P., Wisdom in the Face of Modernity: A  Study in Thomistic Natural 
Theology (Ave Maria, Fla.: Sapientia Press, 2009).
7


INTRODUCTION
This is not a book about Saint Thomas Aquinas’ Five Ways.1 Some 
readers of my earlier books might have supposed otherwise, given 
that I have defended Aquinas’ arguments elsewhere and that the title 
of this book is Five Proofs of the Existence of God. But though there 
is certainly some overlap with what Aquinas says and with what I 
have said in other places, this book stakes out somewhat different 
ground. It is not new ground, exactly, insofar as none of the proofs I 
will discuss is original with me. But it is different ground insofar as 
several of these proofs are arguments I have not previously defended 
at any length. It is also different in that most of these proofs have 
not received much attention in contemporary philosophy. This is 
remarkable, given that they have been very prominent historically, 
and given that they happen to be the most powerful arguments for 
God’s existence on offer (or so I think). My longtime readers will not 
be surprised when I say that in my view this tells you nothing about 
the proofs themselves and everything about the state of contemporary 
academic philosophy, including philosophy of religion.
Though the arguments are not new in themselves, then, they 
will be new to most readers, as will much of what I have to say in 
defense of them. What is distinctive about this book will perhaps 
be most easily explained by saying something about its origins. In 
my earlier books The Last Superstition and Aquinas, and elsewhere, I 
approached questions of natural theology— that is to say, questions 
about what might be known via unaided human reason, apart from 
divine revelation, concerning the existence and nature of God and of 1
1 Aquinas’s Five W ays o f demonstrating the existence o f God appear in Summa Theolo­
giae I, q. 2, a. 3. The First W ay is the argument from motion to the existence of a first U n­
moved Mover. The Second W ay is the argument from causality to the existence o f a first 
uncaused cause. The Third W ay is the argument from the contingency o f the world to the 
existence o f an absolutely necessary being. The Fourth W ay is the argument from degrees 
o f perfection to the existence of a most perfect being. The Fifth W ay is the argument from 
finality to the existence o f a supreme intelligence.
9

IO
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
his relationship to the world—by way of exposition and defense of 
what Aquinas had to say on the subject.2 Since Aquinas is, in my 
estimation, the greatest of natural theologians, that approach has its 
advantages. But it has its limitations too. For one thing, it requires 
that the discussion be largely exegetical, a matter of explaining what 
Aquinas meant to say, or at most the direction in which his argu­
ments could be taken (and have been taken by later Thomists), given 
what is actually to be found in his texts.3 That in turn requires setting 
out the background philosophical principles concerning the nature 
of change, causality, contingency, and so forth, that are deployed in 
his arguments; disentangling the essential ideas from the contingent 
and erroneous scientific assumptions in terms of which he sometimes 
expresses them; and so on. It is for that reason that, in both of the 
books mentioned, the reader has to work through seventy pages of 
sometimes dense general metaphysics before questions of natural the­
ology are addressed. For another thing, the approach requires confin­
ing oneself to the arguments that Aquinas himself happened to think 
are the most siguificant ones.
In the years since those books appeared, though, it has occurred 
to me that there is a place, indeed a need, for a book that approaches 
things differently. In particular, there is a need for an exposition and 
defense of certain important arguments for God’s existence that Aqui­
nas himself does not discuss and which have also received insufficient 
attention in recent work in natural theology. And there is a need for 
an exposition and defense of all of the most important arguments 
for God’s existence that is neither burdened with complex and often 
tedious issues of textual exegesis, nor preceded by any detailed meta­
physical prolegomenon, but which simply gets straight to the heart of 
the arguments and introduces any needed background metaphysical 
principles along the way.
2 Edward Feser, The Last Superstition: A  Refutation of the New Atheism (South Bend, Ind.: 
St. Augustine’s Press, 2008); and Aquinas (Oxford: Oneworld Publications, 2009). See also 
my articles “ Existential Inertia and the Five W ays” , American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 
85 (2011): 327-6 7, and “ Between Aristotle and William Paley: Aquinas’s Fifth W ay” , Nova et 
Vetera 11 (2013): 707—49. Both articles are reprinted (along with some other essays on matters 
relevant to Aquinas’ natural theology) in my anthology Neo-Scholastic Essays (South Bend, 
Ind.: St. Augustine’s Press, 2015), pp. 8 4 -11 7  and pp. 47-92, respectively.
3 “ Thomism” is, of course, the standard label for the system of thought deriving from 
Thomas Aquinas, and thus a “ Thomist” is an adherent o f Thomism.

INTRODUCTION
II
That is exactly what the present book does. Two of the proofs 
I defend here can be found in Aquinas, but three of them are not 
arguments that Aquinas discusses, at least not at length or in the form 
presented here. Nor is there any exegesis in this book, of Aquinas’ 
texts or those of any other great thinker of the past. To be sure, and as 
the table of contents suggests, the arguments are all certainly inspired 
by several great thinkers of the past— in particular, by Aristotle, Ploti­
nus, Augustine, Aquinas, and Leibniz. Indeed, I think that the proofs 
that I defend here capture what is essential to the arguments of these 
thinkers. But I am not presenting an interpretation of any text to be 
found in the writings of any of these thinkers, and I am not claiming 
that any of these thinkers said or would agree with everything I have to 
say. I defend an Aristotelian proof of God’s existence, but not Aristotle’s 
own proof, exactly; an Augustinian proof, but not an exegesis of any­
thing Augustine himself actually wrote; and so forth. And I do not set 
out any more in the way of background metaphysics than is abso­
lutely necessary before getting into the proofs. As far I am able, I 
introduce the relevant background metaphysical principles along the 
way, in the course of their application to natural theology.
Each of the first five chapters of the book is devoted to one of the 
proofs, and each of these chapters has the following structure. First, 
I present what I characterize as an informal statement of the argu­
ment, in two stages. In stage i, I argue for the existence of something 
fitting a certain key description, such as (for example) the description 
“ an uncaused cause of the existence of things” . In stage 2, 1 argue that any­
thing fitting the description in question must have certain key divine 
attributes, such as unity, eternity, immateriality, omnipotence, omni­
science, and perfect goodness. These presentations are “informal” in 
the sense that the arguments are not initially set out in the explicit 
step-by-step format beloved of contemporary analytic philosophers, 
but rather in a more discursive and leisurely way. The reasons for this 
procedure are that I want to make it as easy as possible for readers 
unfamiliar with philosophy to get into and understand the arguments, 
and also that I need at various points temporarily to digress into more 
general issues of metaphysics so as to make clear exactly what is going 
on in the proofs and to forestall potential misunderstandings or irrel­
evant objections. To be sure, the discussion does at times get pretty 
technical. But the aim, in the earlier parts of each of these chapters, is

12
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
to introduce the reader to these technicalities as gently as is feasible. 
I want the book to be of interest not only to academic philosophers, 
but also, as far as possible, to laymen who are willing and able to get 
into philosophical abstractions if they are given the chance to ease into 
them gradually. Though we end up, in every chapter, in the deepest 
part of the deep end of the pool, I always try to start at the shallow­
est part of the shallow end that I can. (As the reader will discover, this 
is easier to do with some arguments than with others.)
The next section of each of these chapters contains what I charac­
terize as a more formal statement of the argument. Here I do set out 
the arguments in an explicit step-by-step manner, with the aim of 
making the logical structure of the reasoning as evident as possible, 
and of recapitulating in a crisp and clear way the Une of thought that 
the reader will have worked through in a more informal and leisurely 
way in the preceding discussion. None of these more formal sections 
is meant to stand alone. The reader may not understand them prop­
erly if he has not first read the more informal sections that precede 
them, which slowly and carefully explain the significance of each 
of the key concepts deployed in the more formal statement. But the 
more formal statement should make it clear in each case how every­
thing said in the more informal preceding discussion ties together. 
Finally, each of these chapters concludes with a long section address­
ing various objections which have been or might be raised against the 
argument developed in the chapter. These sections are in some cases 
where the most technical material appears.
More specifically, the content of each of these first five chapters is 
as follows. Chapter i defends what I call the Aristotelian proof of the 
existence of God. It begins with the fact that there is real change in 
the world, analyzes change as the actualization of potential, and argues 
that no potential could be actualized at all unless there is something 
which can actualize without itself being actualized— a “purely actual 
actualizer” or Unmoved Mover, as Aristotle characterized God. Aris­
totle developed an argument of this sort in book 8 of his Physics and 
book 12 of his Metaphysics. Later Aristotehans such as Maimonides 
and Aquinas developed their own versions— the first of Aquinas’ Five 
Ways being one statement of such an argument. These earlier writers 
expressed the argument in terms of archaic scientific notions such as 
the movement of the heavenly spheres, but as modern Aristotelians

INTRODUCTION
13
have shown, the essential kernel of the argument in no way depends 
on this outdated husk. Chapter 1 aims to present the core idea of the 
argument as it might be developed by an Aristotle, Maimonides, or 
Aquinas were they writing today.
Chapter 2 defends what I call the Neo-Platonic proof of God’s exis­
tence. It begins with the fact that the things of our experience are 
in various ways composite or made up of parts, and argues that the 
ultimate cause of such things can only be something which is abso­
lutely simple or noncomposite, what Plotinus called “ the One” . The 
core idea of such an argument can be found in Plotinus’ Enneads, and 
Aquinas gave expression to it as well. Indeed, the notion of divine 
simplicity is absolutely central to the classical theist conception of 
God, though strangely neglected by contemporary writers on natural 
theology, theists no less than atheists. Among the aims of this book 
is to help restore it to its proper place.
Chapter 3 defends an Augustinian proof of God’s existence. It begins 
by arguing that universals (redness, humanness, triangularity, etc.), 
propositions, possibilities, and other abstract objects are in some sense 
real, but rejects Plato’s conception of such objects as existing in a 
“ third realm” distinct from any mind and distinct from the world of 
particular things. The only possible ultimate ground of these objects, 
the argument concludes, is a divine intellect— the mind of God. This 
idea too has its roots in Neo-Platonic thought, was central to Saint 
Augustine’s understanding of God, and was defended by Leibniz as 
well. This book puts forward a more detailed and systematic statement 
of the argument than (as far as I know) has been attempted before.
Chapter 4 defends the Thomistic proof of God’s existence. It begins 
by arguing that for any of the contingent things of our experience, 
there is a real distinction between its essence (what the thing is) and 
its existence (the fact that it is). It then argues that nothing in which 
there is such a real distinction could exist even for an instant unless 
caused to exist by something in which there is no such distinction, 
something the very essence ofwhich just is existence, and which can 
therefore impart existence without having to receive it— an uncaused 
cause of the existence of things. Aquinas presented an argument of 
this sort in his little book On Being and Essence, and many Thom- 
ists have regarded it as the paradigmatically Thomistic argument for 
God’s existence.

14
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Chapter 5 defends a rationalist proof of the existence of God. The 
proof begins with a defense of the principle of sufficient reason (PSR), 
according to which everything is intelligible or has an explanation 
for why it exists and has the attributes it has. It then argues that there 
cannot be an explanation of the existence of any of the contingent 
things of our experience unless there is a necessary being, the exis­
tence of which is explained by its own nature. This sort of argument 
is famously associated with Leibniz, but the version of it I defend 
departs from Leibniz in several ways and interprets the key ideas in 
an Aristotelian-Thomistic way. (Hence, while it is definitely “ratio­
nalist” insofar as it is committed to a version of PSR and to the thesis 
that the world is intelligible through and through, it is not “ rational­
ist” in other common senses of that term. For example, it is in no 
way committed to the doctrine of innate ideas or other aspects of the 
epistemology associated with continental rationalist philosophers like 
Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz. And its interpretation of PSR  differs 
in key respects from theirs.)
Having presented these five proofs of God’s existence, I move on 
in chapter 6 to examine God’s nature and the nature of his relationship 
to the world of which he is the cause. These issues will already have 
been addressed to a considerable extent in the preceding chapters, but 
chapter 6 examines them in greater depth and more systematically. It 
begins with exposition and defense of three key background princi­
ples: the principle of proportionate causality, according to which whatever 
is in an effect must in some sense preexist in its total cause; the principle 
agere sequitur esse, according to which the way a thing behaves or oper­
ates follows from what it is; and the Thomist account of the analogical 
use of language. It then deploys these principles, first, in deriving the 
various divine attributes and addressing philosophical questions and 
objections that have been raised vis-à-vis these attributes. The chapter 
shows, to start with, that it is one and the same God at which each of the 
five proofs arrives, and that there can in principle only be one God. 
Having thereby established God’s unity, the chapter goes on to show 
that to God we must also attribute simplicity, immutability, immate­
riality, incorporeality, eternity, necessity, omnipotence, omniscience, 
perfect goodness, will, love, and incomprehensibility.
The chapter then expounds and defends the doctrine of divine con­
servation, according to which the world could not exist even for an

INTRODUCTION
15
instant if God were not continually sustaining it in being; and the 
doctrine of divine concurrence, according to which no created thing could 
have any causal efficacy if God were not imparting causal power to it 
at any moment at which it acts. Along the way it is shown that these 
and other arguments rule out conceptions of God’s relationship to 
the world such as pantheism, panentheism, occasionalism, and deism. 
Chapter 6 ends with a discussion of what a miracle is and the sense 
in which God might cause miracles. (Those issues, as the reader will 
see, are crucial to determining whether there could be a source of 
knowledge about God outside of natural theology, in some special 
divine revelation— though whether any such revelation has occurred 
is a question beyond the scope of this book.)
Finally, chapter 7 addresses various criticisms of natural theology. 
These too will already have been dealt with to a considerable extent 
in the preceding chapters, but the aim of chapter 7 is both to address 
some objections not considered in earlier chapters, and to examine 
in even greater depth some of the objections that were considered in 
the earlier chapters. By the end of the chapter, and thus the end of the 
book, it will be clear that none of the objections against arguments 
of the sort defended in this book succeeds, and indeed that the most 
common objections are staggeringly feeble and overrated.
That is a confident claim, I realize. But natural theology, his­
torically, was a confident discipline. A long fine of thinkers from 
the beginnings of Western thought down to the present day—  
Aristotelians, Neo-Platonists, Thomists and other Scholastics, early 
modem rationalists, and philosophers of some other schools too, 
whether pagans, Jews, Christians, Muslims, or philosophical theists—  
have affirmed that God’s existence can be rationally demonstrated 
by purely philosophical arguments. The aim of this book is to show 
that they were right, that what long was the mainstream position in 
Western thought ought to be the mainstream position again. The real 
debate is not between atheism and theism. The real debate is between 
theists of different stripes—Jews, Christians, Muslims, Hindus, purely 
philosophical theists, and so forth— and begins where natural theol­
ogy leaves off. This book does not enter into, much less settle, that 
latter debate. I will be satisfied if it contributes to getting us back to 
the point from which the deepest questions can be addressed.


I
The Aristotelian Proof
Informal statement o f the argument: Stage i
Change occurs. Examples are all around us. The coffee in your cup grows 
cooler. A leaf on the tree outside your window fells to the ground. A 
puddle grows larger as the rain continues. You swat a fly and it dies.
These examples illustrate four kinds of change: qualitative change 
(the coffee cools down); change with respect to location (the leaf falls 
from the tree); quantitative change (the puddle increases in size); and 
substantial change (a living thing gives way to dead matter). That 
changes of these sorts occur is evident from our sensory experience 
of the world outside our minds.
But suppose our senses are deceiving us. Suppose your entire life has 
been one long dream or hallucination, of the sort Descartes described 
in his Meditations and which has been dramatized in science fiction 
films like The Matrix. Still, there would be no doubt even in this far­
fetched scenario that change occurs. You have one experience, then 
another. You consider whether you are dreaming or hallucinating, 
then dismiss the idea as too silly to bother with, and then find that you 
are still troubled by the arguments you read in Descartes and wonder 
whether there might be something to them after all. That is a kind of 
change— change with respect to your thoughts and experiences.
Yet, might even those changes be a kind of illusion? After all, 
the Greek philosopher Parmenides notoriously argued that when 
we carefully analyze what change of any sort would have to involve, we 
will see that it is impossible. Consider once again your coffee, which 
starts out hot and after sitting on the desk for a while grows cold. You
17

ι8
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
might say that the coldness of the coffee, which does not exist while 
the coffee is hot, comes into existence. But now we have a problem, 
says Parmenides. For if the coldness of the coffee was initially nonex­
istent, then at that point it was nothing; and when it later comes into 
existence, it is then something. But something can’t come from noth­
ing. So, the coldness of the coffee cannot come into existence, and 
thus, the coffee cannot grow cold. Something similar could be said 
for any purported case of change— all of them would have to involve 
something coming from nothing, which is impossible. Hence, con­
cludes Parmenides, change cannot ever really occur.
Perhaps you suspect there is something fishy about this argument, 
and if so, you would be right. One problem is that no one could 
possibly coherently accept it. Suppose you try to convince someone, 
even if only yourself, that change is an illusion—whether via Par­
menides’ argument or some other argument. You work your way 
through each step until you or your listener is convinced. Yet that 
your mind entertains one premise after the other and finally reaches 
the conclusion is itself an instance of the change the argument denies. 
The very act of casting doubt on whether change occurs presup­
poses that it occurs.
There is another problem with Parmenides’ argument. As the later 
Greek philosopher Aristotle pointed out, it is a mistake to think that 
change would have to involve something coming from nothing. Go 
back to the coffee. It is true that while the coffee is hot, the coldness 
is not actually present. Still, it is there potentially in a way other quali­
ties are not. The coffee does not, after all, have the potential to fuel a 
gasoline engine, or to turn itself into chicken soup, or for that matter 
to morph into a five chicken and begin squawking. But it does have 
the potential to grow cold, and it has various other potentials too— to 
make you more alert if you drink it, to stain the floor if you spill it, 
and so forth. That it has the potential to become cold while lacking 
certain other potentials shows that the coldness is not exactly nothing, 
even if it is not yet actual either.
What change involves, then, is for Aristotle the actualization of 
a potential. The coffee has the potential to become cold, and after 
sitting out for a while that potential is made actual. This is not a 
case of something coming from nothing—which, Aristotle agrees, is 
impossible— because, again, a potential is not nothing.

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
19
So, change occurs. Everyday experience shows that it does, and a 
little philosophical reflection not only reinforces this judgment but 
explains what change involves. But how does change occur? That 
depends on the change, of course. The coffee’s getting cold is not the 
same kind of process as the falling of the leaf, the puddle’s growing 
large, or the fly’s being swatted. Still, whatever sort of change is in 
question, there will be something or other that brings it about.
Change requires a changer. We find examples all around us in every­
day experience. The cool air in the room brings the temperature of 
the coffee down. A flick of your wrist brings the flyswatter down 
on the fly. But the thesis that change requires a changer is not merely 
a generalization from instances like these. It follows from what change 
is: the actualization of a potential. We saw that while the coffee is 
still hot, the coldness of the coffee is not exactly nothing, since it 
is there potentially in the coffee in a way other qualities are not. But 
it is still there merely potentially and not actually, otherwise the coffee 
would be cold already, even while it is hot, which of course it isn’t. 
Now potential coldness can hardly do anything, precisely because it is 
merely potential. Only what is actual can do anything. In particular, 
the potential coldness of the coffee cannot make itself actual. Only 
something already actual can do that— the coolness in the surround­
ing air, or perhaps some ice cubes you might drop into the coffee. 
In general, any mere potential can only be actualized by something 
that is already actual. In that sense, any change requires a changer of 
some sort or other.
So, change occurs, and any change requires a cause; or to put it 
less colloquially but more precisely, some potentials are actualized, 
and when they are, there must be something already actual which 
actualizes them. Now, notice that often what is true of the thing 
being changed is also true of the thing changing it. The coolness of 
the air in the room makes the coffee cold. But the coolness of the 
air was itself merely potential until the air conditioner actualized it. 
The flick of your wrist causes the flyswatter to come down hard, and 
its impact in turn kills the fly. But the flick of your wrist was itself 
merely potential until the firing of certain motor neurons actualized 
it. So, when something causes a change, that is sometimes because it 
is undergoing a change itself; and when that is the case, that change 
too requires a changer. Or, once again to put things less colloquially

20
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
but more precisely, sometimes when a potential is being actualized, 
what actualizes it is itself something which has gone from potential to 
actual; and when that is the case, there must have been some further 
thing which made that happen.
Notice that I did not say that everything which causes a change must 
be undergoing change itself That does not follow from anything 
said so far, and as we will see, it is not true. The point is rather that 
if something which causes a change is undergoing change itself, then 
that change requires a changer of its own. So, we sometimes have 
a series of changers and things changed. The coldness of the coffee 
was caused by the coolness in the surrounding air, which was caused 
by the air conditioner, which was caused to switch on when you 
pressed the appropriate button. The fly was killed by the impact of 
the flyswatter, which was caused by the flick of your wrist, which was 
caused by the firing of certain motor neurons, which was caused by 
your annoyance at the fly’s buzzing around the room. One potential 
was actualized by another, which was in turn actualized by another, 
which was actualized by yet another.
So far this has all been common sense supplemented with some 
semitechnical jargon. But the jargon will help us to move beyond 
common sense— not to contradict it, but rather to follow out its 
implications. Consider next that series of changes of the sort we’ve 
described typically extend backward in time, in what we might think 
of as a linear fashion. The coffee is cold because the air in the room 
cooled it, the air was cold because of the air conditioner, the air 
conditioner went on because you pressed a certain button, and so 
forth. Now let’s suppose for the sake of argument that this series 
extends backward into the past to infinity, without a beginning. 
You pressed the button, your desire to cool down the room caused 
you to do that, the effect of the room’s heat on your skin brought 
about that desire, the sun generated that heat, and so on and on and 
on without there being any temporally first member of this series of 
changes and changers. The material world, we are supposing, has 
always been here, and has always been changing. That, as it happens, 
is what Aristotle himself thought.
Now these days it is often supposed that the Big Bang theory 
shows that he was wrong. On the other hand, some scientists have 
suggested that the Big Bang was itself the result of an earlier universe

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
21
imploding, or perhaps involved our universe branching off from 
some other, parallel universe. It is also sometimes suggested that the 
series of such preexisting universes is infinite, so that even if our par­
ticular universe had a beginning, the series as a whole did not. This is 
all very dubious, but whether it is true or not simply doesn’t matter 
for our purposes. Again, let us grant for the sake of argument that the 
universe, or a “ multiverse” comprising our universe together with 
other universes, has no beginning but has always existed.
Even if such linear series of changes and changers might in theory 
extend backward to infinity, with no first member, there is another 
kind of series— let us call it the hierarchical kind—which must have a 
first member. Remember that we were thinking of a linear series as 
extending backward in time— the coffee got cold because the room 
was cool, the room was cool because the air conditioner had made it 
so, you had switched on the air conditioner because you didn’t like 
the heat, the heat had been generated by the sun, and so forth. To 
understand what a hierarchical series is, it will be useful, by contrast, 
to think instead of what might exist at a single moment of time. This 
is not in fact essential to a hierarchical series, but it is a useful way to 
introduce the idea.
So, consider, once again, the coffee cup as it sits on your desk. It is, 
we may suppose, three feet above the floor. Why? Because the desk 
is holding it up, naturally. But what holds the desk up? The floor, of 
course. The floor, in turn, is held up by the foundation of the house, 
and the foundation of the house by the earth. Now, unlike the cof­
fee being cooled by the surrounding air, which is in turn cooled by 
the air conditioner, and so forth, this is not a series which need be 
thought of as extending backward in time. O f course, the cup may in 
fact have been sitting there on the desk for hours. But the point is that 
even if we consider the cup as it sits there at some particular moment, 
it is sitting there at that moment only because the desk is holding it 
up at that moment, and the desk is holding it up at that moment only 
because it is in turn being held up, at that same moment, by the floor. 
Or consider the lamp above your head, which is held up by a chain, 
which is in turn held up by the fixture screwed into the ceiling, all 
at the same moment. In both cases we have what I have called a 
hierarchical series of causes, in the first case tracing downward to the 
ground and in the other case upward to the ceiling.

22
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Now since we are considering each of these hierarchical series as 
existing at a particular moment of time rather than over the course 
of minutes or hours, it might seem odd to think of them as involving 
change. But our consideration of the nature of change led us to intro­
duce the idea of actualizing a potential, and each of these series does 
involve that. The potential of the cup to be three feet off the ground 
is actualized by the desk, the potential of the desk to hold the cup 
aloft is actualized by the floor, and so forth. Similarly, the potential of 
the lamp to be seven feet from the ground is actualized by the chain, 
and the potential of the chain to hold the lamp aloft is actualized by 
the fixture screwed into the ceiling.
What makes these series hierarchical in the relevant sense, though, 
is not that they are simultaneous, but that there is a certain sort of 
dependence of the later members on the earlier ones. The cup has no 
capacity on its own to be three feet from the ground; it will be there 
only if something else, such as the desk, holds it up. But the desk in 
turn has no power on its own to hold the cup there. The desk too 
would fall to the earth unless the floor held it aloft, and the floor, 
for that matter, can hold up the desk only because it is itself being 
held up by the house’s foundation, and the foundation by the earth. 
Similarly, the lamp can hang there at seven feet off the ground only 
because the chain is holding it there, while the chain can hold it 
there only because it is in turn being held up by the fixture and the 
fixture by the ceiling. The ceiling, however, can hold up the fixture 
only because it is itself being held up by the walls, which are also 
held up by the foundation, which is held up by the earth. So, you 
might say that it is really the earth that is holding up both the cup 
and the lamp, and that it is doing so through these intermediaries. 
The desk, chain, walls, and floor have no power to hold anything 
up except insofar as they derive that power from the earth. They are 
in that sense like instruments. Just as it is not a brush which paints a 
picture but rather the painter who uses the brush as an instrument 
who paints it, so too is it the earth which holds up the cup and the 
lamp, with the floor, walls, desk, chain, and so forth serving, as it 
were, as its instruments.
What makes a hierarchical series of causes hierarchical, then, is 
this instrumental or derivative character of the later members of the 
series. The desk will hold the cup aloft only so long as it is itself being

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
23
held up by the floor. If the floor collapses, the desk will go with it and 
the cup will fall as a result. The members of a linear series are not like 
that. The air conditioner is on because you turned it on. Still, once 
you’ve done so, the air conditioner will keep cooling the room even 
if you left the house or dropped dead.
Now, it is because of this difference that a hierarchical series of 
causes has to have a first member while a linear series does not. But 
it is crucial to understand what “first” means in this context. As has 
already been indicated, the idea of a hierarchical series is best intro­
duced by thinking in terms of a sequence whose members exist all 
together at a single moment of time, such as the cup which is held 
up by the desk which is held up by the floor. So, when it is said that 
such a series must have a first member, the claim is not that the series 
has to be traced back to some beginning point in the past (at the Big 
Bang, say).
The idea is rather this. Since the desk, the floor, and the foun­
dation have no power of their own to hold the cup aloft, the series 
could not exist in the first place unless there were something that did 
have the power to hold up these intermediaries, and the cup through 
them, without having to be held up itself. You might say that if the 
desk, floor, walls, and so forth are acting like instruments of a sort, 
then there must, as it were, be something whose instruments they 
are. Or to put the point another way, if they have only derivative 
power to hold things up, then there must be something from which 
they derive it, something which does not have to derive it from 
anything else in turn but just has it “built in” . The sort of “first” 
cause that a hierarchical series must have, then, is a cause that has the 
power to produce its effects in a wowderivative and nomnstrumental 
way. In the case of the cup, where the desk holds it up only because 
it derives its power to do so from the floor, and the floor from the 
foundation, none of these things could hold up anything at all unless 
there were something which holds them up without having to be 
held up itself.
Now it was suggested above that we could think of the earth as the 
“ first” cause in this series, since there is an obvious sense in which it 
holds up the floor, walls, desk, cup, and lamp, while nothing is hold­
ing the earth itself up. In fact even the earth is not a “ first” cause in 
the strict sense, but we’ll come back to that. The point to emphasize

24
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
for now is that it is being the sort of thing that has nonderived causal 
power—being the sort of thing that can actualize a potential without 
itself having to be actualized— that makes something a “first” cause in 
the sense relevant to understanding a hierarchical series of causes. 
As I have already said, being “first” in a temporal sense, in the sense 
of coming at some beginning point in time, is not what is at issue. 
But even the idea of a series of causes that is only finitely rather than 
infinitely long is not essential to the notion of a hierarchical causal 
series. To take an example sometimes used to illustrate the point, a 
paintbrush has no power to move itself, and it would remain power­
less to move itself even if its handle were infinitely long. Hence, even 
if there could be an infinitely long brush handle, if it is actually going 
to move, there will still have to be something outside it which does 
have the “built-in” power to cause it to move. Or to return to our 
own example, a desk has no power all on its own to hold up the cup, 
and thus an infinite series of desks, if there could be such a thing, 
would be as powerless to hold it up as a single desk would be. Hence, 
even if such a series existed, there would have to be something out­
side it which could impart to it the power to hold up the cup. When 
we say that a hierarchical series of causes has to have a first member, 
then, we don’t mean “first” in the sense of being the one that comes 
before the second, third, fourth, fifth, and so on. We mean it is the 
first cause in the sense that it has inherent or built-in causal power 
while the others have only derived causal power. It is their having 
only derivative causal power that makes the other members second­
ary rather than first or primary.
Let us pause to take stock, because things have gotten a bit abstract. 
We started out by noting that there can be no doubt that change 
occurs, and that change can occur only if things have potentials which 
can be actualized. We also saw that any change requires a changer 
in the sense that whenever a potential is actualized, there must be 
something already actual that actualizes it. Having introduced this 
distinction between what is potential and what is actual, we went on 
to make a further distinction between two kinds of series in which 
one potential is actualized by another, which is actualized by another. 
The first sort, which we called a linear series, is the sort we usually 
imagine when we think of change. It was illustrated by the coffee 
being cooled by the surrounding air in the room, which was itself

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
25
cooled by the air conditioner, which was turned as a result of your 
having pressed a certain button, and so forth. In this sort of series, the 
members have their own causal power. After you have turned it on, 
the air conditioner can continue to cool the room even after you are 
no longer present. Even the air will remain cool for some time after 
the air conditioner is turned off, and will therefore retain the power 
to cool down the coffee.
What we called a hierarchical series of causes is very different. Here 
every cause other than the first has its causal power only in a deriv­
ative way. Thus the desk, floor, and foundation have no power to 
hold aloft the coffee cup except insofar as they derive it from the 
earth this whole series rests on. This takes us beyond what we would 
ordinarily think of as change, because we would ordinarily think of 
the sequence of the cup, desk, floor, foundation, and earth as simul­
taneous. But what matters is that we do still have the actualization of 
potentials, the notion of which was introduced as a way of making 
sense of change. The potential of the cup to be three feet off the 
ground is actualized by the desk, the desk’s potential to hold the cup 
aloft is actualized by the floor, and so forth.
Now it is this second, hierarchical sort of series that ultimately 
concerns us here, for it is more fundamental to reality than the other 
linear sort of series is.1 To be sure, it is at first easier for us to rec­
ognize and understand the linear sort of series, because the kinds of 
change it involves are familiar to us from everyday experience. By 
contrast, introducing the notion of a hierarchical series required us 
first to abstract from this everyday experience the notion of actualiz­
ing a potential, and then to apply that notion to a context to which 
the passage of time is not essential. But once we have done that, 
we can see that every series of the linear sort presupposes series of 
the hierarchical sort. We can see that to understand the changes we 
observe all around us in everyday life— coffee getting cold, the fly 
being swatted, and so on— we need to understand how hierarchical 
series trace down to first causes. To a single first cause, in fact. 1
1 What I am here calling the distinction between a linear causal series and a hierarchi­
cal causal series is also sometimes characterized as the distinction between a series o f causes 
ordered per accidens or accidentally, and a series of causes ordered per se or essentially. For 
further discussion, see Edward Feser, Scholastic Metaphysics: A  Contemporary Introduction (Heu­
senstamm: Editiones Scholasticae, 2014), pp. 148-54.

2 6
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
How so? Go back to the coffee in the cup. To state the obvious, 
it can only get cold, or be held up by the desk, if it exists; nonexis­
tent coffee cannot do either, or anything else for that matter. Now, 
what makes it the case that the coffee exists? Obviously someone 
made it by pouring hot water through coffee grounds, but that’s not 
what I’m asking about. I mean, what makes it true that the coffee 
exists here and now, and at any particular moment that it exists? What 
keeps it in existence?
For one thing, the coffee will exist only insofar as the water that 
makes up the bulk of it exists, so to simplify things somewhat let’s 
consider that. What keeps the water in existence at any particular 
moment? After all, given the chemistry of the water, the matter that 
makes it up also has the potential to exist instead as distinct quantities 
of oxygen and hydrogen. But that is not the potential that is being 
actualized right now; instead, it is that matter’s potential to exist as 
water that is being actualized right now. Why? It is no good to answer 
that such-and-such a process occurred at some time in the past so as 
to combine the hydrogen and oxygen in just the right way. That tells 
us how the water got here, but that is not what we are asking about. 
It is also no good to point out that nothing has yet come along to 
separate out the hydrogen and oxygen. That tells us how the water 
might someday go out of existence, but that isn’t what we’re asking 
about either. What we’re asking about, again, is what keeps the water 
in existence at any instant at which it does in fact exist.
You might say that it has to do with chemical bonding between 
atoms, but that merely rephrases rather than answers the question. 
For the atoms have the potential to be bonded in other ways, and 
yet they are not so bonded. It is their potential to be bonded in such 
a way that water results that is in fact being actualized. Again, why? 
Appealing to the structure of the atom won’t answer the question 
either, but merely pushes it back a stage. For why are the subatomic 
particles combined in just the specific way they are, here and now, 
rather than some other way? What is it that actualizes that poten­
tial rather than another?
What we have here, as you may have noticed, is something like 
the cup which is held up by the desk which is held up by the floor. 
Only in this case it is the very existence of a thing that is at issue rather 
than merely its particular location. The potential of the coffee to exist

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
27
here and now is actualized, in part, by the existence of the water, 
which in turn exists only because a certain potential of the atoms is 
being actualized, where these atoms themselves exist only because a 
certain potential of the subatomic particles is being actualized. This 
is a hierarchical series— one which, as we have seen, must have a first 
member. We have also seen that what it means for such a series to 
have a first member is that there is something which can impart causal 
power to the other members of the series without having to have 
that power imparted to it— something that has its causal power in a 
“built-in” or nonderivative way. Now since what is being explained 
in this case is the actualization of a thing’s potential for existence, the 
sort of “first” cause we are talking about is one which can actualize 
the potential for other things to exist without having to have its own 
existence actualized by anything.
What this entails is that this cause doesn’t have any potential for 
existence that needs to be actualized in the first place. It just is actual, 
always and already actual, as it were. Indeed, you might say that it 
doesn’t merely have actuality, the way the things it actualizes do, 
but that it just is pure actuality itself. It doesn’t merely happen not to 
have a cause of its own, but could not in principle have had or needed 
one. For being devoid of potentiality, there is nothing in it that 
could have needed any actualizing, the way other things do. It is in 
this sense that it is an uncaused cause, or to use Aristotle’s famous 
expression, an Unmoved Mover. More precisely, we might call it an 
unactualized actualizer.
Notice that we reached this result by beginning with ordinary 
individual objects and processes, such as a coffee cup and the cool­
ing down of the coffee within it. We didn’t start by asking where 
the universe as a whole came from, and we need not start with any 
claim about the universe as a whole in order to get to an unactual­
ized actualizer. But what we have said has implications for the uni­
verse as a whole. For what is true of the water in the coffee is true of 
every other material thing— the leaf that fell from the tree, the fly 
you swatted, and so on and on. Every material thing is such that it 
can exist at any moment only if certain potentials are actualized. 
Hence, it is ultimately such that, like the water in the coffee, it can 
exist at any moment only insofar as it is caused to exist by an unac­
tualized actualizer.

28
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
As I have said, we reached this result from a consideration of 
everyday phenomena, but things have gotten even more abstract, so 
let’s briefly retrace our steps. We started with the observation that 
change occurs and saw that this cannot coherently be denied. We 
then saw that change can occur only if the things that change have 
potentials which can be actualized— the potential to be cooled down, 
the potential to grow in size, or what have you— since change is 
just the actualization of a potential. And we saw that change requires 
a changer insofar as a potential can be actualized only by something 
already actual. Now, we then noted that there are, on the one hand, 
series of changes of what we called a linear sort, the kind illustrated 
by the coffee which was cooled by the air which was cooled by 
the air conditioner which was switched on when you pressed a but­
ton. That kind of series does not require a first member. But we also 
saw that there is another kind of series in which one potential is actu­
alized by another which is in turn actualized by another, in which 
there must be a first member. In this hierarchical sort of series, the first 
member is “first” in the sense that it can cause other things without 
being caused itself. It has its causal power in a primary, inherent, or 
“built-in” way, whereas the other members of the series have their 
causal power in only a secondary, derivative way.
We saw next that linear series of changes are less fundamental than 
the hierarchical sort of series. For things can change only because they 
exist— the coffee, for example, cannot grow cold unless it exists—  
and for a thing to exist at any particular moment requires that it be 
actualized at that moment, at least if it is the sort of thing which has 
the potential either to exist or not to exist. This, in turn, is possible 
only if there is a cause of the existence of a thing which can actualize 
its potential for existence without having to be actualized itself—a 
purely actual actualizer of the thing’s existence.2 And we saw that this
2 Yo u  will recall that the way I characterized the situation in the example given earlier is 
that something has to actualize the potential o f the relevant atoms to be bonded in such a 
way that water results. That makes it sound as if the water is nothing but an aggregate o f the 
atoms. In fact, on the Aristotelian hylemorphic understanding o f material substance, the water 
is not such an aggregate, because the atoms exist only “ virtually” rather than “ actually” in the 
water. Metaphysically speaking, the fundamental constituents o f the water are not the atoms, 
but rather the water’s substantial form and prime matter. But Aristotelian hylemorphism is 
controversial, and I refrained from putting things in terms o f it, because doing so is not

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
29
conclusion can be generalized, insofar as what is true of the coffee in 
our example is going to be true of any other material thing as well. 
So, from the fact that change occurs we are led to conclude that there 
is an unactualized actualizer or Unmoved Mover.
Informal statement of the argument: Stage 2
In other words, the undeniable reality of change entails the existence 
of God. Why call the unactualized actualizer or Unmoved Mover 
“ God” ? For one thing, this cause is, among other things, the ultimate 
cause of the existence of things, in the most intimate sense of being 
that which keeps them in existence at any moment at which they 
exist at all. And whatever else God is supposed to be, he is the ulti­
mate cause of things.
For another thing, various further attributes definitive of God as 
traditionally conceived follow from what has already been said. We 
will in a later chapter see how in some detail, but for the moment a 
brief sketch will suffice to convey the general idea. First of all, since 
the cause of things is pure actuality and therefore devoid of potenti­
ality, it cannot go from potentiality to actuality and is thus immutable 
or unchanging. Since existing within time entails changeability, an 
immutable cause must also be eternal in the sense of existing outside 
of time altogether. It neither comes to be nor passes away but simply 
is, timelessly, without beginning or end. Since to be material entails 
being changeable and existing within time, an immutable and eter­
nal cause must be immaterial and thus incorporeal or without any sort 
of body.
Consider now what it is for a thing to be in some respect or 
other imperfect or flawed. An injured animal or damaged plant is 
imperfect insofar as it is no longer capable of realizing fully the ends
necessary to the argument. But naturally, we could state the point in hylemorphist terms 
instead if we wanted to. For on the Aristotelian analysis, the prime matter o f a material 
substance depends for its concrete existence on the substance’s substantial form, and the sub­
stantial form depends for its concrete existence on being realized in prime matter. Thus, we 
would have an explanatory vicious circle unless there were something outside the form- 
matter composite that actualizes it or keeps it in being. (See Feser, Scholastic Metaphysics, 
chap. 3, for detailed exposition and defense o f the Aristotelian analysis o f substance.)

30
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
its nature has set for it. For instance, a squirrel which has been hit 
by a car may be unable to run away from predators as swiftly as it 
needs to; and a tree whose roots have been damaged may be unsta­
ble or unable to take in all the water and nutrients it needs in order 
to remain healthy. A defect of this sort is (to use some traditional 
philosophical jargon) a privation, the absence of some feature a thing 
would naturally require so as to be complete. It involves the failure 
to realize some potential inherent in a thing. Something is perfect, 
then, to the extent that it has actualized such potentials and is with­
out privations. But then a purely actual cause of things, precisely 
since it is purely actual and thus devoid of unrealized potentiality or 
privation, possesses maximal perfection.
Could there be more than one such cause? There could not, not 
even in principle. For there can be two or more of a kind only if 
there is something to differentiate them, something that one instance 
has that the others lack. And there can be no such differentiating fea­
ture where something purely actual is concerned. Thus, we typically 
distinguish the things of our experience by their material or temporal 
features— by one thing being larger or smaller than another, say, or 
taller or shorter than another, or existing at a time before or after 
another. But since what is purely actual is immaterial and eternal, one 
purely actual thing could not be differentiated from another in terms 
of such features. More generally, two or more things of a kind are 
to be differentiated in terms of some perfection or privation that one 
has and the other lacks. We might say, for instance, that this tree’s 
roots are more sturdy than that one’s, or that this squirrel is lacking 
its tail while the other has its tail. But as we have seen, what is purely 
actual is completely devoid of any privation and is maximal in per­
fection. Hence, there can be no way in principle to differentiate one 
purely actual cause from another in terms of their respective perfec­
tions or privations. But then such a cause possesses the attribute of 
unity— that is to say, there cannot be, even in principle, more than one 
purely actual cause. Hence, it is the same one unactualized actualizer 
to which all things owe their existence.
Consider now that to have power is just to be able to make some­
thing happen, to actualize some potential. But then, since the cause 
of the existence of all things is pure actuality itself rather than merely

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
31
one actual thing among others, and it is the source of all the actualiz­
ing power anything else has, it has all possible power. It is omnipotent. 
Consider further that a thing is good, in a general sense, to the extent 
that it realizes the potentials inherent in it as the kind of thing it is, 
and bad to the extent that it fails to realize them. A good painter, 
for example, is good to the extent that he has realized his poten­
tial for mastery of the various aspects of painting— craftsmanship, 
composition, and so forth— while a bad painter is bad to the extent 
that he has failed to acquire the relevant skills. But a purely actual 
cause of the world, devoid as it is of potentiality, cannot be said to be 
bad or deficient in any way, but on the contrary (as we have seen) to 
be perfect. In that sense such a cause must be fully good.
So far, then, we have seen that the purely actual actualizer or 
Unmoved Mover must be one, immutable, eternal, immaterial, incorpo­
real, perfect, omnipotent, and fully good cause of the existence of things, 
in the sense of being that which keeps all things in being from moment 
to moment. Can we attribute attributes of a more personal nature to 
this cause? For instance, can we attribute to it something like intel­
ligence? We can. But to see how, we must first say something about 
the nature of intelligence, and also something more about the nature 
of cause and effect.
Intelligence, as traditionally understood, involves three basic ca­
pacities. First, there is the capacity to grasp abstract concepts, such as 
the concept man, which is what you have when you not only know 
this or that particular man or this or that particular subset of men, 
but what it is to be a man in general. To have the concept man is to have 
a universal idea that applies to all possible men, not only those that do 
exist or have existed, but also all those that could exist. Second, there 
is the capacity to put these ideas together into complete thoughts, as 
when you combine the concept man and the concept mortal in the 
thought that all men are mortal. Third, there is the capacity to infer 
one thought from others, as when you reason from the premises that 
all men are mortal and Socrates is a man to the conclusion that Socrates is 
mortal. Obviously the capacity to grasp abstract or universal concepts 
is the most fundamental of these three. You couldn’t form complete 
thoughts or reason from one thought to another if you didn’t have 
the concepts that are the constituents of the thoughts.

32
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Now to have such a concept is to have a kind ofform or pattern in 
the mind, and the same form or pattern that exists in the things you 
might think about. There is a form or pattern that all men have that 
makes them all the same thing— namely, men; there is a form or pat­
tern that all triangles have that makes them all the same thing— namely, 
triangles; and so forth. Now when these forms or patterns come to 
exist in material things, the results are the various individual objects—  
individual men, individual triangles, and so forth— that we find in 
the world around us. When we think about men or triangles in gen­
eral, though, we abstract away from all the different particular men 
and triangles, and focus on what is common or universal to them. 
And that is really the essence of strictly intellectual activity— the 
capacity to have the universal or abstract form or pattern of a thing 
without being that kind of thing. A material object that has the form 
or pattern of a triangle just is a triangle. When you contemplate what 
it is to be a triangle, you have that form or pattern of being a triangle 
as well, but without being a triangle.
W e’ll come back to the notion of intelligence in a moment. Let’s 
now say a little more about cause and effect. W e’ve noted that when 
something is either changed or caused to exist, a potential is actual­
ized, and that something already actual must be what actualizes it. 
This is sometimes called the principle of causality. A further point to 
make about cause and effect is that whatever is in some effect must 
in some way or other be in the cause, even if not always in the same 
way. For a cause cannot give what it does not have to give. This is 
sometimes called the principle of proportionate causality.
Suppose, for example, that I give you $20. The effect in this case 
is your having the $20, and I am the cause of this effect. But the 
only way I can cause that effect is if I have the $20 to give you in 
the first place. Now there are several ways in which I might have 
it. I might have a $20 bill in my wallet, or two $10 bills, or four 
$5 bills. Or I may have no money in my wallet, but do have $20 in 
my bank account and write you a check. Or I may not have even 
that, but I am able to borrow the $20 from someone else, or work 
for it, so that I can go on to give it to you. Or perhaps I have a friend 
who has a key to the U.S. Treasury printing press and I get him to 
run off an official $20 bill for me to give to you. Or to take an even 
more farfetched scenario, suppose that in order to guarantee that you

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
33
get that $20 I somehow convince Congress to pass a law which per­
mits me personally to manufacture my own $20 bills. These are all 
various ways in which I might in theory give you $20. But if none of 
these ways are available to me, then I can’t do it.
Again, these are different ways in which the cause may have what 
is in the effect. When I myself have a $20 bill ready to hand and I 
cause you to have it, what is in the effect was in the cause formally, to 
use some traditional jargon. That is to say, I myself was an instance of 
the form or pattern of having a $20 bill, and I caused you to become 
another instance of that form or pattern. When I don’t have the 
$20 bill ready to hand but I do have at least $20 credit in my bank 
account, you might say that what was in the effect was in that case in 
the cause virtually. For though I didn’t actually have the $20 on hand, 
I did have the power to get hold of it. And when I get Congress to 
grant me the power to manufacture $20 bills, you might say (once 
again to use some traditional jargon) that I had the $20 eminently. 
Because in that case, I not only have the power to acquire already- 
existing $20 bills, but the more “ eminent” power of causing them 
to exist in the first place. When it is said, then, that what is in an effect 
must in some way be in its cause, what is meant is that it must be in 
the cause at least “virtually” or “ eminently” even if not “formally” .
Now, consider once again the purely actual actualizer of the exis­
tence of things. We have seen that the existence of anything that 
might exist is going to trace to this one cause. It is the cause of every 
possible thing that might exist. Now to cause a thing to exist is pre­
cisely to cause something of a particular sort—a stone rather than a 
tree, say, or a tree rather than a cat. That is to say, to cause something 
to exist is just to cause something having a certain form or fitting a 
certain pattern. But as we have just said, the purely actual cause of 
things is the cause of every possible thing— every possible cat, every 
possible tree, every possible stone. It is for that reason the cause of 
every possible form or pattern a thing might have. We have also 
noted that whatever is in an effect must in some way or other be in 
its cause.
Put these points together and what follows is that the forms or 
patterns of things must exist in the purely actual cause of things; and 
they must exist in it in a completely universal or abstract way, because 
this cause is the cause of every possible thing fitting a certain form or

34
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
pattern. But to have forms or patterns in this universal or abstract way 
is just to have that capacity which is fundamental to intelligence. Add 
to this consideration the fact that this cause of things is not just the 
cause of things themselves, but of their being related in any way they 
might be related. That is to say, it is not only the cause of men but of 
the fact that all men are mortal; not just the cause of this cat, but of this 
cat’s being on this mat; and so forth. So, there must be some sense in 
which these effects too exist in their purely actual cause, and it must 
be in a way that has to do with the combination of the forms or pat­
terns that exist in that cause. That is to say, the effects must exist in 
the cause in something like the way thoughts exist in us.
So, what exists in the things that the purely actual cause is the cause 
ofpreexists in that cause in something like the way the things we make 
preexist as ideas or plans in our minds before we make them. These 
things thereby exist in that purely actual cause eminently and virtually 
even if not formally. For the cause of things is not itself a cat or a tree 
(and cannot be, given that it is immaterial), but it can cause a cat or a 
tree, or anything else that might exist. But it is not merely intelligence 
that we can therefore attribute to the cause of things. Consider that 
as the intelligent cause of everything that exists or could exist, there is 
nothing that exists or could exist that is not in the range of this cause’s 
thoughts. It is in that sense all-knowing or omniscient.
Now, much more could be said. The topic of the divine attributes 
deserves a chapter of its own, and we will devote a chapter to it later 
on. But this sketch should make it clear enough that we can say 
a great deal about the nature of the cause of things, and in particular a 
great deal to show that this cause really does fit the description of God 
as traditionally conceived.
A  more formal statement of the argument
Let’s briefly summarize. We have seen that it cannot coherently be 
denied that change occurs, and we have noted that change can occur 
only if things have potentials which are actualized by something 
already actual. Hence, the hot coffee has the potential to be cooled, 
and that potential is actualized by the coolness in the surrounding air. 
We have also argued that while a linear series of changes and changers

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
35
might in principle extend backward in time without beginning, the 
members of these series must depend at any moment at which they 
exist on a hierarchical series of actualizes, and that such a series must 
terminate in a purely actual cause or actualizer of their existence. And 
it has now been argued that any such cause must be one, immutable, 
eternal, immaterial, incorporeal, perfect, omnipotent, fully good, intelligent, 
and omniscient—that is to say, it must have the key divine attributes. 
In short, the things of our experience can exist at any moment only 
if sustained in existence by God.
So far, I have stated the argument in an informal and unhurried 
way so as to facilitate understanding, especially among readers not 
used to the technicalities of academic philosophy. But now that the 
overall thrust of the reasoning is clear, it will be useful to have a sum­
mary presented in a somewhat more formal way. It might be stated 
as follows:
1. Change is a real feature of the world.
2. But change is the actualization of a potential.
3. So, the actualization of potential is a real feature of the world.
4. No potential can be actualized unless something already actual 
actualizes it (the principle of causality).
5. So, any change is caused by something already actual.
6. The occurrence of any change C presupposes some thing or 
substance S which changes.
7. The existence of S at any given moment itself presupposes the 
concurrent actualization of S’s potential for existence.
8. So, any substance S has at any moment some actualizer A of 
its existence.
9. A ’s own existence at the moment it actualizes S itself presup­
poses either (a) the concurrent actualization of its own poten­
tial for existence or (b) A ’s being purely actual.
10. If A ’s existence at the moment it actualizes S presupposes the 
concurrent actualization of its own potential for existence, 
then there exists a regress of concurrent actualizes that is 
either infinite or terminates in a purely actual actualizer.
1 1 . But such a regress of concurrent actualizes would constitute 
a hierarchical causal series, and such a series cannot regress 
infinitely.

36
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
12. So, either A  itself is a purely actual actualizer or there is a 
purely actual actualizer which terminates the regress that 
begins with the actualization of A.
13. So, the occurrence of C and thus the existence of S at any 
given moment presupposes the existence of a purely actual 
actualizer.
14. So, there is a purely actual actualizer.
15. In order for there to be more than one purely actual actual­
izer, there would have to be some differentiating feature that 
one such actualizer has that the others lack.
16. But there could be such a differentiating feature only if a 
purely actual actualizer had some unactualized potential, 
which, being purely actual, it does not have.
17. So, there can be no such differentiating feature, and thus no 
way for there to be more than one purely actual actualizer.
18. So, there is only one purely actual actualizer.
19. In order for this purely actual actualizer to be capable of change, 
it would have to have potentials capable of actualization.
20. But being purely actual, it lacks any such potentials.
21. So, it is immutable or incapable of change.
22. If this purely actual actualizer existed in time, then it would be 
capable of change, which it is not.
23. So, this purely actual actualizer is eternal, existing outside of 
time.
24. If the purely actual actualizer were material, then it would be 
changeable and exist in time, which it does not.
25. So, the purely actual actualizer is immaterial.
26. If the purely actual actualizer were corporeal, then it would be 
material, which it is not.
27. So, the purely actual actualizer is incorporeal.
28. If the purely actual actualizer were imperfect in any way, it 
would have some unactualized potential, which, being purely 
actual, it does not have.
29. So, the purely actual actualizer is perfect.
30. For something to be less than fully good is for it to have a 
privation— that is, to fail to actualize some feature proper to it.
31. A purely actual actualizer, being purely actual, can have no 
such privation.
32. So, the purely actual actualizer is fully good.

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
37
33. To have power entails being able to actualize potentials.
34. Any potential that is actualized is either actualized by the 
purely actual actualizer or by a series of actualizes which ter­
minates in the purely actual actualizer.
35. So, all power derives from the purely actual actualizer.
36. But to be that from which all power derives is to be omnipotent.
37. So, the purely actual actualizer is omnipotent.
38. Whatever is in an effect is in its cause in some way, whether 
formally, virtually, or eminently (the principle of proportion­
ate causality).
39. The purely actual actualizer is the cause of all things.
40. So, the forms or patterns manifest in all the things it causes 
must in some way be in the purely actual actualizer.
41. These forms or patterns can exist either in the concrete way 
in which they exist in individual particular things, or in the 
abstract way in which they exist in the thoughts of an intellect.
42. They cannot exist in the purely actual actualizer in the same 
way they exist in individual particular things.
43. So, they must exist in the purely actual actualizer in the abstract 
way in which they exist in the thoughts of an intellect.
44. So, the purely actual actualizer has intellect or intelligence.
45. Since it is the forms or patterns of all things that are in the 
thoughts of this intellect, there is nothing that is outside the 
range of those thoughts.
46. For there to be nothing outside the range of something’s 
thoughts is for that thing to be ominiscient.
47. So, the purely actual actualizer is omniscient.
48. So, there exists a purely actual cause of the existence of things, 
which is one, immutable, eternal, immaterial, incorporeal, 
perfect, fully good, omnipotent, intelligent, and omniscient.
49. But for there to be such a cause of things is just what it is for 
God to exist.
50. So, God exists.
Some objections rebutted
Naturally all sorts of objections are bound to be raised against this 
argument. For example, the derivation of the divine attributes

38
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
presupposes a number of philosophical assumptions which are bound 
to be controversial. Again, I am going to address the question of 
the divine attributes at much greater length in a later chapter, and 
answer therein the various objections which might be raised. The 
point of what has been said so far is merely to give the reader a sense 
of how the Aristotelian argument for the existence of God takes us 
well beyond a mere cause of the existence of change. A common 
but entirely ungrounded objection to first cause arguments for God’s 
existence is that even if they could get you to a cause of the world, 
they couldn’t tell you enough about the nature ofthat cause to justify 
identifying it with God as traditionally conceived. What has been said 
so far suffices to show how problematic this objection is, and by the 
end of the book it will be clear that it has no force at all.
There are other objections raised against first cause arguments in 
general, which will be addressed in another later chapter devoted to 
answering such objections. But some objections should be addressed 
immediately, especially those pertaining to the distinctively Aristote­
lian aspects of the argument given above.
Common misunderstandings
Let’s begin with a response to some further common objections, 
which are bound to seem to some readers obvious and even fatal, 
but which in fact rest on egregious misunderstandings of the argu­
ment and have no force at all. For example, some readers are bound 
to think that I have been arguing that if we trace the series of causes 
of things back in time, we’ll get to a beginning of the universe, 
and that God was the cause of that beginning. I tried to make it clear 
that that is not what I am saying, but people are so used to thinking 
of an argument for God’s existence in those terms that they will read 
this idea even into an argument that explicitly denies it. And then 
they are bound to go on to ask how we can be so sure that the uni­
verse really did have a beginning. But what I said, remember, is that 
even if a given series of changes has no beginning in time, even if the 
universe or series of universes extends forever into the past, that would 
be irrelevant to the argument. For the argument is rather that for 
things to exist here and now, and at any moment at which they exist, 
they must be here and now sustained in existence by God.

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
39
Similarly, some might suppose that the argument proceeds from 
the assumption that the entire universe has to have some cause. And 
then they will go on to object that even if this or that part of the uni­
verse has a cause, it doesn’t follow that the whole universe has one. 
But in fact the claim that the universe as a whole has a cause is not a 
premise of the argument I’ve just given. What I argued was that for 
any particular thing to exist at any moment, God must be causing it 
to exist at that moment. To argue for the existence of God, you don’t 
need to start from the claim that the universe had a beginning, and 
you don’t need to start with any other claim about the universe as a 
whole either. You can start with any old trivial object existing here 
and now— a stone, a cup of coffee, whatever—because even for that 
one thing to exist, even for a moment, there must be a purely actual 
cause actualizing it at that moment. Now, it is true that I also went on 
to claim that this applied to everything that exists, and so I did make a 
claim about the universe as a whole. But that claim was a consequence 
of the argument, not a premise of the argument.
Another stock objection raised against arguments like the one just 
presented goes like this: If everything has a cause, then what caused 
God? If we say that God does not have a cause, then maybe other 
things don’t have a cause either. The argument, so the critic claims, 
commits the fallacy of special pleading, making an arbitrary exception 
in God’s case to the rule it applies to everything else. But in fact this 
objection is no good, and the argument I have been developing does 
not commit any fallacy of special pleading. First of all, the argument 
does not rest in the first place on the premise that “ everything has a 
cause.” What it says is that any change requires a cause; more precisely, 
it says that whatever goes from potential to actual has a cause. That is very 
different from saying that everything whatsoever has a cause. Secondly, 
the argument is by no means arbitrary in claiming that God does not 
have a cause of his own. For the reason other things require a cause 
is precisely because they have potentialities that need to be actualized. 
By contrast, what is purely actual has no potentialities, and so there 
is nothing in it that needs to be, or indeed could be, actualized. Nat­
urally, then, it is the one thing that need not have, and indeed could 
not have, a cause of its own.
The importance of these points cannot be overemphasized. Some 
critics of first cause arguments are so invested in the “ If everything

40
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
has a cause, then what caused God?” objection that they are reluctant 
to give it up even when it is exposed as being directed at a straw man. 
They might try to suggest, for example, that there is no siguificant 
difference between saying that whatever goes from potential to actual has a 
cause and saying that everything has a cause. But that is as silly as claim­
ing that there is no significant difference between saying that all trian­
gles have three sides and saying that all geometrical figures have three sides.
They might also suggest that the argument refrains from saying 
that everything has a cause merely as an ad hoc way of avoiding the 
“What caused God?” objection. But there are three problems with 
this suggestion. First, even if the suggestion were true, that wouldn’t 
show that the claim that whatever goes from potential to actual has a 
cause is false or that the Aristotelian argument for God’s existence is 
unsound. To assume that a person’s motivations for making a claim 
or giving an argument by themselves cast doubt on the claim or the 
argument is to commit an ad hominem fallacy.
But second, the suggestion in question is, as a matter of historical 
fact, simply false. For more than twenty-three hundred years, from 
Aristotle to Aquinas to the present day, proponents of different versions 
of the Aristotelian argument have claimed, not that everything has a 
cause, but rather that what goes from potential to actual has a cause. 
They did not invent the latter claim as a way of trying to get around the 
objection in question. That was always the claim from the start.
Third, there is nothing in any way ad hoc about the claim. It fol­
lows quite naturally from Aristotle’s analysis of change, independently 
of any application to arguments for the existence of God. And one 
hardly needs to believe in God in order to find it implausible to 
suppose that something that is merely potential could actualize itself. 
In fact, the only thing that is ad hoc here is some critics’ desperate 
attempt to salvage the “What caused God?” objection in the face of 
the overwhelming evidence that it is directed at a straw man and has 
no force.
Hume and Kant on causation
Still, the critic may insist, following the empiricist philosopher 
David Hume, that in theory even coffee cups, stones, and the like 
might exist without a cause. I have said that any potentiality that is

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
41
actualized must be actualized by something already actual. But didn’t 
Hume show that it is at least conceivable that something could pop 
into existence uncaused? And in that case couldn’t something go 
from potential to actual without being caused to do so by something 
already actual?
But in fact Hume showed no such thing. What Hume had in 
mind was the sort of case where we imagine an empty space in which 
something suddenly appears— a stone, or a coffee cup, or whatever. 
O f course, that is imaginable. But that is hardly the same thing as 
conceiving of the stone or coffee cup coming into being without 
a cause. At the very most it is conceiving of it without at the same 
time conceiving of its cause, and that is completely unremarkable. 
We can conceive of something being a trilateral— a closed plane fig­
ure with three straight sides— without at the same time thinking of it 
as a triangle. But it doesn’t follow that any trilateral could ever exist in 
reality without being at the same time a triangle. We can conceive of 
some man without conceiving of how tall he is, but it doesn’t follow 
that any man could exist without some specific height. In general, to 
conceive of A without at the same time conceiving of B is not the 
same thing as conceiving of A existing without B. But then, even if 
I can conceive of a stone or a coffee cup suddenly appearing without 
at the same time conceiving of its cause, it doesn’t follow that I have 
conceived of it as having no cause, and it doesn’t follow that it could 
exist in reality without a cause.
For another thing, and as the philosopher Elizabeth Anscombe 
pointed out, for Hume to make his case he has to tell us why a cof­
fee cup suddenly appearing in a previously empty space counts as an 
instance of coming into existence in the first place, whether with a cause 
or otherwise. For why shouldn’t we suppose instead that the cup has 
merely been transported from somewhere else? So, Hume would 
need to add something to his scenario in order to distinguish the 
cup’s coming into existence from its merely being transported. But 
now Hume has a problem. For the only way to distinguish a cup’s 
coming into existence from its being transported is by reference to the 
causes of these different sorts of event. A cup’s coming into existence 
involves one sort of cause (molding a bit of porcelain or plastic, say), 
while a cup’s being transported involves another sort of cause (some­
one’s picking it up and moving it). Hume’s scenario was supposed

42
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
to eliminate the notion of a cause, but to spell it out in the detail he 
needs ends up bringing back in the notion of a cause.3
It is also ironic that an empiricist would question the principle of 
causality, given that it is as well supported by experience as any claim 
could be. For in general, we do in fact find causes when we look 
for them, and when we don’t find them (e.g., when investigating an 
unsolved murder) we have reason to think they are nevertheless there 
and would be found if only we had all the pertinent evidence and 
the time and resources for a more thorough investigation. Not only 
is this just what we would expect if the principle of causality is true, 
but it is not at all what we should expect if it were false. As W. Nor­
ris Clarke points out, if the principle were false, “ then nothing at all 
would be required to produce anything at all: an elephant, or a hotel 
could appear suddenly on your front lawn out of nowhere” , and “it 
should be the easiest thing in the world for them to be popping up all 
the time.”4 But of course this is not the way the world actually works.
The best explanation of why the world works in just the way it 
does is that there is something in the very nature of potentiality that 
requires actualization by something already actual— that is, the best 
explanation is that the principle of causality is true. The fact that we 
tend to find causes for things that come into being, and that things do 
not regularly pop into existence without any evident cause, would 
be miraculous if the principle were false.
An alternative criticism might look to Immanuel Kant rather than 
David Hume. We learn that things have causes from our observation 
of the empirical world. The surrounding air cools down the coffee, 
the air conditioner cools the air, you turn on the air conditioner, and 
so forth. But even if we acknowledge that the principle of causality 
applies within the world of our experience, why should we suppose 
that we can extend it beyond the empirical world, to a purely actual 
actualizer of things— to something which, because it is immaterial, 
outside of time and space, is unobservable?
3 See G .E .M . Anscombe, “ ‘Whatever Has a Beginning o f Existence Must Have a Cause’: 
Hum e’s Argument Exposed” , in her collection From Parmenides to Wittgenstein (Minneapolis: 
University ofMinnesota Press, 1981), and “ Times, Beginnings, and Causes” , in her collection 
Metaphysics and the Philosophy of Mind (Minneapolis: University ofMinnesota Press, 1981). I 
discuss and defend Anscombe’s argument in Scholastic Metaphysics, pp. 1 1 2 -1 4 .
4 W . Norris Clarke, The One and the Many: A  Contemporary Thomistic Metaphysics (Notre 
Dame, Ind.: University o f Notre Dame Press, 2001), p. 182.

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
43
But this objection is not difficult to answer. It is true that we learn 
the principle of causality from our experience of the world, but it 
doesn’t follow that we cannot apply it beyond the world of experi­
ence. For the reason we conclude that the things of our experience 
require causes is not because we experience them, but rather because 
they are merely potential until made actual. And the principle that no 
potential can actualize itself is completely general. Once we learn it 
we can apply it beyond the things we have actually experienced, and 
there is no reason to doubt that we can apply it as well beyond what 
we could experience. (Compare: We learn Euclidean geometry by 
looking at drawings of various geometrical figures, usually in black 
ink. But what we learn applies to geometrical figures of any color 
and indeed of no color at all. To think that the principle of causality 
applies only to things we can experience is like thinking that Euclid­
ean geometry applies only to figures we can see.)
Russell on causation
But now the critic might appeal to science instead of philosophy. 
There are several ways in which it might seem that science has under­
mined the principle that what goes from potential to actual has a 
cause. For example, in his essay “ On the Notion of Cause” , Bertrand 
Russell argued that “ the law of causality ... is a relic of a bygone 
age.” 5 Physics, in Russell’s view, shows that there is no such thing 
as causation. For physics describes the world in terms of differential 
equations describing relations between events, and these equations 
make no reference to causes. “ In the motions of mutually gravitating 
bodies, there is nothing that can be called a cause, and nothing that 
can be called an effect; there is merely a formula.”6
But there are a number of problems with this argument. For one 
thing, it would prove too much. If a thing’s absence from the equa­
tions of physics suffices to show that it does not exist, then we will 
have to eliminate not only causation, but all sorts of other fundamen­
tal notions as well— including notions essential to our understanding 
of science, which Russell needs in order to get his argument off the 
ground. As Jonathan Schaffer writes:
5 
Bertrand Russell, “ O n the Notion o f Cause” , in Russell on Metaphysics, ed. Stephen 
Mumford (London: Routledge, 2003), p. 165.
6Ibid., pp. 17 3-7 4 .

44
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
In this respect, “event,” “law,” “cause,” and “explanation” are in the 
same boat. These ... terms serve to allow a systematic understanding 
of science; they do not themselves appear in the equations. From this 
perspective, Russell’s argument might seem akin to the foolish claim 
that math has eliminated the variable, because the term “variable” 
does not appear in the equations!7
For another thing, it is not clear that physics really is free of causal 
notions. As the philosopher C .B . Martin has argued, the fundamen­
tal particles described by nuclear physics clearly have dispositional 
properties— that is, tendencies to produce certain effects when they 
interact in certain ways.8
Third, whether or not causal notions are present in physics, they 
are certainly present in other sciences. And that the other sciences 
cannot be reduced to physics is now fairly widely acknowledged in 
contemporary philosophy. This is true not only of the social sciences, 
but also of biology,9 and even, some have argued, of chemistry.10 
But if the other sciences give us genuine knowledge of the world 
and they make reference to causation, then causation must be a real 
feature of the world. A related point is that the philosophical natu­
ralism which provides the intellectual foundation of modem atheism 
is in contemporary philosophy typically articulated and defended in 
terms of causal notions. Naturalists routinely defend causal theories of 
knowledge, causal theories of perception, causal theories of meaning, 
and so forth. If causation is central to the articulation and defense of 
naturalism, though, then naturalists themselves must affirm its exis­
tence whether or not physics makes reference to it.
The most basic problem with Russell’s argument, however, is that 
there is simply no reason to suppose that physics gives us anything 
close to an exhaustive description of reality in the first place. Indeed, 
there is ample reason to think that it does not. Ironically, Russell 
himself would in his later work give eloquent expression to the point:
7Jonathan Schaffer, “ The Metaphysics o f Causation” , in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philoso­
phy, Stanford University, 2007-, first published February 2, 2003, last modified July 5, 2016, 
http : //plato .stanford.edu/entries/causation-metaphysics/.
8C .B . Martin, The Mind in Nature (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2008), p. 50.
9John Dupré, The Disorder of Things: Metaphysical Foundations of the Disunity of Science 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993).
IOJ. van Brakel, Philosophy of Chemistry (Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2000), chap. 5.

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
45
It is not always realised how exceedingly abstract is the information 
that theoretical physics has to give. It lays down certain fundamental 
equations which enable it to deal with the logical structure of events, 
while leaving it completely unknown what is the intrinsic character
of the events that have the structure__ All that physics gives us is
certain equations giving abstract properties of their changes. But as to 
what it is that changes, and what it changes from and to—as to this, 
physics is silent.11
Modern physics focuses its attention on those aspects of nature 
which can be described in the language of mathematics, abstracting 
away everything else. Its “mathematicizations” , as Martin has called 
them, entail taking what Martin calls only a “partial consideration” 
of the phenomena studied.12 That is why physics has achieved such 
breathtaking precision and predictive success. It simply does not 
allow into its characterizations of physical phenomena any features 
that would not be susceptible of mathematically precise description 
and prediction. If there are features of the world that can be cap­
tured by this method, then physics has a good shot at finding them. 
But by the same token, if there are features that cannot be captured 
by this method, physics is guaranteed not to find them. To reason 
from the predictive success of physics to the conclusion that physics 
gives us an exhaustive description of reality is therefore to commit a 
very crude fallacy. It is like reasoning from the success of metal detec­
tors to the conclusion that there are no nonmetallic features of real­
ity; or it is like a student’s reasoning from the fact that he has taken 
only classes he knew he would do well in and gotten A ’s in each, to 
the conclusion that there is nothing of importance to be learned in 
other classes; or like a drunk’s reasoning from his success in finding 
things in the fight under the lamppost to the conclusion that his lost 
car keys cannot possibly be anywhere else.
Since the equations of physics are, by themselves, mere equations, 
mere abstractions, we know that there must be something more to the 
world than what they describe. There must be something that makes 
it the case that the world actually operates in accordance with the
^Bertrand Russell, M y Philosophical Development (London: Unwin Paperbacks, 1985), 
P- U -
12 Martin, Mind in Nature, p. 74.

4 6
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
equations, rather than some other equations or no equations at all. 
There must be what the later Russell called an “intrinsic character” 
to the things related in the ways the equations describe. There must, 
as he put it, be something “ that changes” and something “it changes 
from and to” , something about which, as Russell admitted, “physics 
is silent.” Now if what the equations describe really is change, then as 
I have argued, this change entails the actualization of a potential. But 
to actualize a potential just is to be a cause. That means that causality 
must be among the intrinsic features of the things physics describes.
Note that even if someone wanted to resist attributing real change 
and causality to mind-independent physical reality, he will still 
have to attribute them to our experience of physical reality, through 
which we acquire the observational and experimental evidence 
on which physics is based. One experience gives way to another; 
for example, the experience of setting up an experiment is followed 
by the experience of observing the results. That entails (for all Rus­
sell has shown) the actualization of a potential, and thus causation. 
Moreover, the later Russell himself acknowledged that we know 
the world described by physics only by virtue of the fact that our 
experiences are causally related to that world. It is only because the 
physical world has the effects on our sense organs that it does that we 
can know that there is something out there for us to study scientifi­
cally in the first place.
Thus, contra the early Russell, there is simply no way coherently 
to appeal to physics in support of the claim that causation is not a real 
feature of the world.
Newton on inertia
It is sometimes suggested that Newton’s law of inertia— according 
to which a body in motion will remain in motion unless acted upon 
by outside forces— shows that change could occur without a cause. 
There’s a lot that could be said in response to this objection, and 
I’ve addressed it in detail elsewhere.13 But for present purposes the
13 Edward Feser, “ Motion in Aristotle, Newton, and Einstein” , in Aristotle on Method 
and Metaphysics, ed. Edward Feser (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), pp. 236—58. 
Reprinted in Edward Feser, Neo-Scholastic Essays (South Bend, Ind.: St. Augustine’s Press, 
2015), pp. 3-27.

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
47
following points will suffice. First of all, what Newton’s law describes 
are events ordered in time— for example, the motion of molecules as 
coffee swirls around in a cup. But as I have emphasized, the argument 
for the existence of God that we have been examining is ultimately 
concerned with the question of what actualizes a thing’s potential to 
exist at any particular moment of time. It is concerned, for example, 
with what makes it the case at any moment that the components of 
a water molecule actually constitute a water molecule, specifically, in 
the first place, rather than some other kind of thing. Since Newton’s 
law presupposes the existence of things like water molecules, it can 
hardly explain their existence.
Furthermore, as several philosophers have argued (and as I will 
argue in a later chapter), for something to follow any physical law—  
such as the law of inertia— is just for it to be the kind of thing that 
behaves in accordance with that law. That is to say, talk of a “law of 
nature” is really just a kind of shorthand for a description of the way 
a thing will tend to operate given its nature— given the form or pat­
tern it possesses, which distinguishes it from other kinds of thing (to 
make use of some terminology introduced earlier). Thus, Newton’s 
law is simply a shorthand description for the way a thing will behave 
given the nature or form it possesses. But what makes it the case 
that there actually are things that have that sort of nature or form 
rather than another? What makes it true that things are governed 
by the law of inertia rather than some alternative law? What actu­
alizes that potential, specifically? Newtonian mechanics can hardly 
answer these sorts of questions. Again, it makes no sense to appeal 
to Newton’s laws in order to explain why the things presupposed by 
Newton’s laws exist.
Finally, there is the point made above that physics simply does 
not give anything like an exhaustive description of nature in the 
first place, but abstracts from it everything that cannot be “mathe- 
maticized” (to use Martin’s expression). This includes the notions 
of actuality and potentiality, and thus causation as the Aristotelian 
understands it. Newton’s laws of motion reflect this tendency, insofar 
as they provide a mathematical description of motion suitable for 
predictive purposes without bothering about the origins of motion 
or the intrinsic nature of that which moves. Indeed, that is arguably 
the whole point of the principle of inertia. As James Weisheipl writes:

48
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Rather than proving the principle, the mechanical and mathematical 
science of nature assumes it ... [and] the mathematical sciences must
assume it, if they are to remain mathematical__
The basis for the principle of inertia lies ... in the nature of mathe­
matical abstraction. The mathematician must equate: a single quantity 
is of no use to him. In order to equate quantities he must assume the 
basic irrelevance or nullity of other factors, otherwise there can be no 
certainty in his equation. The factors which the mathematician con­
siders irrelevant are ... motion, rest, constancy, and unaltered direc­
tivity; it is only the change of these factors which has quantitative value. 
Thus for the physicist it is not motion and its continuation which 
need to be explained but change and cessation of motion—for only 
these have equational value__
In the early part of the seventeenth century physicists tried to find 
a physical cause to explain the movement [of the heavenly bodies]; 
Newton merely disregarded the question and looked for two quanti­
ties which could be equated. In Newtonian physics there is no ques­
tion of a cause, but only of differential equations which are consistent
and useful in describing phenomena__
The nature of mathematical abstraction ... must leave out of con­
sideration the qualitative and causal content of nature__ Since math­
ematical physics abstracts from all these factors, it can say nothing 
about them; it can neither affirm nor deny their reality.14
Hence, it is not merely that Newtonian mechanics does not refute 
the principle of causality, but that it could not— any more than (to 
make use once again of analogies appealed to earlier) the drunk who 
stays under the lamppost can say anything one way or another about 
what lies elsewhere, or any more than the student who takes only 
courses he knows he will do well in can say anything one way or the 
other about the subject matter of other courses, or any more than 
metal detectors can tell us anything one way or the other about the 
existence of wood, stone, and water. Objections to the principle of 
causality based on Newton’s First Law of Motion therefore do not 
even rise to the level of being well-formulated, and the Aristotelian is 
within his rights to insist that however inertia is interpreted, it must 
be made compatible with the principle of causality, which captures 
deeper levels of reality than physics does or can.
I4James A . Weisheipl, Nature and Motion in the Middle Ages, ed. William E. Carroll (Wash­
ington, D .C .: Catholic University o f America Press, 1985), pp. 42, 47-48.

49
Einstein and change
It is sometimes claimed that change has been shown to be illusory 
by Einstein, or at least by the construction Hermann Minkowski 
famously put on relativity theory. On this four-dimensional block 
universe model, time is analogous to space, so that just as distant places 
are as actual as nearby places, so too are past and future moments as 
actual as the present moment. Hence, there is (so the argument goes) 
no actualization of potential. Our conscious experience of the world 
presents it as if it were changing— as if the present moment receded 
into the past and gave way to the future— but in reality there is no 
change. Objectively speaking, the past and the future exist in just the 
same way that the present does.
Now, such claims are controversial, even among physicists, but 
this is a controversy that need not be settled for present purposes.15 
For even if we supposed for the sake of argument that change does 
not occur in the objective physical world, it would not follow that 
the principle that whatever goes from potential to actual has a cause has no 
application, for two reasons.
First, physics, including relativity theory, rests on the empirical 
evidence of observation and experiment, which involves scientists 
having certain experiences. This is in turn a matter of an event of 
formulating a prediction being followed by the event of performing 
an observation to test the prediction; of moving from a state of igno­
rance to a state of knowledge; and so forth. But all of this involves 
change. Hence, if there is no change, then there is no such thing 
as having the experiences which provide the empirical evidence for 
any scientific theory in the name of which someone might take the 
position that there is no such thing as change. Thus, as philosopher of 
science Richard Healey has pointed out, the view that physics shows 
that all change is an illusion is incoherent.16 The most that could 
coherently be claimed is that change exists only in the mind but not 
in mind-independent reality. What cannot be coherently claimed is 
that there is no change at all. But if change exists at least in the mind, 
then there is at least some actualization of potential, and that is all that
15 See Lee Smolin, Time Reborn (N ew  York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013).
16 Richard Healey, “ Can Physics Coherently Deny the Reality o f Tim e?” , in Time, Real­
ity, and Experience, ed. Craig Callender (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002), 
pp. 2 9 3-316 .

50
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
is needed for the Aristotelian argument for God’s existence to get off 
the ground.
Second, even if change didn’t exist in the physical world, in the 
mind, or anywhere else, it still wouldn’t follow that the actualiza­
tion of potential didn’t exist anywhere. For as I have argued, it is not 
just a thing’s undergoing change that involves the actualization of 
potential, but its very existence at any moment that involves the actual­
ization of potential. Hence, even if there is no real change or actu­
alization of potential within an Einsteinian four-dimensional block 
universe, the sheer existence of that universe as a whole— in a sin­
gle, timeless moment, as it were— would involve the actualization of 
potential and thus an actualizer distinct from the world itself. There 
would need to be a cause of that sort of world’s being actual rather 
than some other sort of world’s being actual. Similarly, even if there 
were no change even within the human mind, there would still 
need to be a cause of the mind’s being actual at all.
So, like Newton’s law of inertia, relativity in no way undermines 
the principle that whatever goes from potential to actual has a cause. The 
most it does is to affect how we apply this principle, but not whether 
we need to apply it.17
Quantum mechanics and causality
The same must be said in response to objections to the principle of 
causality that appeal to quantum mechanics. There are at least three 
objections of this sort. The first is that the nondeterministic character 
of quantum systems is incompatible with the principle of causality. 
The second is that the Bell inequalities show that there are correla­
tions without a causal explanation.18 The third is that quantum field 
theories show that particles can come into existence and go out of 
existence at random.
As to the objection from indeterminism, it is sometimes pointed out 
in response that the de Broglie-Bohm hidden variable interpretation
17 For more detailed discussion, see Edward Feser, “ Actuality, Potentiality, and Relativity’s 
Block Universe” , in Neo-Aristotelian Perspectives on Contemporary Science, ed. William M .R . 
Simpson, Robert C . Koons, and Nicholas J. Teh (London: Routledge, forthcoming).
18 The Bell inequalities, named for physicist John S. Bell, have to do with measurements 
made at distant locations between which there are correlations that appear not to have a 
common cause.

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
51
provides a way of seeing quantum systems as deterministic.19 But 
from an Aristotelian point of view it is a mistake to suppose in the 
first place that causality entails determinism. For a cause to be suffi­
cient to explain its effect, it is not necessary that it cause it in a deter­
ministic way. It need only make the effect intelligible. And that 
condition is satisfied on a nondeterministic interpretation of quantum 
mechanics. As Robert Koons writes:
According to the Copenhagen version of quantum mechanics, every 
transition of a system has causal antecedents: the preceding quantum 
wave state, in the case of Schrôdinger evolution, or the preceding 
quantum wave state plus the observation, in the case of wave packet 
collapse.20
As to the objection from the Bell inequalities, it is sometimes sug­
gested that one could respond to it by denying that causal influences 
never travel faster than light,21 or by allowing for either backward 
causation, or an absolute reference frame, or positing a law to the 
effect that the correlations in question take place.22 As to the objec­
tion that particles can come into or go out of existence at random in 
a quantum vacuum, Alexander Pruss suggests that here too one might 
propose a hidden variable theory, or, alternatively, propose that the 
system described by the laws of quantum field theory is what causes 
the events in question, albeit indeterministically.23
O f course, all such proposals raise questions, though the interpreta­
tion of quantum mechanics is a notoriously vexed issue in any event. 
But that brings us to the deeper point, which is the one made above in 
response to the objection from Newton’s law of inertia. As Weisheipl 
wrote, “ The nature of mathematical abstraction ... must leave out of 
consideration the qualitative and causal content of nature__ Since
19 Named for physicists Louis de Broglie and David Bohm, the interpretation in question 
proposes that the appearance of indeterminism stems merely from our ignorance o f some of 
the relevant causal factors.
20 Robert C . Koons, Realism Regained: An Exact Theory of Causation, Teleology, and the Mind 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 114.
21 Ibid.
22 Alexander R . Pruss, The Principle of Sufficient Reason: A  Reassessment (Cambridge: Cam ­
bridge University Press, 2006), pp. 166, 169.
23 Ibid., pp. 169-70.

52
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
mathematical physics abstracts from all these factors, it can say noth­
ing about them; it can neither affirm nor deny their reality.”24 This 
is as true of quantum mechanics as it is of Newtonian mechanics. 
What we have is what Martin calls a “partial consideration” of mate­
rial reality by way of “mathematicization” . As Russell acknowledges, 
physics leaves “ the intrinsic character” of what it describes in terms of 
mathematical structure “ completely unknown” .25
Hence, that quantum theory fails to assign a cause to a phenome­
non simply does not entail that there isn’t one, since even a completed 
physical theory could not capture every aspect of the phenomena it 
describes in the first place. The absence of something in a representa­
tion of nature is not the same thing as a representation of its absence 
from nature. Its absence from the representation does not even make 
it likely that it is absent from nature, if we already know independently 
that the representation would leave it out even if it is there. Hence, 
if an artist represents a scene he is looking at in a black-and-white 
line drawing, the fact that there is no color in the drawing does not 
show that there is no color in the scene itself. The colorlessness of 
the image is an artifact of the artist’s method, not of the phenome­
non represented. Similarly, the “mathematicization” to which physics 
confines itself already by its nature leaves out potentiality and other 
notions essential to causality as the Aristotelian understands it. It is the 
method that drains causality out of the world, with quantum mechanics 
being something like a limiting case. The four-dimensional block uni­
verse interpretation of relativity is another limiting case, entailing as it 
does a picture of the world from which change and thus potentiality 
are absent. In both cases we have physical theories which tell us, not 
whether causality exists in the world itself, but what sort of represen­
tation of the world we get when we consistently abstract from causal 
notions. To draw philosophical conclusions about causality from such 
theories is to mistake abstractions for concrete realities. As with the 
objection to the principle of causality from inertia, then, the objection 
from quantum mechanics is not even well-formulated.
It is worth adding that there is even a sense in which quantum 
mechanics, if it has any implications for causality at all, if anything
24Weisheipl, Nature and Motion in the Middle Ages, p. 48.
25Russell, M y Philosophical Development, p. 13.

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
53
points toward rather than away from the Aristotelian position. To 
see how, consider once more the analogy of the artist’s black-and- 
white line drawing. Again, the drawing by itself does not give us evi­
dence that there is no color in the scene represented, since we know 
that the artist’s exclusive use of black-and-white materials would 
never capture the color even if it is there. However, his use of those 
materials could indicate that there is color in the scene represented, 
in the following way. We are familiar with line drawings which rep­
resent a contour by depicting it in black ink. The contour of a face, 
for example, might be portrayed by a set of black lines, as in a comic 
book. In what is called a “ color hold” , however, some contours in a 
finished piece of artwork are not represented in black ink, but only 
in the color that will be added to the black-and-white line drawing. 
The black-and-white line art might leave off the contour of one 
side of an object, for example, with the contour of that side being 
represented by the color that will be added to the line art. If one sees 
only the unfinished line art itself, from which the color is absent, one 
will not see this particular contour. He will accordingly not see that 
part of the object represented. He might, however, be able to infer 
from the contours that have been rendered in black that the rest of 
the object— the part that the colored artwork will portray—must be 
present in the scene represented. For instance, he might infer from 
the presence in the line art of several straight Unes and shadows that 
what is being represented is a cube, and deduce where the edges of 
the cube that are not drawn in black ink would go. The viewer could 
mentally “fill in” what is missing from the artwork, and what the 
finished, colored artwork would have represented.
Now I have suggested that quantum mechanics and physical the­
ories in general are like the black-and-white artwork, and physical 
theory together with Aristotelian metaphysical principles Uke the 
principle of causality is like the black-and-white artwork once it is 
colored. And there is a sense in which quantum theory might be 
understood as analogous to a piece of black-and-white artwork to 
which a “ color hold” is going to be added— a piece of artwork whose 
lines do not represent, but nevertheless suggest, at least partially, the 
presence of causaUty in the reality that is being represented. In par­
ticular, as Werner Heisenberg suggested, quantum theory points to 
something Uke the AristoteUan notion of potentiaUty. Regarding

54
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
the “ statistical expectations” that quantum theory associates with the 
behavior of an atom, Heisenberg wrote:
One might perhaps call it an objective tendency or possibility, a 
“potentia” in the sense of Aristotelian philosophy. In fact, I believe 
that the language actually used by physicists when they speak about 
atomic events produces in their minds similar notions as the concept 
“potentia.” So the physicists have gradually become accustomed to 
considering the electronic orbits, etc., not as reality but rather as a 
kind of “potentia.”26
We might say that insofar as quantum theory— in its indetermin­
ism, in the Bell inequalities, and in the notion of particles popping 
into existence in a quantum vacuum—portrays the actualization 
of potential without portraying something doing the actualizing, 
it approximates the notion of potentiality without actuality.27 The 
four-dimensional block universe interpretation of relativity theory, 
meanwhile, approximates the notion of actuality without potential­
ity. Now, since causation involves the actualization of potential, any 
description which leaves out one or the other is going to leave out 
causation. In the case of the four-dimensional block universe, what 
is left out is any potential needing to be actualized; in the case of 
quantum theory, what is left out is anything to actualize the poten­
tial. In both cases what is missing is missing, not because it is absent 
from reality, but because it is bound to be absent from a consistently 
mathematicized description of reality.
Finally, as with objections to the principle of causality which 
appeal to inertia, objections which appeal to quantum mechanics 
are, ultimately, appeals to laws of physics. And as has been pointed 
out already, a law of physics is (the Aristotelian argues) a shorthand 
description for the way a thing will behave given the nature or form 
it possesses. Thus, to explain something in terms of the laws of phys­
ics is hardly an alternative to explaining it in terms of the actualization 
of a potential. For what makes it the case that there actually are things
26Werner Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy (N ew  York: HarperCollins, 2007), pp. 15 4 - 
55. See also pp. 15, 27, 134.
27 
See Stanley F. Grove, “ Quantum Theory and Aquinas’s Doctrine on Matter” (PhD 
thesis, Catholic University of America, 2008).

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
55
that have the sort of nature or form in question rather than another? 
What makes it true that things are governed by the laws of quantum 
mechanics rather than some alternative laws? What actualizes that 
potential, specifically?
Hence, consider radioactive decay, which is usually regarded as 
indeterministic, and thus often claimed to pose a challenge to the 
principle of causality. Specifically, consider an example given by phi­
losopher of science Phil Dowe:
Suppose that we have an unstable lead atom, say Pb2I°. Such an atom 
may decay, without outside interference, by a-decay into the mercury 
atom Hg206. Suppose the probability that the atom will decay in the 
next minute is x. Then
P(E \C) = x
where C is the existence of the lead atom at a certain time tIf and E is 
the production of the mercury atom within the minute immediately 
following tï.28
Now, from an Aristotelian point of view, what is going on here is 
that Pb210 simply behaves, like all other natural objects do, according 
to its form or nature. Copper, given its form or nature, will conduct 
electricity; a tree, given its form or nature, will sink roots into the 
ground; a dog, given its form or nature, will tend to chase cats and 
squirrels. And Pb210 is the sort ofthing which, given its form or nature, 
is such that there is a probability of x that it will decay in the next 
minute. The decay is not deterministic, but that does not entail that 
it is unintelligible. It is grounded in what it is to be Pb210 as opposed to 
being some other kind of thing— that is to say, it is grounded, again, 
in the nature or form of Pb210. This is what in Aristotelian philosophy 
is called the “formal cause” of a thing. There is also a generating or 
“ efficient cause”— namely, whatever it was that originally generated 
the Pb210 atom at some point in the past (whenever that was). And, 
more to the present point, there is a deeper efficient cause in what­
ever it is that keeps the Pb210 atom in existence here and now. That some­
thing exists here and now as a Pb210 atom, with its nondeterministic 28
28 Phil Dowe, Physical Causation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), pp. 22-23.

56
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
tendency to decay— rather than as some other thing, and rather than 
not existing at all— itself presupposes the actualization of a potential. 
And that actualization must have a cause in something already actual. 
So, the appeal to the nondeterministic character of radioactive decay 
in no way eliminates from the picture causation requiring a purely 
actual actualizer. It merely illustrates how some causal situations are 
more complicated than others.29
29 
Readers familiar with Aristotelian-Thomistic philosophy o f nature might note a parallel 
here with what Aquinas says about local motion (i.e., change with respect to location or 
place). Aquinas took the view that a substance can manifest certain dispositions in a “ sponta­
neous” way in the sense that these manifestations simply follow from its nature or substantial 
form, and that a thing’s natural tendencies vis-à-vis local motion would be an example. Such 
motions simply follow from the thing’s substantial form and do not require a continuously 
conjoined external mover. N ow , that is not, in Aquinas’ view, to say that the motion in 
question does not have an efficient cause. But the efficient cause is just whatever generated 
the substance and thus gave it the substantial form that accounts (qua formal cause) for its 
natural local motion. (It is commonly but erroneously thought that medieval Aristotelians in 
general thought that all local motion as such required a continuously conjoined cause. In fact 
that was true only of some o f these thinkers, not all o f them. For detailed discussion o f this 
issue, see Weisheipl’s Nature and Motion in the Middle Ages, from which I borrow the language 
of “ spontaneity” .)
N ow , Aquinas elaborated on this idea in conjunction with the thesis that the “ natural 
place” toward which heavy objects are inclined to move is the center o f the earth, and he 
supposed also that projectile motions did require a conjoined mover insofar as he regarded them 
as “ violent” motions rather than natural ones. Both of these suppositions are scientifically out­
moded, but the more general thesis summarized in the preceding paragraph is logically inde­
pendent of them and can easily be disentangled from them. One can consistently affirm that 
(a) a substance will tend toward a certain kind o f local motion simply because o f its substantial 
form, while rejecting the claim that (b) this local motion involves movement toward a certain 
specific place, such as the center o f the earth. Indeed, some contemporary Aristotelians have 
proposed that affirming (a) while rejecting (b) is the right way to think about inertial motion: 
N ew ton’s principle of inertia, on this view, is a description o f the way a physical object will 
tend to behave vis-à-vis local motion given its nature or substantial form. (See Feser, “ Motion 
in Aristotle, Newton, and Einstein” , for discussion of the relevant literature.)
The point for present purposes, though, is that the idea just described also provides a 
model— not necessarily the only model, but a model— for understanding what is going on 
metaphysically with phenomena like radioactive decay. W e can say that the decay described 
in D ow e’s example is “ spontaneous” in something Uke the way Aquinas thought the nat­
ural local motion o f a physical substance is “ spontaneous” . In particular, given the nature 
or substantial form o f Pb2I°, there is a probability o f x that it will decay in the next minute. 
The probability is not unintelligible, but grounded in what it is to be Pb2I°. The decay thus 
has a cause in the sense that (1) it has a formal cause in the nature or substantial form o f the 
particular Pb210 atom, and (2) it has an efficient cause in whatever it was that originally gen­
erated that Pb210 atom.
Interestingly, elsewhere in his book, Dow e argnes that Newton’s first law should be inter­
preted as entailing, not that a body’s uniform motion has no cause, but rather that its inertia,

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
57
Dowe makes a further point, which reinforces the conclusion that 
examples like that of Pb2I° show merely that not all causality is deter­
ministic, but not that there is no causality at all in radioactive decay:
If I bring a bucket of Pb2I° into the room, and you get radiation sick­
ness, then doubtless I am responsible for your ailment. But in this type 
of case, I cannot be morally responsible for an action for which I am 
not causally responsible. Now the causal chain linking my action and 
your sickness involves a connection constituted by numerous connec­
tions like the one just described [in the passage quoted above]. Thus 
the insistence that C does not cause E on the grounds that there’s no 
deterministic link entails that I am not morally responsible for your 
sickness. Which is sick.30
Dowe also points out that “ scientists describe such cases of decay 
as instances of production of Hg206 ... [and] ‘production’ is a near­
synonym for ‘causation’ ” .31 This sounds paradoxical only if we falla­
ciously conflate deterministic causality and causality as such.
Outdated science?
It is sometimes alleged that, even apart from considerations about 
inertia, relativity, and quantum mechanics, arguments of the sort I 
have been defending rest on outdated science. Sometimes this sort of 
objection takes the form of a sweeping assertion to the effect that Aris- 
totelianism as a general worldview was refuted by modem science. 
Hence (it is concluded), an Aristotelian argument for God’s existence 
is no more relevant today than AristoteHan astronomy is. The trouble 
with this sort of objection is that it is intellectually sloppy, running 
together issues that need to be kept distinct. “Aristotelianism” , as a
conceived o f as a property o f a body, is its cause (pp. 53-54). This dovetails with the analysis 
o f inertial motion given by some contemporary Aristotelians, to which I alluded above. John 
Losee, in his book Theories of Causality (N ew  Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 20 11), dis­
cusses D ow e’s views and notes the parallel between what Dow e says about radioactive decay 
and what he says about inertia (p. 126). The parallel, I would say (using notions neither Dowe 
nor Losee appeal to), is this: in both cases, Dow e is describing the way a thing will “ sponta­
neously” tend to behave given its nature or substantial form (albeit the manifestation of the 
tendency is probabilistic in the case of Pb2I° but not in the case of inertial motion).
30Dowe, Physical Causation, p. 23.
31 Ibid.

58
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
label for the system of thought that the early modem philosophers 
and scientists rebelled against, covers an enormous variety of philo­
sophical, scientific, theological, and political ideas and arguments. It is 
true that certain specifically scientific theses associated with medieval 
Aristotelianism— such as geocentrism, the ancient theory of the ele­
ments, and the notion that objects have specific places toward which 
they naturally move— have been refuted by modem science. But it 
simply doesn’t follow that every idea which might be characterized as 
“Aristotelian” has been refuted by modem science. For example, the 
thesis that change entails the actualization of a potential— which is a 
philosophical or metaphysical thesis rather than a scientific thesis—  
has in no way been refuted by modem science. On the contrary, 
since, as has already been pointed out, the very enterprise of science 
presupposes the existence of change (insofar as, for example, obser­
vation and experiment presuppose the transition from one perceptual 
experience to another), the Aristotelian would argue that any possible 
scientific theory thereby presupposes the actualization of potential. In 
a later chapter I will discuss in more detail the ways in which science 
rests on philosophical or metaphysical foundations which only the 
philosopher, and not the scientist, can rationally justify. It is upon 
these deeper and rationally more secure metaphysical foundations 
that the arguments for God’s existence defended in this book rest, 
rather than on any claims that might in principle be upended by nat­
ural science.
Sometimes the objection in question instead takes the form of the 
claim that specific examples of the sort used in arguments like the 
one I have given rest on mistaken scientific assumptions. For exam­
ple, I spoke in my informal presentation of the Aristotelian argu­
ment for God’s existence of a desk holding up a coffee cup, where 
the desk can do so only because it is itself being held up by the 
floor. But someone familiar with physicist Arthur Eddington’s book 
The Nature of the Physical World might conclude that the example is 
faulty. Eddington famously begins the book by contrasting the way 
a table is understood by common sense with the way it is described 
by science.32 Common sense regards the table as a single extended,
32 
Sir Arthur Eddington, The Nature of the Physical World (Ann Arbor: University o f M ich­
igan Press, 1963), pp. xi—xiv.

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
59
substantial object. Physics describes it as a cloud of particles in mostly 
empty space. When an object rests on the table, the reason it does 
not fall through this cloud of particles is that the particles continu­
ously hit against the underside of the object and thereby maintain 
it at a steady level. But the object itself is also essentially a cloud of 
particles, which hit against the table. Hence (the objection might 
go), the commonsense picture of a floor holding up a desk which 
holds up a coffee cup just doesn’t get the scientific details right, so 
that an argument which appeals to such commonsense examples is 
poorly grounded.
But despite its faux air of scientific sophistication, this sort of 
objection is really quite silly. One problem with it is that it supposes 
that the commonsense picture of the world and the description given 
by physics are in competition, as if one cannot accept both and has to 
choose between them. And that supposition is controversial at best.33 
That a floor, a desk, and a cup are each made of particles that hit 
against each other simply does not entail that it is not really true after 
all that the floor holds up the desk and the desk holds up the coffee 
cup. By themselves and without further argumentation, the sorts of 
details Eddington describes merely give us the mechanism by which 
the floor holds up the desk and the desk the coffee cup.
Notice also how selectively this sort of objection is raised. When 
an engineer makes claims about how thick a concrete foundation 
will have to be in order to support a building, or a medical doctor 
explains how a herniated disk is unable adequately to support the 
spinal column, no one raises quibbles from particle physics to the ef­
fect that what is really going on is that the particles making up the 
concrete and the building, or the particles making up the disk and 
vertebrae, are really hitting against one another as they travel through 
space that is mostly empty. No one alleges on this basis that engineer­
ing and medicine rest on outdated science. It is understood that these 
details from physics are irrelevant to the points the engineer and the 
doctor are making, and thus can be safely ignored for their particular 
purposes. But then it is sheer special pleading to pretend that the 
absence of such details from an example to which an argument for
33 
See L. Susan Stebbing, Philosophy and the Physicists (N ew  York: Dover, 1958), and Amie 
L. Thomasson, Ordinary Objeds (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), chap. 8.

6o
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
God’s existence appeals shows that the argument is thereby somehow 
suspect from a scientific point of view.
But there is a deeper problem with the sort of objection under 
consideration. Even if there were some conflict between modem 
physics and the commonsense description of the desk holding up the 
cup or the chain holding up the lamp, this simply wouldn’t in any 
way undermine the Aristotefian argument for God’s existence. For 
the specific scientific details of the examples are completely irrele­
vant to the point the examples were being used to make. The point 
was to introduce notions such as the actualization of a potential and 
the distinction between a hierarchical causal series and a linear causal 
series. And these notions have application whether we think in terms 
of desks holding up cups, or in terms of clouds of particles hitting 
against one another, or in some other terms altogether. The specific 
scientific details will affect only how we apply these notions, but not 
whether we need to apply them.
Here again we see how selectively accusations of faulty science 
are made by critics of arguments for God’s existence. When a phys­
icist illustrates a point by asking us to imagine what we would expe­
rience if we fell into a black hole or rode on a beam of light, no one 
thinks it clever to respond that photons are too small to sit on or 
that we would be ripped apart by gravity before we made it into the 
black hole. Everyone knows that such objections would be pedan­
tic and would entirely miss the point the physicist is trying to make. 
But to object to examples like the cup holding up the table on the 
grounds that this ignores the way the situation looks from the point 
of view of particle physics is no less pedantic or point-missing, and 
would remain so even if there were a conflict on this issue between 
physics and common sense.
^4re hierarchical causal series real?
A critic might still try to raise one further objection from science. 
I have said that any stage in a linear series of causes and effects that 
extends through time presupposes a more fundamental hierarchical 
causal series whose members all exist at that particular moment of 
time. But are there really any causes and effects that exist simultane­
ously in this way? To be sure, in everyday contexts we often speak

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
6l
as if there were. We might say, for example, that when one pushes a 
stone with a stick, the motion of the stick and that of the stone are 
simultaneous. But isn’t this true only in a loose sense? Wouldn’t mea­
surement with precision instruments reveal a slight time lag between 
the movement of the stick and that of the stone? Or to take the exam­
ple I used earlier, wouldn’t there also be a slight time lag between 
the motion of the particles that make up the desk and the motion 
of the cup the desk holds up, so that the cup’s being held at a certain 
level isn’t exactly simultaneous with what is going on in the desk? 
Moreover, doesn’t relativity theory cast doubt on the whole idea of 
simultaneity anyway?
The first of several points to make in response to all of this is that 
it is simply a mistake to think that being simultaneous entails being in­
stantaneous. An event like someone’s using a stick to move a stone is 
of course spread out through time rather than occurring in a single 
instant. But to say that the motion of the stick and that of the stone 
are simultaneous is not in the first place to say that they occur in a 
single instant. It is rather to say that the stick’s moving the stone and 
the stone’s being moved by the stick are part of the same one event, 
however long this event lasts. As Clarke (citing a different example) 
points out, “ It indeed takes me time to push a chair across the room; 
but there is no time at all between my pushing the chair and the chair 
being pushed.” 34
Hume took the view that a cause and its effect are always separated 
in time, but as Stephen Mumford and Rani Lill Anjum argue, the 
standard examples used to support this claim are not convincing.35 
For instance, to say (as a follower of Hume would) that the motion 
of billiard ball A caused the later motion of billiard ball B is not 
quite right, for A ’s motion could have been stopped before A had 
any causal influence on B, and B ’s motion may or may not continue 
regardless of the continued presence of A. It is only at the point of 
impact that there is really any causation going on vis-à-vis A and B. 
But ball A ’s impacting B and B ’s being impacted by A are not tem­
porally separated. They are just the same event. Neither is it quite
34 Clarke, One and the Many, p. 192.
35 Stephen Mumford and Rani Lill Anjum, Getting Causes from Powers (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 20 11), chap. 5.

6 2
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
right to speak (as a Humean would) of the throwing of a brick causing 
the breaking of glass. It is rather the brick’s pushing into the glass that 
is the immediate cause and the glass’ giving way that is the effect, and 
these (unlike the throwing of the brick and the breaking of the glass) are 
not temporally separated but rather parts of one and the same event. 
O f course, the motion of billiard ball A and the throwing of the brick 
are causally relevant, and there is a perfectly legitimate sense in which 
we can speak of them as causes of the effects in question. But what 
they are not are the immediate causes of these effects, and immediate 
causes are always simultaneous with their effects.
But (it might be objected) would this not make all the causes 
and effects in a causal chain simultaneous, which would have the 
absurd implication that there are no causal chains extended through 
time? No. For one thing, remember that “ simultaneous” does not 
entail “ instantaneous” . The single event in which a cause generates 
its effect can take place over the course of seconds, minutes, even 
hours or much longer. (Think of a potter molding a vase, a cube of 
sugar dissolving in water, or a heater warming a room.) For another, 
as Mumford and Anjum note, we must “ [distinguish] causal epi­
sodes that are a part of a single process from causal processes that are 
enabled by powers instantiated in earlier causal processes” .36 Con­
sider, to borrow their example: a cube of sugar being dissolved in 
tea, followed ten minutes later by the tea being drunk, which is then 
followed in turn by the tea’s being converted into energy after it 
reaches the stomach. Each of these three events is a causal process, 
but they are not themselves related causally in the sense in which 
causation occurs within each event. That is to say, the sugar dissolv­
ing in the tea is one causal process, but it does not in turn cause the 
drinking of the tea. Rather, it results in a set of conditions, which 
ten minutes later play a role in the separate causal process of the tea’s 
being drunk. Nor does the drinking of the tea cause the conversion 
of the tea into energy. Rather, it is one causal process which sets 
up the conditions for the other (even if in this case there is a partial 
temporal overlap between the two processes). What we don’t have 
is one process causing another which causes another in the sense in 
which (say) the water and molecular structure of the sugar cube
36Ibid., p. 125.

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
63
cause dissolution. In that latter process the cause and effect are simul­
taneous. But since the tea’s dissolving is not in the same sense a cause 
of the drinking of the tea, there is no question of simultaneity and 
thus no question of this long series of events (sugar dissolving, tea 
being drunk, tea converted to energy) collapsing into one big simul­
taneous causal event.
Again, though, it might still be objected: Hasn’t Einstein refuted 
the claim that causes and effects are simultaneous, insofar as special 
relativity holds that whether two spatially separated events are simul­
taneous is relative to the observer’s frame of reference? No, because 
the cases we have been considering are precisely those in which an 
effect and its immediate cause are part of the same event rather than 
distinct events, and the examples we have been appealing to involve 
causes and effects occupying the same spatial location rather than sep­
arate locations. So, relativity is irrelevant.37
In any case, as I emphasized above, while the analysis of change 
leads us to the distinction between actuality and potentiality, that 
distinction has application not only to the changes things undergo 
through time, but also to their very existence at any moment of time. 
So, questions about the duration of the events in which change occurs 
and about whether any such events are simultaneous are not really to 
the point. We could ignore all that and just focus on the sheer exis­
tence of something at any instant, such as the existence of the water 
of our earlier example. For even its very existence— the fact that its 
atoms constitute water rather than discrete quantities of oxygen and 
hydrogen— involves the actualization of a potential and thus requires 
something to do the actualizing.
I also noted that what makes such a causal series hierarchical rather 
than linear is not simultaneity per se, but rather the fact that all the 
members in such a series other than the first have their causal power 
in a derivative or instrumental rather than inherent or “built-in” way. 
This, you will recall, is why linear series of causes can in principle 
extend backward to infinity, while hierarchical series of causes can­
not. Since each member of a linear series has its causal power inher­
ently rather than derivatively, there is no need to trace any member’s 
action back to a first member, which imparts to it its power to
37Ibid., p. 12 1.

64
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
act.38 Hence, such a series need not have a beginning. By contrast, 
a hierarchical series is hierarchical precisely insofar as each member 
other than the first can act only insofar as its power to act is imparted 
to it from outside. If D is actualized by C only insofar as C is in turn 
being actualized by B and B in turn by A, then until we get to some­
thing which can actualize everything else in the series without having 
to be actualized itself—that is to say, to something which can impart 
causal power without having to derive it— then we will not really 
have explained anything. We will just keep passing the explanatory 
buck. A first actualizer who is the source of the actualizing power of 
the others is a precondition of there being a hierarchical series in the 
first place. A hierarchical series without such a first member would 
be like an instrument that is not the instrument of anything, a series 
of causes which have derivative causal power without anything from 
which to derive it.
As this indicates (and as I also noted earlier), what is meant by a 
“first” cause in this context is not merely “ the cause that comes before 
the second, third, fourth, and so on” , or “ the one which happens to 
be at the head of the queue” . Rather, a “first cause” is one hav­
ing ««derived or “primary” causal power, in contrast to those which 
have their causal power in only a derivative or “ secondary” way. 
Thus, even if for the sake of argument we allowed that there could 
be an infinitely long hierarchical series— D actualized by C, which is 
in turn actualized by B, which is in turn actualized by A, and so on
38 More precisely, each member of a given linear series has its causal power inherently relative 
to the other members of that series. But it doesn’t have it inherently ^w// stop. Consider Al, who has 
a son named Bob, who in turn has a son o f his own named Chuck. Each member o f this series 
has the power to beget a son inherently rather than in a derivative way, in the sense that Bob 
can beget Chuck whether or not Al is still around, just as Al was able to beget Bob whether 
or not his own father was still around, and just as Chuck will be able to have a son o f his own 
whether or not either Al or Bob is still around. Their power to beget sons is not instrumental 
or derivative in the way that the power o f a stick to move a stone is derivative. It is Bob who 
begets Chuck, not Al who begets Chuck using Bob as an instrument. But o f course, there 
are other senses in which they do not have inherent causal power o f this or any other sort. 
For one thing, none o f them would have the power to beget sons had they not inherited that 
power from their parents. And most importandy for present purposes, neither A l nor Bob nor 
Chuck could beget or do anything else even for an instant unless the potential o f the atoms 
that make up their bodies to constitute bodies, specifically, is actualized here and now, which 
in turn requires that the potential o f the relevant subatomic particles to constitute atoms o f that 
sort, specifically, is actualized here and now, and so forth. And of course, none o f that is in A l’s 
(or Bob’s or Chuck’s) power. Again, each stage in a linear series itself presupposes hierarchical 
series o f causes, which do involve derivative rather than inherent causal power.

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
65
ad infinitum— there would still have to be a source of causal power 
outside the series to impart causal power to the whole. Again, even 
an infinitely long paintbrush handle could not move itself, since the 
wood out of which it is made has no “built-in” power of movement. 
The length of the handle is irrelevant. Or consider a mirror which re­
flects the image of a face present in another mirror, which in turn 
reflects the image of a face present in another, and so on ad infinitum. 
Even if we allowed that there could be such a series of mirrors, there 
would still have to be something outside this infinite series— the face 
itself—which could impart the content of the image without having 
to derive it. What there could not be is only mirror images and never 
any actual face. By the same token, even an infinitely long series of 
instrumental causes could not exhibit any causality at all unless there 
were something beyond the series whose instruments they were.
In this light, some objections sometimes raised against the idea that 
a hierarchical series of causes must have a first member can be seen 
to miss the point.39 It is no good, for instance, to point to infinite 
mathematical series as counterexamples, because these do not involve 
instrumental and primary causes, or indeed any causality at all. Aris­
totelians do not in any event rule out all infinite series as such. They 
allow not only for infinite mathematical series, but, as has already 
been noted, generally agree that linear series of causes extending 
backward in time (which also do not involve instrumental and pri­
mary causes) could at least in principle lack a beginning. That is why 
it misses the point to raise against the argument of this chapter the 
objection that there are cosmological models favoring a universe, or 
at least a “multiverse” , without a beginning.
It is also sometimes objected that the argument for a first member 
of a hierarchical series begs the question, insofar as characterizing 
other causes as instrumental itself presupposes that there is such a first 
member.40 But there is no begging of the question. To characterize
39E.g., Graham Oppy, in Arguing about Gods (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2006), pp. 10 1, 103, claims that Aquinas gives no reason to rule out an infinite series. But 
he simply ignores the crucial role that the notion o f instrumental causality plays in Aquinas’ 
argument.
40 Cf. Jordan Howard Sobel, Logic and Theism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2004), p. 195. Sobel’s objection to arguments like the one I have been defending is essentially 
that we will have no reason to think that things really do depend on hierarchical causal series 
unless we already accept the overall brand o f theism that the argument is trying to establish.

66
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
something as an instrumental cause is merely to say that it derives its 
causal power from something else. There is nothing in that charac­
terization that presupposes that a series of such causes cannot regress to 
infinity or that there must be some cause which has underived causal 
power. Even the skeptic can perfectly well understand the idea that a 
stick cannot move the stone under its own power, whether or not he 
goes on to agree that a regress of such moved movers must terminate 
in a first member.
Why an unmovable mover?
Even if it is granted that the Aristotelian proof takes us to an unmoved 
mover, a critic might object that it does not thereby get us to a mover 
that is unmovable. Or rather (to use the language I have said is less col­
loquial but more precise) the critic might suggest that even if there is 
a first actualizer, it need not be a purely actual actualizer, one devoid 
of potentiality. For why not suppose instead that it has potentialities 
which are simply not in fact being actualized, at least not insofar as 
it is functioning as the first actualizer in some hierarchical series of 
causes? Perhaps those potentialities are actualized at some other time, 
when it is not so functioning; or perhaps they never are. But as long 
as it has them, it will not be a purely actual actualizer, and thus will not 
have many of the attributes definitive of God— unity, immateriality, 
eternity, perfection, omnipotence, and so forth.
To see what is wrong with this objection, recall once again that 
though the argument begins by asking what explains the changes 
we observe in the world around us, it moves on to the question of 
what explains the existence, at any moment, of the things that undergo 
changes. So, the regress of actualizes that we are ultimately con­
cerned with is a regress of the actualizes of the existence of things. 
The first actualizer in the series is “fist” , then, in the sense that it can 
actualize the existence of other things without its own existence hav­
ing to be actualized. So, suppose this first actualizer had some poten­
tiality that had to be actualized in order for it to exist. What actualizes 
that potential? Should we suppose that it is something other than the 
first actualizer that actualizes it? But in that case, the so-called first 
actualizer isn’t really the first actualizer after all, contrary to hypoth­
esis; it would be this further actualizer that is the first, or perhaps

THE ARISTOTELIAN PROOF
67
some yet further actualizer that is the first. Should we say instead that 
the first actualizer has some purely actual part that actualizes the part 
that is merely potential? But in that case, it will be this purely actual 
part that is the true first actualizer, and the potential “part” will not 
really be a part of the first actualizer, but rather merely the first of its 
effects. Or should we say instead that the first actualizer’s potential is 
actualized by some part of it that is not purely actual, but a mixture 
of actual and potential? But what actualizes the potentialities of that 
part? Some yet further part that is a mixture of potential and actual? 
But in that case we are back to a vicious regress and haven’t reached 
a first actualizer after all.
So, there really is no sense to be made of a first actualizer of the 
existence of things which is not purely actual. If we acknowledge a 
first actualizer at all, we have to acknowledge thereby a purely actual 
actualizer. And thus we have to acknowledge an actualizer that has all 
the divine attributes which follow from being purely actual.
Still, a critic might object that anything that actualizes another 
thing must be undergoing change itself in the course of doing so, 
and thus must have potentialities which need to be actualized. Thus 
(so the objection might go) the very notion of a purely actual actualizer 
is incoherent. But one problem with this objection is that it simply begs 
the question. The Aristotelian argument for God’s existence claims to 
prove that no potential could be actualized at all unless there is a first 
actualizer, which is purely actual and thus devoid of potentiality. So, 
given that the premises of this argument are true and that the conclu­
sion follows logically from them, it follows that the conclusion is true 
and therefore coherent. Accordingly, it won’t do simply to insist that 
the conclusion must be false; one has to show specifically either that one 
of the premises is false or that the conclusion does not follow. Oth­
erwise, one ought to admit that the argument shows precisely that a 
purely actual actualizer really is possible (since actual) after all.
Another problem is that the objection seems to be grounded in 
what logicians call a fallacy of accident. In our experience, when a 
thing changes another thing, it undergoes change itself; for instance, 
when your arm moves a stick, that is because your arm is itself moving 
in the process. Things in our experience thus actualize other things 
precisely by going from potential to actual themselves. But it doesn’t 
follow that absolutely anything that actualizes another thing must itself

68
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
go from potential to actual. That is like reasoning from the pre­
mise that every president of the United States has in fact been under 
seven feet tall to the conclusion that absolutely anyone who could 
ever become president must be under seven feet tall. That does not 
follow, because there is no essential connection between being presi­
dent and being under seven feet tall, but only an accidental or contin­
gent connection. And the connection would remain contingent even 
if the facts of biology make it extremely unlikely that there will ever 
be a president taller than seven feet. Similarly, even if the actualizes 
of our experience are themselves mixtures of actual and potential, it 
simply doesn’t follow (for all the critic has shown) that there is an 
essential, as opposed to merely contingent, connection between being 
an actualizer and being a mixture of actual and potential.
Besides, it is hardly as if the notion of a purely actual actualizer 
were somehow paradoxical, as (say) the notion of an “immortal mor­
tal” would be. An “immortal mortal” would be something that both 
dies and does not die, which is self-contradictory. But a purely actual 
actualizer is something that actualizes other things without itself 
being actualized, and there is no self-contradiction in that idea. Fur­
thermore, the reason the actualizes of our experience are themselves 
being actualized even as they actualize other things is precisely because 
they are limited in the various ways entailed by being mixtures of 
actual and potential. For example, because an arm which moves a 
stick is actually at one point in space and only potentially at another, 
its potential to be at the other point in space has to be actualized by 
something else if it is to get the stick to that other point in space. But 
something which is pure actuality, devoid of all potentiality, would 
have no such limitations, and thus not need to be actualized itself as 
it is actualizing other things.
As I have said, in later chapters we will consider other objections 
which might be raised against any first cause argument for God’s 
existence. But so far we have seen that the objections that might 
be raised against a specifically Aristotelian argument for a divine First 
Cause all fail.41
41 For a more detailed exposition and defense o f the Aristotelian theory o f actuality and 
potentiality and the account o f causation that it is grounded in it, see Feser, Scholastic Meta­
physics, esp. chaps. 1 and 2.

2
The Neo-Platonic Proof
Informal statement of the argument: Stage i
The things of our experience are made up of parts. Suppose you are 
sitting in a chair as you read this book. The chair is made up of parts, 
such as the chair legs, the screws that hold the legs to the frame of the 
chair, the seat and back of the chair, and a cushion and the fabric that 
covers it. The book itself is made up of parts, such as the cover, the 
pages, the glue that secures the pages to the cover, and the ink on 
the pages. You are yourself made up of parts, such as your arms and 
legs, eyeballs and ears, bones and muscles, and all the rest.
There is a sense in which, in each of these cases, the parts are less 
fundamental than the whole. After all, we understand what a leg or 
an eyeball is by reference to the whole organism whose leg or eyeball 
it is. A leg is something which helps an organism to move about, and 
an eyeball is something which allows the organism to have visual 
experiences of objects in its surrounding environment. The parts of 
the book and the chair are also to be understood by reference to the 
whole. A book cover is something that protects the pages of the book 
and indicates, via the words written on it, the author of the book and 
something of the book’s contents. A chair leg is something which 
holds the chair up, a cushion something that functions to make the 
chair comfortable for the person sitting in it, and so forth.
Still, there is obviously also another sense in which each of these 
wholes is less fundamental than its parts. For the whole cannot exist 
unless the parts exist and are combined in the right way. For example, 
if there were no chair legs, no frame, or no seat, the chair would not 
exist. Neither would it exist if these parts were simply thrown in a 
pile or put together in the form of a table (say), rather than assembled
69

70
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
into a chair, specifically. Similarly, the book would not exist if the 
pages, cover, glue, and so forth did not exist, or if they existed but 
were scattered across a field. Your body would not exist if your arms, 
legs, eyes, ears, bones, muscles, and so forth were similarly scattered 
across the field or lumped together into a big pile, instead of being 
configured in the normal way.
So, the things of our experience are composite, or composed of 
parts. And a composite is less fundamental than its parts in the sense 
that its existence presupposes that its parts exist and are put together 
in the right way. You might think that this has essentially to do with 
there being some point in time at which the parts are not assembled 
into the whole, and then later on they are so assembled. And that is 
true in many cases. For example, the parts of a chair are made first 
and then assembled into a chair. But it is not true in every case. In 
the case of the human body, for example, it isn’t that the arms, legs, 
eyes, and ears all come into existence first and are then assembled into 
a body. Rather, they all develop together as cells divide while you 
gestate within the womb. Moreover, a composite thing would be less 
fundamental than its parts in the relevant sense even if it had never 
come into existence but somehow had always existed. For instance, 
even if a certain chair had always existed, it would still be true that its 
existence presupposes that its parts exist and are put together in the 
right way. For that matter, it would also depend on its parts even if it 
had not existed always, and not been assembled over time either, but 
instead came into existence altogether and all at once.
So, a composite depends on its parts not merely (and indeed not 
necessarily always) in a temporal sense, but more fundamentally (and 
always) in an atemporal sense. At any particular moment, a compos­
ite thing’s existence will presuppose that its parts exist and are put 
together in the right way at that moment, and this will be the case 
whether or not that composite thing has existed always, or only for a 
certain number of minutes, hours, days, or years, or only for an instant.
How do the parts of a composite come together to form the whole? 
It can’t be the composite itself that causes this to happen. This is 
obvious enough when we’re thinking in temporal terms. Chairs, 
for example, don’t assemble themselves. Someone has to take the 
parts and put them together. But again, even if we think atemporally 
of the chair at any particular moment, the existence of the whole

THE NEO-PLATONIC PROOF
71
depends on the existence and proper arrangement of the parts. And 
the chair as a whole can’t be the cause of those parts existing, 
and being assembled in just the right way, at that moment. We would 
in that case have an explanatory vicious circle, insofar as the existence 
of the whole would depend on the existence and arrangement of the 
parts, and the existence and arrangement of the parts would depend 
on the existence of the whole. The chair would be lifting itself up by 
its own metaphysical bootstraps, as it were.
In fact, of course, the existence and arrangement of the chair’s 
parts at any moment does not depend on the chair itself, but on 
myriad other factors. For example, the chair legs are at any moment 
at which the chair exists fastened to the frame of the chair by screws, 
and friction ensures that the screws stay in place. The legs and screws 
themselves exist at that moment because their respective molecules 
exist and are combined in certain specific ways, and the existence of 
the molecules themselves is explained in turn by the existence of the 
atoms that make them up and those atoms being combined in certain 
specific ways. Then there are other factors, such as the temperature in 
the room in which the chair sits being within the right range. Natu­
rally, if it were sufficiently hot in the room, the metal that makes up 
the screws would melt, the wood of the chair would catch fire, and 
thus the chair itself could not hold together. That the room is instead 
at a lower temperature is thus part of what makes it possible for the 
chair to exist at any moment. All of these factors (and others too) 
have, at any moment, to be combined in just the right way in order 
for the parts of the chair to exist and be combined in just the right 
way, so that the chair itself can exist at that moment.
What is true of the chair is true of all the other composite things 
of our experience. At any moment at which they exist, their parts 
exist and are arranged in just the right way, and that is the case only 
because various other factors exist and are combined in just the right 
way at that moment. Composite things have causes, and this is true not 
merely in the sense that something brings them into being at some 
point in time, but also in the more fundamental sense that their con­
tinued existence at any particular moment of time depends, at that 
moment, on other things which exist at that moment.
Notice that whereas the chair’s having being assembled by some­
one in a factory would involve a causal series of a linear sort, the chair’s

72
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
continued existence at any moment being dependent on other factors 
existing and being combined in just the right way at that moment 
involves a causal series of a hierarchical sort (to make use of some jar­
gon introduced in the previous chapter). This is indicated by the fact 
that the factors in question are simultaneous, all operating at the same 
moment; but remember that what is essential to the notion of a hier­
archical causal series is not simultaneity per se but rather the way the 
causal power of members of the series is derivative (as the power of a 
stick to push a stone derives from the hand which pushes the stick). 
The chair exists only because its parts exist and are combined in the 
right way, the parts in turn can exist and be combined in the right 
way only insofar as certain other factors exist and are combined in just 
the right way, and so on. If the latter factors don’t “hold together” , 
neither will the chair hold together.
We started out by considering parts of everyday material objects 
which are themselves everyday material objects— chair legs, screws, 
paper, eyeballs, muscles, and so forth— but as the discussion has 
progressed, we have made reference to parts that are not everyday 
material objects (such as atoms) or which are not objects at all (such 
as temperature). And the parts of a thing can be more exotic still, as 
they are according to various metaphysical theories. For example, 
according to Aristotelian philosophers, all physical substances are 
composites of form and matter. It is by virtue of its form that a piece 
of copper (say) has its distinctive properties, such as malleability and 
the capacity to conduct electricity; it is by virtue of its very differ­
ent form that a tree has its own distinctive properties and activities, 
such as the capacity to take in water and nutrients through roots; it 
is by virtue of yet another sort of form that an animal has its own 
distinctive properties and capacities, such as the ability to take in 
information through specialized sense organs; and so forth. Now, 
each of these kinds of form— the form of copper, the form of a tree, 
the form of an animal— is universal in the sense that it is one and the 
same form that exists in different individual things at different points 
in time and space. This piece of copper, that one, and a third one 
are all copper (rather than lead or gold) precisely because they have 
one and the same form; this tree and that one are both trees precisely 
because they have the same form, the form of a tree; this animal and 
that one are both animals because they both have the form of an

THE NEO-PLATONIC PROOF
73
animal; and so forth. Matter, by contrast, is what ties this otherwise 
universal form down to a particular individual thing at a particular 
time and place.
Now there is a lot more to this analysis of physical objects, but 
whether one accepts it is irrelevant to the present argument.1 The 
point is just that what has been said here about ordinary physical 
parts like chair legs and screws would be true also of metaphysi­
cal parts like form and matter, if they exist. That is to say, anything 
that is a composite of form and matter would have to have a cause 
which combines those parts, just as a chair requires some cause to 
combine the chair legs, screws, and so forth, in order for the chair 
to exist. For on the Aristotelian analysis, the form of something like 
copper or a tree is, all by itself and apart from matter, a mere abstrac­
tion rather than a concrete object. For the form to exist concretely 
requires that there be some matter to take that form on. But matter all 
by itself and apart from any form is, for the Aristotelian, nothing but 
the potential to be something. It is only actually some thing if it has the 
form of some particular kind of thing. So, though form and matter 
are different, there is a sense in which form depends on matter and 
matter depends on form. We would thus have an explanatory vicious 
circle if there were not something outside them which accounted for 
their combination.
Other metaphysical parts too might be identified. For example, 
Thomist philosophers hold that we can distinguish between the 
essence of a thing and its existence— that is, between what the thing is 
and the fact that it is. There is, for example, the essence or nature 
of a triangle— being a closed plane figure with three straight sides—  
and the existence of some particular triangle, which differs from the 
existence of some other particular triangle. Now, a thing exists at all 
only as a thing of some kind or other, so that there is no such thing 
as the existence of a triangle (to stick with that example) apart from 
the essence of the triangle. But the essence of a triangle all by itself 
and apart from any actual triangle which has that essence is a mere 
abstraction rather than a concrete object. So, some particular concrete 1
1 
For detailed exposition and defense o f the Aristotelian analysis o f material substance, see 
Edward Feser, Scholastic Metaphysics: A  Contemporary Introduction (Heusenstamm: Editiones 
Scholasticae, 2014), chap. 3.

74
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
triangle’s essence has no reality apart from the triangle’s existence. As 
with matter and form, then, the essence and existence of a thing 
depend on one another in such a way that if there were no cause 
outside of the thing that accounts for how the essence and existence 
are conjoined, we would have an explanatory vicious circle.
Here too for the moment nothing rides on whether one actually 
accepts this distinction or the metaphysical system of which it is a 
part (though we will have reason to revisit the Thomistic distinc­
tion between essence and existence in a later chapter).2 The point, 
again, is just that the principle that whatever is composite has a cause is 
completely general, applying whatever the parts are of which a thing 
is composed.
Now, if some composite thing is caused by another composite 
thing and that by yet another in a hierarchical causal series, then for 
the reasons set out in the previous chapter, that series must have a first 
member. But the first member cannot itself be composite, for then 
it would require a cause of its own and thus not be first. So, it must 
be something noncomposite, something utterly simple in the sense of 
having no parts of any kind— no material parts, and no metaphysical 
parts like form and matter or essence and existence.
For any of the composite things of our experience to exist at all 
here and now, then, there must also exist here and now a noncom­
posite or utterly simple ultimate cause of their existence— a cause 
which, following the Neo-Platonic philosopher Plotinus, we might 
call the One.
Informal statement of the argument: Stage 2
What is the One like? For example, is it unique? Could there be 
more than one of the One? There could not be. For suppose there 
were two or more noncomposite or utterly simple causes of things. 
Then there would have to be some feature the possession of which 
distinguishes one of them from the other. Noncomposite or simple 
cause A would differ from noncomposite or simple cause B insofar 
as A has feature F, which B lacks, and B has feature G, which A
2 For a detailed exposition and defense o f the distinction, see ibid., chap. 4.

THE NEO-PLATONIC PROOF
75
lacks. But in that case neither A nor B would really be simple or 
noncomposite after all. A would be a simple or noncomposite cause 
plus F, and B would be a simple or noncomposite cause plus G. F and 
G would be different parts, one of which each of these causes has 
and the other of which it lacks. But a simple or noncomposite cause 
has no parts. So, there can be no feature one such cause has and the 
other lacks. So, there can be no way one such cause could differ from 
another, and so there just couldn’t be more than one such cause. 
The One is “ one” , then, not just in the sense of being simple or 
noncomposite, but also in the sense of being unique. It is the same 
one simple or noncomposite cause to which all the composite things 
of our experience ultimately trace.
The One must be changeless or immutable. For to change entails 
gaining or losing some feature, and if the One could gain or lose some 
feature, it would not be simple or noncomposite. Rather, it would 
be a simple or noncomposite thing plus this feature, in which case 
the feature would be a part, and thus the One just wouldn’t really be 
simple or noncomposite. If the One is changeless or immutable, then 
it is also eternal or outside time, since to be in time entails undergoing 
some change. It must also be eternal in the sense of neither coming 
into being nor passing away. For if it came into being, it would have 
a cause, which entails that it has parts which were combined at the 
time it was caused; and it has no parts. If it could pass away, then that 
would entail that it has parts it could be broken down into; and again, 
it has no parts.
Furthermore, as is noted by William Vallicella (who defends an 
argument similar to the argument of this chapter), “ everything is 
either a mind, or a content in a mind, or a physical entity, or an ab­
stract entity.” 3 Now, the One cannot be an abstract entity, because 
abstract entities are causally inert. (For example, while a stone can 
break a window, the abstract pattern of being a stone cannot break 
a window, or do anything else for that matter.) But the One is the 
cause of the existence of composite things. Nor can the one be a 
physical or material entity, because material entities have parts which 
need to be combined in order for them to exist, and the One has no
3 
William F. Vallicella, A  Paradigm Theory of Existence: Onto-Theology Vindicated (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002), p. 255.

7 6
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
parts. They are for that reason capable of coming into existence and 
passing away, which, as I have just argued, the One is not. Nor can 
the One be a content in a mind— a thought, say— because a mental 
content depends on the mind whose content it is, and thus cannot 
be an ultimate cause of anything. But the One is the ultimate cause 
of things. So, to paraphrase Vallicella, “ given that [the One] is nei­
ther abstract nor physical, what we must conclude is not that [it] is 
a mental content, but that [it] is either a mind, or more like a mind 
than anything else.”4
Now, the One must be the cause of all things other than itself, 
for since it is unique, anything other than itself is composite, and we 
have already seen that anything that is composite must ultimately 
depend for its existence on the One. I have also argued that the One 
is itself uncaused, simple or noncomposite, unique, immutable, eter­
nal, immaterial, and a mind or intellect. That much would already 
justify us in calling the One “ God” . But much more can be said. 
The One also has to be regarded as purely actual rather than a mixture 
of actuality and potentiality. Obviously it has to be at least partially 
actual, for the reasons set out in the previous chapter— namely, that 
nothing that is merely potential can do anything, and the One is doing 
something insofar as it is the cause of all things other than itself. But 
if it was less then purely actual, then it would be partially potential. 
In that case it would have parts— an actual part and a potential part—  
and it has no parts. So, again, it must be purely actual.
If the One is purely actual, though, and we add to our consider­
ations the principle of proportionate causality appealed to in the pre­
vious chapter, then everything said there about the Unmoved Mover 
or purely actual actualizer of things will be true also of the One. We 
can thus add to the attributes already named, and judge the One to 
be also perfect, omnipotent, fully good, and omniscient. Indeed, the One 
and the Unmoved Mover are really identical. For both are purely 
actual, and as we saw in the previous chapter, there cannot even in 
principle be more than one thing that is purely actual. In arriving
4Ibid., p. 256. T o  be sure, Neo-Platonic philosophers like Plotinus located intellect in 
a second divine reality after the One. But one need not agree with all o f the specific details 
o f their position in order to embrace the general Neo-Platonic approach to arguing for the 
existence o f God.

THE NEO-PLATONIC PROOF
77
at the existence of the One, then, we have really just arrived at the 
existence of the Unmoved Mover from a different starting point. 
In the previous chapter, we started with the distinction between 
actuality and potentiality, and concluded that there must be some­
thing that is purely actual. In the present chapter, we started from the 
idea of things that are composed of parts, and concluded that there 
must be something which is simple or noncomposite. But it turns 
out that these are just different ways of thinking about one and the 
same thing.
That God, despite being unique and without parts, may be under­
stood or conceived of in different ways is crucial to understanding 
what is wrong with an objection that might have occurred to some 
readers. One might ask, if the One is omnipotent, is an intellect, and 
so forth, doesn’t that entail that it has parts? For aren’t omnipotence, 
intellect, and the like different attributes, and thus different parts of 
the One? Part of the answer to this objection is to note that while the 
statement that “ the One is omnipotent” doesn’t mean the same thing 
as the statement that “ the One is an intellect” , it doesn’t follow that 
they are not statements about the same one reality. The logician Gott­
lob Frege famously distinguished between the sense of an expression 
and its reference. The expression “ the evening star” doesn’t have the 
same sense as the expression “ the morning star” , but both expressions 
refer to one and the same thing— namely, the planet Venus. Simi­
larly, “ the One’s omnipotence” and “ the One’s intellect” don’t have 
the same sense, but they refer to the very same thing, to a single, sim­
ple, or noncomposite reality. The intellect, omnipotence, eternity, 
immateriality, and so forth of the One are really all one and the same 
thing, just conceived of or described in different ways.
Still, it might be objected: When we talk about a human being’s 
intellect and power, these are not merely different ways of conceiving or 
describing things, but ways of conceiving or describing what are them­
selves different things. A human being’s power is just a different feature 
from his intellect. So, how can they fail to be different attributes in 
the One? The answer is that if we were using expressions like “intel­
lect” and “power” in exactly the same sense when we apply them 
to the One as the sense in which we use them when we apply them to 
human beings, then they would be different features. But precisely 
because the One is noncomposite and thus lacks distinct parts, we

78
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
cannot, or at any rate should not, apply these terms to the One in 
exactly the same sense. We should understand them instead in what 
Thomas Aquinas called an analogical sense.
The analogical use of terms is typically contrasted with the uni­
vocal use and the equivocal use. We use a term univocally in two 
contexts when we use it in the same sense in both contexts. For 
example, if I say that Rover is a dog and that Fido is a dog, I am 
using the term “ dog” in a univocal way. We use a term equivocally 
in two contexts when we use it in one context in a sense that is 
completely different from the sense it has in the other. For example, 
if I say that the baseball player swung the bat and that there was a bat 
flying around the attic, I am using the term “bat” in an equivocal 
way. The analogical use of terms is a middle-ground sort of usage. 
When a term is used analogically in two contexts, the term is not 
used in exactly the same sense in both contexts, but the senses are 
not completely different either. For example, if I say that the wine 
is still good and that George is a good man, I am not using the term 
“ good” in exactly the same sense (since the goodness of wine is a 
very different sort of thing than the goodness of a man), but the two 
uses are not completely different or unrelated either. The goodness 
of the one is analogous to the goodness of the other, even if they are 
not the same thing. Notice that the analogical use of terms (or at 
least the sort of analogical use we are concerned with here) is not 
the same as a metaphorical use. We are not speaking metaphorically 
either when we say that the wine is good or that George is good. 
In both cases we are still using the term literally even if not either 
univocally or equivocally.
When we say of God that he is powerful, or has intellect, or is 
good, then, we should (so Aquinas argues, rightly in my view) under­
stand these terms analogically. We are saying that there is in God 
something analogous to what we call power in us, something analogous 
to what we call intellect in us, and something analogous to what we 
call goodness in us. These are not utterly unrelated to power, intel­
lect, and goodness as they exist in us (the way that being a baseball 
bat is utterly unrelated to being the sort of bat that flies around the 
attic). But neither are God’s power, intellect, and goodness exactly 
the same as what exists in us. In particular, what we call God’s power, 
intellect, and goodness (as well as the other divine attributes) are all

THE NEO-PLATONIC PROOF
79
ultimately one and the same thing looked at from different points of 
view, whereas what we call power, intellect, and goodness in us are 
not the same thing.
This is, of course, odd, but it should not be surprising nor in any 
way regarded as suspect. On the contrary, it is exactly what we should 
expect. A scientific analogy will help us to see why. Modem physics 
famously tells us that elementary particles exhibit properties not only 
of particles, but also of waves. This is very strange and difficult to 
understand, but we have good reason to accept it anyway. For one 
thing, the observational evidence together with rigorous scientific 
theorizing point in that direction. For another thing, the phenomena 
in question are very remote from everyday experience. To describe 
them we have to take concepts whose original application was to the 
material objects we see around us every day and stretch them very 
far, so as to apply them to microscopic phenomena that we do not 
observe. It is only to be expected that the conclusions we are thereby 
led to should be hard to grasp. We have excellent reasons to believe 
both that wave-particle duality is real and that we should not be able 
fully to understand how it works.
Now, when we reason to the existence of a purely actual actu­
alizer of things or to an absolutely simple or noncomposite cause 
of their existence, we are also going very far beyond the world of 
everyday experience. Indeed, we are getting to the most fundamental 
level of reality, to a level even farther from experience than anything 
physics describes or can describe. Hence, to characterize it, we 
have to stretch our ordinary concepts and language to the absolute 
limit. It is hardly surprising if we should arrive at some conclusions 
that are very unusual and difficult to understand. On the contrary, 
it would be surprising if we did not arrive at such conclusions. So, 
we have compelling reasons to conclude not only that there is an 
absolutely simple or noncomposite purely actual actualizer of the 
existence of things— and that this ultimate cause is one, eternal, 
perfectly good, an intellect, omnipotent, and so forth— but also 
that we should find it difficult to understand such a thing. Reason 
itself thus tells us that there is a level of reality that reason can only 
partially comprehend.
Much more could be said and will be said when we get to the 
chapter on the divine attributes. But this much suffices to show that

8o
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
to prove the existence of an absolutely simple or noncomposite cause 
of things is indeed to prove the existence of God.
A  more formal statement of the argument
With the overall thrust of the reasoning of this second argument for 
God’s existence having now been made clear, it will be useful to have 
a summary presented in a somewhat more formal way. It might be 
stated as follows:
1. The things of our experience are composite.
2. A composite exists at any moment only insofar as its parts are 
combined at that moment.
3. This composition of parts requires a concurrent cause.
4. So, any composite has a cause of its existence at any moment 
at which it exists.
5. So, each of the things of our experience has a cause at any 
moment at which it exists.
6. If the cause of a composite thing’s existence at any moment is 
itself composite, then it will in turn require a cause of its own 
existence at that moment.
7. The regress of causes this entails is hierarchical in nature, and 
such a regress must have a first member.
8. Only something absolutely simple or noncomposite could be 
the first member of such a series.
9. So, the existence of each of the things of our experience pre­
supposes an absolutely simple or noncomposite cause.
10. In order for there to be more than absolutely one simple or 
noncomposite cause, each would have to have some differen­
tiating feature that the others lacked.
11. But for a cause to have such a feature would be for it to 
have parts, in which case it would not really be simple or 
noncomposite.
12. So, no absolutely simple or noncomposite cause can have such 
a differentiating feature.
13. So, there cannot be more than one absolutely simple or non­
composite cause.

THE NEO-PLATONIC PROOF
81
14. If the absolutely simple or noncomposite cause were change­
able, then it would have parts which it gains or loses— which, 
being simple or non-composite, it does not have.
15. So, the absolutely simple or noncomposite cause is changeless 
or immutable.
16. If the absolutely simple or noncomposite cause had a begin­
ning or an end, it would have parts which could either be 
combined or broken apart.
17. So, since it has no such parts, the absolutely simple or non­
composite cause is beginningless and endless.
18. Whatever is immutable, beginningless, and endless is eternal.
19. So, the absolutely simple or noncomposite cause is eternal.
20. If something is caused, then it has parts which need to be 
combined.
21. So, the absolutely simple or noncomposite cause, since it has 
no parts, is uncaused.
22. Everything is either a mind, or a mental content, or a material 
entity, or an abstract entity.
23. An abstract entity is causally inert.
24. So, the absolutely simple or noncomposite cause, since it is 
not causally inert, is not an abstract entity.
25. A material entity has parts and is changeable.
26. So, the absolutely simple or noncomposite cause, since it is 
without parts and changeless, is not a material entity.
27. A mental content presupposes the existence of a mind, and so 
cannot be the ultimate cause of anything.
28. So, the absolutely simple or noncomposite cause, being the 
ultimate cause of things, cannot be a mental content.
29. So, the absolutely simple or noncomposite cause must be a 
mind.
30. Since the absolutely simple or noncomposite cause is unique, 
everything other than it is composite.
31. Every composite has the absolutely simple or noncomposite 
cause as its ultimate cause.
32. So, the absolutely simple or noncomposite cause is the ulti­
mate cause of everything other than itself.
33. If the absolutely simple or noncomposite cause had potential­
ities as well as actualities, it would have parts.

82
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
34. So, since it has no parts, it must have no potentialities but be 
purely actual.
35. A purely actual cause must be perfect, omnipotent, fully good, 
and omniscient.
36. So, there exists a cause which is simple or noncomposite, 
unique, immutable, eternal, immaterial, a mind or intellect, 
the uncaused ultimate cause of everything other than itself, 
purely actual, perfect, omnipotent, fully good, and omniscient.
37. But for there to be such a cause is just what it is for God to 
exist.
38. So, God exists.
Some objections rebutted
Some of the objections a critic might think to raise against this argu­
ment are the same as those raised against the Aristotelian proof, to 
which I have already replied or will reply. For example, objections 
might be raised against the arguments given here for the claim that the 
simple or noncomposite cause of things would have to have the various 
divine attributes. As I have said, I am going to address the question of 
the divine attributes at length in a later chapter, and such objections 
will be addressed there. The point to emphasize for the moment is that 
what has been said so far suffices to show that it is no good lazily to 
object (as is often done) that even if there is a first cause of things, we 
have no reason to think it would be a divine cause. For we have just 
set out reasons to think it must be a divine cause. Hence, it will not do 
for the critic glibly to suggest that an ultimate cause of things need not 
be God.
Some might also object that the present argument assumes that 
the universe had a beginning, or is open to the retort “ If everything 
has a cause, then what caused God?” We have already seen why 
these objections are completely without force when raised against 
the Aristotelian proof, and they have no more force when raised 
against the Neo-Platonic proof. For one thing, as should already 
be clear to anyone who has been reading carefully, the argument 
is simply not concerned in the first place with whether or not the 
universe had a beginning in time. The claim is not that the chain of

THE NEO-PLATONIC PROOF
83
causes of composite things traces backward into the past until it ter­
minates in a simple or noncomposite cause. Rather, the claim is that 
it traces here and now to a simple or noncomposite cause. Nor does 
the argument rest on the premise that “ everything has a cause.” What 
it says is that whatever is composite requires a cause. And the reason 
God does not have a cause is not that he is an arbitrary exception to 
a general rule, but rather that only what is in some way composite 
needs to have, or indeed could have, a cause. Something absolutely 
simple or noneomposite not only needs no cause but could not have 
had one. Nor is this point something defenders of the argument 
have come up with as a way to try to sidestep the “What caused 
God?” objection. It was always what the Neo-Platonic tradition 
had in mind from the beginning. As in the case of the Aristote­
lian proof, the “What caused God?” objection, far from being the 
devastating reply many atheists suppose, is in fact utterly incom­
petent, completely missing the point of the arguments at which it 
is directed.
The reader is advised, then, to review what was said in the previ­
ous chapter in reply to the various objections there considered, for 
many of the points made there are relevant here also. For example, 
some critics may appeal to Hume, or to quantum mechanics, in order 
to cast doubt on the premise that whatever is composite requires a 
cause. But these objections too are no better when raised against the 
Neo-Platonic proof than they were when raised against the Aristo­
telian proof.
But there are other potential objections which take aim at what 
is distinctive about the present argument. Whereas the Aristotelian 
proof reasons from the fact that some potentials are actualized to 
the existence of a purely actual actualizer, the Neo-Platonic proof 
reasons from the fact that some things are composite to the existence 
of an absolutely simple or noncomposite cause. But it might be sug­
gested that there are alternative ways to account for the existence 
of composite things. For the argument assumes that for a composite 
thing to exist, its parts have to be unified by some external cause. But 
why assume this? Why not suppose instead that it is precisely some 
part of a composite thing that unifies its parts, rather than something 
external? Or why not suppose that the fact that a composite thing’s 
parts are unified is just an irreducible fact about it?

84
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
But as Vallicella has argued, neither of these suggestions really 
makes any sense.5 Start with the suggestion that the parts of a thing 
are unified by some further part. For instance, consider a thing com­
posed of parts A and B. What makes it the case that A and B are 
united in such a way that the composite thing in question exists? 
The suggestion at hand would be that there is some further part, C, 
which accounts for A and B being united. But the problem is that 
this just pushes the problem back a stage, since we now need to ask 
what unites C together with A and B. If we posit yet another further 
part, D, in order to account for the unity of A, B, and C, then we 
will merely have pushed the problem back yet another stage. And of 
course the problem will just keep recurring for each further part we 
posit. We will not have solved the problem of explaining the unity of 
A and B at all, but rather just compounded the problem.
Suppose instead that we opt for the alternative suggestion, to the 
effect that a composite thing’s parts A and B being unified in such 
a way that it exists is just an irreducible fact about the thing. What 
exactly does this claim amount to? Does it mean that the composite 
thing made up of A and B is itself the cause of A and B being unified 
in such a way that the composite thing exists? That would entail that 
the composite thing is both the cause of its parts A andB being unified 
and the effect of its parts A and B being unified—which is incoherent. 
As we saw above, nothing can be the cause of itself, lifting itself up 
by its own metaphysical bootstraps. Is the idea instead that a compos­
ite thing’s parts A and B being unified in such a way that the thing 
exists has no cause at all, but is just a brute fact? In that case, the critic 
is not really offering an alternative explanation to the Neo-Platonic 
argument at all, but rather giving no explanation. Yet an alternative 
explanation is what he claimed to be offering.
Suppose the critic of the Neo-Platonic argument bites the bullet at 
this point and says: “ OK, so I haven’t actually offered an alternative 
explanation. I guess I’m really just suggesting that there is no explana­
tion at all for why a composite exists.” As Lloyd Gerson has pointed 
out, this is hardly a serious response to a Neo-Platonic argument for
5 
William F. Vallicella, “ From Facts to God: An Onto-Cosmological Argument” , Interna­
tional Journal for Philosophy of Religion 48 (2000): 157—81; see also Vallicella, Paradigm Theory of 
Existence, chap. 7. W hat I present here are just brief summaries o f lines o f argument Vallicella 
develops in much greater detail. I should also note that my terminology differs from his.

THE NEO-PLATONIC PROOF
85
God’s existence.6 The defender of the argument can reasonably say: 
“What are you talking about? I just gave you an explanation— namely, 
that its parts are conjoined by an absolutely simple and noncomposite 
cause. And you have offered no non-question-begging reason to reject 
that explanation. So, it’s silly to say ‘Maybe there’s no explanation’!”
Might the critic of the Neo-Platonic proof acknowledge that there 
is an explanation, and acknowledge that it must be a cause that is 
external to the composite thing itself (rather than being either the 
composite as a whole or some further part of the composite), but 
without having to agree that the cause is divine? In particular, could 
he not say that a composite thing’s parts being combined in such a 
way that the thing exists can be explained scientifically? The idea 
here would be that we can explain why the composite thing’s parts A 
and B are conjoined in terms of laws of nature (whether laws of atomic 
structure, or laws of molecular cohesion, or whatever).
But this proposal too does not provide a genuine alternative at all. 
For however we construe laws of nature— and we will consider the 
various possible accounts of what a law of nature is in a later chapter—  
any explanation in terms of laws of nature will inevitably just leave us 
with some further thing made up of parts whose composition requires 
an explanation, thus continuing rather than terminating the regress 
of causes. For instance, if we say of some composite thing composed 
of parts A and B that it is a law of nature that things of type A and 
things of type B will combine under such-and-such circumstances to 
form the whole, then we have to ask why things of type A and type 
B are governed by that particular law rather than some other. A and B 
as well as the law governing them will together constitute a kind 
of composite whose existence is just a further instance of the sort of 
thing for which the critic of the Neo-Platonic proof was supposed 
to be providing an alternative explanation.7 There simply is no way
6 Lloyd P. Gerson, Plotinus (London: Routledge, 1994), p. 13.
7 This way o f putting the point makes it sound as if laws o f nature are something extrinsic 
to the things the laws govern, which is not how Aristotelian philosophers understand laws. As 
we will see in a later chapter, from an Aristotelian point o f view, a law o f nature is a shorthand 
description o f the way a thing will tend to operate given its nature or substantial form, where 
its nature or substantial form is something intrinsic to it. But this is no help to the critic o f the 
Neo-Platonic proof, since a thing’s substantial form is, together with prime matter, one of 
two basic principles o f which it is composed. Hence, on the Aristotelian view, the operation 
o f a law o f nature presupposes the combination o f the basic metaphysical parts of the thing it 
governs. So it can hardly be what explains that combination.

86
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
to terminate this regress other than by positing something absolutely 
simple or noncomposite, and for the reasons given, this cannot be 
something less than divine.
As I have said before, in later chapters we will consider various 
further objections which might be raised against any first cause argu­
ment for God’s existence. Suffice it for present purposes to note that 
the objections that might be raised against a specifically Neo-Platonic 
argument, like those raised against the Aristotelian proof, all fail.

3
The Augustinian Proof
Informal statement of the argument: Stage i
We are surrounded by particular, individual objects. You take a par­
ticular, individual pool cue, and with it knock a particular, individual 
billiard ball across a particular, individual pool table, then pick up a 
particular, individual rack to arrange the balls so that a new particular, 
individual game can begin. But each of these particular things is an 
instance of an abstract, general pattern. The various pool cues leaning 
against the table are all instances of the same pattem, the pattem of 
being a pool cue; the cue ball, the eight ball, the solid red billiard ball, 
the red striped billiard ball, and all the others are instances of the same 
pattern— namely, the pattern of being a billiard ball; and so forth. 
They are also instances of even more abstract patterns, shared with 
even more kinds of things. Some of the billiard balls share the pattern 
redness in common with stop signs, fire engines, and strawberries; 
all of the billiard balls share the pattern roundness in common with 
basketballs, globes, and the moon; the billiard rack shares the pattern 
triangularity with pyramids, dinner bells, and dunce caps; and so on.
Such patterns are called universals by philosophers, and they are 
“abstract” in the sense that when we consider them, we abstract from 
or iguore the particular, individualizing features of the concrete objects 
that exhibit the patterns. For instance, when we consider triangularity as 
a general pattern, we abstract from or ignore the facts that this particu­
lar triangle is made of wood and that one of stone, that this one is green 
and that one orange, that this one is drawn on the page of a book and 
that one is metal, and focus instead on what is common to them all.
Universals like triangularity, redness, and roundness exist at least as 
objects of thought. After all, we can meaningfully talk about them,
87

88
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
and indeed we know certain things about them. We know, for exam­
ple, that whatever is triangular will be three-sided, that (at least if it is 
Euclidean triangles we are talking about) its angles will always add up 
to the sum of two right angles, and so forth. But unlike a wooden bil­
liard ball rack or dinner bell, you can’t perceive triangularity through 
the five senses, can’t pick it up and put it on the table, or in any 
other way interact with it the way you would interact with a material 
object. If it is an object of some sort, then, it is what philosophers 
would call an abstract object.
Universals are not the only apparent examples of abstract objects. 
A second would be what philosophers call propositions— statements 
about the world, always either true or false, which are distinct from 
the different sentences we might use to express them. “John is a 
bachelor” and “John is an unmarried man” are different sentences, 
but they express the same proposition. “ Snow is white” and “ Schnee 
ist weiss” are also different sentences— indeed, one is a sentence of 
English, the other a sentence of German— but they too express 
the same proposition— namely, the proposition that snow is white. 
When the mind entertains any thought at all, whether true or false, it 
is ultimately a proposition that it is entertaining, and not a sentence. 
That is why we can all entertain the very same thoughts despite our 
being separated by different languages and different times and places. 
When Socrates and Barack Obama think that snow is white, they 
are thinking exactly the same thing, despite the fact that one of them 
expresses this thought in Greek in the Athens of the fifth century b .c ., 
and the other in English in twenty-first-century Washington, D.C.
Like universals, propositions exist at least as objects of thought. But 
also like universals, they are not material objects. If someone writes 
“ Snow is white” on a marker board, you can see the sentence, but 
you cannot literally see the proposition it expresses. (After all, the same 
proposition is expressed by the written sentence “ Schnee ist weiss” , 
which looks very different from the sentence “ Snow is white.”) You 
can erase the sentence, but you cannot thereby destroy the proposi­
tion. (Even if we erased every instance of the English sentence “ Snow 
is white” , every instance of the German sentence “ Schnee ist weiss” , 
and every instance of every parallel sentence in every other language, 
the proposition that snow is white would still be true.) So, if a prop­
osition is a kind of object, it too is an abstract object.

THE AU GU STINIAN PROOF
89
Then there are numbers and other mathematical entities. They 
too obviously exist at least as objects of thought, as we know from 
our grasp of mathematical truths and our carrying out of calcula­
tions. But like universals and propositions, numbers are in no obvi­
ous way material things. The written numeral “ 2” isn’t the number 2 
any more than the Roman numeral “ II” is, or any more than the 
name “Barack Obama” is the same thing as the man Barack Obama. 
Numerals like “ 2” and “ II” are just labels we use to talk about the 
number 2. Nor would erasing every instance of numerals like “ 2” 
and “ II” that anyone has ever written somehow destroy the number 2. 
(It wouldn’t suddenly make 2 + 2 = 4 false, for example.) So, like 
universals and propositions, numbers and other mathematical objects 
are abstract objects.
Finally, consider what philosophers call possible worlds. A possible 
world is a way that things could have been, at least in principle. In 
the actual world, Barack Obama won the 2012 U.S. presidential 
election, but it could have turned out instead that Mitt Romney 
won it. In the actual world, the planet Mars has two moons, but 
had things gone differently it could have had three or only one. 
In the actual world, there are galaxies like the Andromeda galaxy 
and the Milky Way, but had the laws of physics been somewhat 
different, no galaxies would have formed. In the actual world there 
are horses but no unicorns, but in principle unicorns could have 
existed alongside horses (or, for that matter, without horses). When 
we describe scenarios in which Romney won the election, or Mars 
has three moons, or there are no galaxies, or unicorns exist, we are 
describing different possible worlds. (Not everything is a possible 
world. For example, there is no possible world where 2 + 2 = 5 or 
where round squares exist. These notions are self-contradictory and 
therefore absolutely impossible. What worlds are possible, in the 
sense of “possible” in question here, is not constrained by the laws 
of physics— after all, even physicists entertain hypotheses about what 
things might have been like had the laws of physics been different—  
but it is constrained by the laws of logic.)
Possible worlds too are obviously objects of thought, as we know 
from the fact that we can entertain all these possibilities, wondering 
what would have followed had Romney won or Mars had three 
moons. But you can’t literally visit a possible world, much less see or

90
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
otherwise perceive it. They too are commonly regarded by philoso­
phers as abstract objects.
So, in some sense there are abstract objects such as universals, 
propositions, numbers and other mathematical objects, and possible 
worlds. But in what sense, exactly, do they exist? Are they merely 
objects of human thought— purely conventional entities, sheer con­
structs of our minds? Are they merely useful fictions? Or might they 
after all really be material things, but of some more exotic kind than 
the ones we’ve considered so far? (For example, might we identify 
universals or propositions with brain processes?) There are compel­
ling reasons to think that none of these answers can be correct— to 
conclude instead that abstract objects of the sort we’ve been consid­
ering are real, and neither reducible to anything material nor sheer 
constructs of the human mind. This is a view known as realism. The 
standard alternative views are nominalism, which denies that abstract 
objects are real, and conceptualism, which allows that they are real but 
insists that they are wholly constructed by the human mind. The key 
arguments for realism and against nominalism and conceptualism can 
be summarized as follows: 1 2
1. The “one over many” argument: Universals like triangularity and 
redness are not reducible to any particular triangle or red thing, nor 
even to any collection of triangles or red things. For any particular 
triangle or red thing, or even the whole collection of these things, 
could go out of existence, and yet triangularity and redness could come 
to be exemplified once again in some new triangle or red thing. 
These universals also could be, and often are, exemplified even when 
no human mind is aware of this fact. Hence, triangularity, redness, and 
other universals are neither material things nor collections of material 
things, nor dependent on human minds for their existence.
2. The argument from geometry: In geometry we deal with perfect 
fines, perfect angles, perfect circles, and the like, and discover objec­
tive and necessary truths about them. For example, it is an objective 
and necessary truth that the angles of a Euclidean triangle add up to 
the sum of two right angles. We discovered this rather than invented 
it and couldn’t change it if we wanted to. It was true before any 
human mind existed and would remain true even if every human 
being went out of existence. Since these truths are objective and

THE AU GU STINIAN PROOF
91
necessary, they cannot be mere constructs of our minds. Since they 
are necessary and unalterable truths, they would also remain true 
whatever happens in the material world, and even if the material 
world went out of existence. Furthermore, no material thing has 
the perfection that geometrical objects have. So, these truths do not 
depend on the material world either.
3. The argument from mathematics in general: Mathematical truths in 
general are necessary and unalterable, while the material world and 
the human mind are contingent and changing—for example, that 
2 + 2 = 4 was true long before anyone realized it, and would remain 
true even if every human being forgot about it or died out. It would 
also remain true whatever happens in the material universe, and even 
if the entire material universe went out of existence. Hence, the 
things these truths are truths about— numbers and other mathemati­
cal objects— cannot be either mere constructs of the human mind, or 
dependent on the material world. Moreover, the series of numbers 
is infinite, but there are only finitely many material things and only 
finitely many ideas within any human mind or collection of human 
minds. Hence, the series of numbers cannot be dependent for its exis­
tence on either human minds or the material world.
4. The argument from the nature of propositions: Propositions cannot 
depend for their existence either on the material world or on any 
human mind. For some propositions (e.g., mathematical propositions 
like 2 + 2 = 4 )  are necessarily true, and thus would remain true if 
neither the material world nor any human mind existed. Even many 
propositions which are true only contingently would remain true in 
such a circumstance. For example, the proposition that Caesar was 
assassinated on the Ides of March would remain true even if the entire 
material world and every human mind went out of existence tomor­
row. Even if neither the material world nor any human mind had 
ever existed in the first place, the proposition that there is neither a 
material world nor any human mind would have been true, in which 
case it would not be something either material or dependent on any 
human mind. And so forth.1
^ h e  difficulties with identifying propositions with anything either material or mental 
go well beyond this, and are summarized by Alvin Plantinga in Warrant and Proper Function 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993), chap. 6.

92
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
5. The argument from science: Scientific laws and classifications, being 
general or universal in their application, necessarily make reference 
to universals; and science is in the business of discovering objective, 
mind-independent facts. Hence, to accept the results of science is to 
accept that there are universals that do not depend for their existence 
on the human mind. Science also makes use of mathematical formu­
lations, and since (as noted above) mathematics concerns a realm of 
abstract objects, to accept the results of science thus commits one to 
accepting that there are such abstract objects.
6. The argument from the nature of possible worlds: Much of what is 
possible (not all of what is possible, to be sure, but much of it) does 
not depend either on the actual material world or on the human 
mind. For example, there are possible worlds in which the laws of 
physics are radically different from those that actually operate, includ­
ing some with laws that would make it impossible for human beings 
to exist. Obviously such possibilities cannot depend on the actual 
material world (which, needless to say, is governed by the laws that 
actually hold) or the human mind. And before the actual material 
world or any human mind came into existence, it was at least possible 
for them to exist. This possibility could not then have depended on 
either the actual material world or the human mind, since neither yet 
existed. There are also possible worlds in which no human minds nor 
any material things of any sort exist— a world in which there are only 
angelic intellects, say— and the possibility of such a world could not 
depend on the material world nor any human mind.
These are direct arguments for realism. There are also indirect 
arguments, to the effect that the alternatives to realism cannot be 
right. Consider nominalism, which denies that there are universals, 
numbers, propositions, or possible worlds.2 For example, where we 
think there are universals, the nominalist says, there are really only 
general names, words we apply to many things. Hence, there is, for 
instance, the general term “ red” , which we apply to various objects, 
but no such thing as redness. O f course, this raises the question why 
we apply the term “ red” to just the things we do, and it is hard to see 
how there could be any plausible answer other than “because they
2 
O f course, one could take a nominalist position vis-à-vis some sorts o f abstract objects and 
a realist position vis-à-vis other sorts.

THE AU GU STINI AN PROOF
93
all have redness in common” , which brings us back to affirming 
the existence of universals after all. The nominalist might seek to 
avoid this by saying that the reason we label different things “ red” 
is that they resemble each other, without specifying the respect in 
which they resemble each other. This is implausible on its face—  
isn’t it obvious that they resemble each other with respect to their 
redness?— but there are other problems too.
7. The vicious regress problem: As Bertrand Russell noted, the resem­
blance to which the nominalist appeals is itself a universal.3 A stop 
sign resembles a fire truck, which is why we call them both “ red” . 
Grass resembles the Incredible Hulk’s skin, which is why we call 
them both “ green” . And so on. What we have, then, are multiple 
instances of one and the same universal— namely, resemblance itself. 
Now the nominalist might seek to avoid this consequence by say­
ing that we only call all of these examples cases of “ resemblance” 
because they resemble each other, without specifying the respect in 
which they resemble each other. But then the problem just crops up 
again at a higher level. These various cases of resemblance resemble 
other various cases of resemblance, so that we have a higher-order 
resemblance, which itself will be a universal. And if the nominalist 
tries to avoid this universal by once again applying his original strat­
egy, he will be just faced with the same problem again at yet a higher 
level, ad infinitum.
8. The “words are universals tooyy problem: The nominalist claims that 
there are no universals like redness, just general terms like “red” . Yet 
this claim seems obviously self-contradictory, since the term “red” is 
itself a universal. You utter the word “ red” , I utter the word “red” , 
Socrates utters the word “red” , and they are all obviously particular 
utterances of the same one word, which exists over and above our 
various utterances of it. (As philosophers usually put it, each utter­
ance is a different token of the same word type.) Indeed, this is the 
only reason the nominalist proposal has whatever plausibility it has: 
that the same one word applies to many things might seem sufficient 
to capture (on a superficial analysis, anyway) our intuitive sense that 
there is something in common between them. But again, if it is the
3 
Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy (Amherst, N .Y .: Prometheus Books, 1988), 
chap. 9.

94
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
same one word, then since there are different utterances of it, we 
have just the sort of “ one over many” situation the nominalist wants 
to avoid. To evade this result, the nominalist might propose that 
when you, I, and Socrates each say “red” , we are not in fact uttering 
the same word at all, but only words that resemble each other. This 
would, of course, be absurd on its face. It would also entail that com­
munication is impossible, since we would never be using the same 
words— indeed, you would never be using the same word more than 
once even when talking to yourself, but only words that resemble each 
other— in which case, what does the nominalist hope to accomplish 
by talking to us? Furthermore, the appeal to “resemblance” would 
open the door up again to the vicious regress problem.
In general, it is notoriously very difficult to defend nominalism 
in a way that doesn’t surreptitiously bring in through the back door 
a commitment to universals or other abstract objects, in which case 
the view is self-undermining. For reasons such as this, conceptual­
ism hopes to avoid realism not by denying that universals exist, but 
rather by denying that they have any existence independent of the 
human mind. It is an attempt at a middle way between realism and 
nominalism. But it too faces what are widely regarded as insupera­
ble difficulties.
9. 
The argument from the objectivity of concepts and knowledge: When 
you and I entertain the concept of any universal— the concept of tri­
angularity, say, or of redness—we are each entertaining one and the same 
concept, which refers to one and the same universal. It is not that you are 
entertaining your own private concept of redness and I am entertaining 
mine, with nothing in common between them. Similarly, when we 
each consider various propositions, we are entertaining the same prop­
ositions. For example, when you think about the Pythagorean theo­
rem and I think about the Pythagorean theorem, we are each thinking 
about one and the same truth. It is not that you are thinking about your 
own personal Pythagorean theorem and I am thinking about mine 
(whatever that would mean). Furthermore, many of the universals and 
propositions we entertain are the same as those entertained by people 
long dead, and will be entertained by people who do not yet exist, long 
after we are dead. If the human race died out, and some new intelligent 
beings came into existence, they could come to entertain the same uni­
versals and propositions we did. So, universals and propositions are not

THE AU GU STINIAN PROOF
95
mere constructs of the human mind, but have some foundation outside 
the human mind.
Consider also that this must be the case in order for communi­
cation to be possible. Suppose that, as conceptualism implies, the 
universals and propositions you entertain were sheer constructs of 
your mind. Then it would be impossible for you and anyone else 
ever to communicate. For whenever you said something— “ Snow is 
white” , say— then the universals you refer to and propositions that 
you expressed would be things that existed only in your own mind, 
and would thus be inaccessible to anybody else. Your idea of snow 
would be entirely different from my idea of snow, and since your 
idea is the only one you would have any access to, and my idea is 
the only one I would have access to, we would never mean the same 
thing whenever we talked about snow, or about anything else for that 
matter. But this is absurd. We are able to communicate and grasp the 
same concepts and propositions. Indeed, we have to be able to do so 
even to agree or disagree about conceptualism itself. Hence, univer­
sals and propositions cannot be mere constructs of the human mind, 
but must have some foundation outside it.
io. 
The argument from the incoherence of psychologism: Arguments 
like the last are associated with the logician Gottlob Frege, who was 
concerned to uphold the scientific status of logic and mathematics 
against a doctrine known as “psychologism” . Psychologism tends 
to reduce the laws of logic and mathematics to mere psycholog­
ical principles governing the operation of the human mind.4 On 
this view, logic and mathematics don’t describe objective reality, 
but merely the way the structure of our minds leads us to think 
about reality. There are obvious affinities between conceptualism 
and this sort of view. When you add to it (as some relativists would) 
the suggestion that the way our minds are structured is determined 
by contingent and evolving biological, social, historical, and cul­
tural circumstances, the result is a very radical form of relativism, on 
which all our concepts, as well as logic, mathematics, science, and 
so forth, are culturally conditioned and subject to revision, with no 
necessary connection to objective reality.
4 
See, for instance, Frege’s essay “ Thought” , in The Frege Reader, ed. Michael Beaney 
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1997), pp. 325-45.

9 6
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
This is radical, and totally incoherent, as are psychologism and 
conceptualism generally. For if we say that our concepts, standards 
of logic, and the like are determined not by any correspondence to 
objective reality but rather by the effects on our minds of contin­
gent forces of history, culture, and the like, or even by biological 
evolution, then we have to give some account of exactly how this 
works. We have to say precisely which biological and cultural forces 
were responsible, how they formed our minds, and so forth. We will 
also have to give arguments in defense of this account. But such an 
account will necessarily appeal to various universals (e.g., Darwin­
ian selection pressures, class interests, genetic mutations, and social trends) 
and to scientific and mathematical principles governing the relevant 
processes; and defending it will require appeal to standards of logic. 
Yet these were the very things the view in question tells us have no 
objective validity, and (since they purportedly depend on our minds 
for their existence) did not exist before our minds did. Hence, this 
sort of view completely undermines itself.
Suppose instead that, following Kant, the conceptualist or advo­
cate of psychologism takes the less radical position that though our 
concepts and standards of logic and mathematics reflect only the 
operations of our own minds and not objective reality, this is a nec­
essary fact about ourselves, something that could not be changed by 
either biological or cultural evolution. Would this save the view from 
incoherence? Not at all. For again, the advocate of such a view is 
going to have to explain to us how he knows all this, and how our 
minds got that way in the first place. And if he appeals to concepts, 
logical standards, and so forth that he’s just got done telling us have 
no connection to objective reality and depend entirely on our minds 
for their existence, then he’s effectively undermined his own case. 
On the other hand, insofar as he claims that it is a necessary fact 
about our minds that we have the concepts, standards of logic, and 
so forth that we do, then he’s thereby claiming to have knowledge of 
the objective nature of things— specifically, of the objective nature 
of the workings of our minds— of just the sort that was supposed to 
be ruled out by his theory. For to formulate and defend his claim, he 
needs to appeal to certain universals (like mind), standards of logic, 
and so forth; and again, his theory claims that these have no objective 
validity. So, he’s caught in a dilemma: if he insists, as his theory must

THE AU GU STINIAN PROOF
97
lead him to, that our concepts, standards of logic, and so forth have 
no objective validity, then he cannot so much as defend his own 
position; if he claims that they do have validity, so as to justify his 
claim to know about the objective nature of our minds, then he’s just 
contradicted his own view in the very act of defending it. Again, the 
view is simply incoherent.
So, some version of realism about abstract objects like universals, 
propositions, numbers and other mathematical objects, and possible 
worlds must be correct. But which version? There are three alterna­
tives: Platonic realism, Aristotelian realism, and Scholastic realism. Let’s 
consider each in turn.
The Platonic form of realism— named after Plato, who was the first 
to formulate a version of it— holds that if the abstract objects we 
have been discussing depend for their existence neither on the mate­
rial world nor on the human mind, then they must exist in a “ third 
realm” that is neither material nor mental. This is the famous realm 
of Platonic Forms, entities which exist outside time and space and 
which the things of our experience merely imperfectly “resemble” or 
“participate” in. The universal triangularity, for example, exists in this 
third realm as the Form of Triangle, and the triangles of our expe­
rience are things of the kind they are because they “participate” in 
this Platonic Form and “ resemble” it, albeit only approximately. The 
universal humanness exists in the third realm as the Form of Human 
Being, and the human beings of our experience are what they are 
because they “participate” in and “resemble” that Form. And so on 
for every other universal. Numbers, propositions, and possible worlds 
are also, at least on some variations on this basic idea, to be thought 
of on the model of the Forms— as objects existing in a “ third realm” 
outside the spatiotemporal world and outside any mind.
There are a number of well-known problems with this Platonic 
brand of realism. For example, Platonic Forms and other denizens 
of the “ third realm” seem to be causally inert. We know that mate­
rial triangles, such as a billiard rack or a dinner bell, can have effects 
on other things. For instance, a billiard rack will cause the billiard 
balls to be arranged in a certain shape, and a dinner bell when rung 
makes a sound we can hear. We also know that our concept of the 
universal triangularity can have effects on other things. For instance,

98
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
an architect gives the pyramidal structure he builds its characteristic 
shape by virtue of his having the concept of triangularity and apply­
ing it when drawing up the blueprints. But what would it be for 
triangularity, in the abstract and all by itself—existing, not in an actual 
material triangle and not in any mind, but somehow as an object in its 
own right— to cause something? How could it do so if it lacks causal 
powers of the sort we know material objects and minds to have? Yet 
if it has no causal powers, and thus no effects on anything, then it 
would follow that it has no effects on us. And in that case, how could 
we possibly even know about it? Furthermore, if it has no effect on 
anything, then it has no effect on individual material objects, like the 
triangular billiard ball rack or dinner bell. But in that case, how could 
it be that which explains why those things fit the particular pattern 
they do?
A second problem is that Platonic realism seems to regard a Form 
as something both universal— that is, instantiated in many things—  
and also existing as a particular, individual thing in its own right. This 
seems incoherent, and seems to lead to paradoxes. Take the Form 
of Man, for example. Individual men are men only because they 
“participate” in this Form, says the Platonic realist. But if the Form 
of Man is itself an individual object, doesn’t that entail that there 
must be some other Form that it “participates” in and by reference 
to which it counts as the Form of Man specifically? Don’t we have to 
posit a Super-Form of Man over and above the Form of Man, in 
which both individual men and the Form of Man itself all “partic­
ipate” ? Indeed, wouldn’t we have to posit a Super-Super-Form of 
Man over and above that Super-Form, in which the Form of Man, 
the Super-Form, and individual men “participate” ? We seem led 
into infinite regress, and absurdity.
This objection— known as the “ Third Man” argument—was 
raised by Plato himself, and its force has been a matter of dispute 
for millennia. A more telling objection, though, is the following. 
Consider a universal like animality. Every individual animal is either 
rational (as human beings are) or nonrational (as all other animals are). 
But what about animality itself? Precisely because it is universal, it has 
to apply to both rational and nonrational animals. But it can’t itself 
include both rationality and nonrationality, for these are contradic­
tory. So, we have to say that inherently it entails neither rationality 
nor nonrationality. But no individual thing can be neither rational nor

THE AU GU STINIAN PROOF
99
nonrational; any existing thing has to be one or the other. Hence, 
the universal animality cannot be said to exist as an individual thing 
in its own right; that is to say, it cannot properly be thought of as a 
Platonic Form.
A third problem with Platonic realism is entailed by the fact that 
the view implies that the essences or natures of the things of our 
experience are not in the things themselves, but exist in the Platonic 
“ third realm” . The essence or nature of a tree, for example, is not to 
be looked for in the tree itself, but in the Form of Tree; the essence 
of a human being is not to be looked for in any human being but 
rather in the Form of Human Being; and so forth. Now, if treeness is 
not to be found in a tree, nor humanness in a human being, then it 
is hard to see how what we call a tree really exists as a tree or what 
we call a human being really exists as a human being. Indeed, the trees 
and human beings we see are said by Plato merely imperfectly to 
“ resemble” something else— namely, the Forms. So, what we call 
a tree seems at the end of the day to be no more genuinely treelike 
than a statue or mirror image of a tree is; what we call a human being 
seems no more genuinely human than a statue or mirror image of a 
human being is; and so forth. But this is absurd.5
It is certainly absurd, anyway, from the point of view of the Aristo­
telian realist, who has independent reasons to regard a tree or a human 
being as a substance— something existing in its own right (rather than 
being a mere image or reflection or otherwise parasitic on some­
thing else), and having an intrinsic source of its properties and char­
acteristic activities (as opposed to deriving them entirely from some 
extrinsic source).6 Aristotelian realism therefore denies that univer­
sals exist in a “ third realm” of Forms. How do they exist, then? Con­
sider, once again, the example of the universal animality. In the world 
outside the mind, animality exists only in actual animals, and always 
inseparably tied to either rationality or nonrationality. Hence, there is 
animality in Socrates, but it is there inseparably tied to his rationality, 
and specifically to his humanness. And there is animality in Fido, but
5 C £  P. Coffey, Epistemology, or The Theory of Knowledge: An Introduction to General Meta­
physics, 2 vols. (Gloucester, Mass.: Peter Smith, 1958), 1:292-97; and David S. Oderberg, Real 
Essentialism (London: Routledge, 2007), pp. 8 1-8 5.
6 For the reasons, see the exposition and defense o f the Aristotelian account o f substance 
in chap. 3 o f Edward Feser, Scholastic Metaphysics: A  Contemporary Introduction (Heusenstamm: 
Editiones Scholasticae, 2014).

100
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
it is there inseparably tied to nonrationality, and specifically to “ dog- 
ness” . Animality considered in abstraction from these things exists only 
in the mind. The senses observe this or that individual man, this or 
that individual dog; the intellect goes on to abstract away the partic­
ular, individualizing and differentiating features of each of these, and 
considers the animality in isolation, as a universal. This Aristotelian 
realist position is not nominalist, because it holds that universals exist. 
But neither is it conceptualise because while it holds that universals 
considered in abstraction from other features exist only in the mind, it also 
holds that universals exist in the extramental things themselves (albeit 
always tied there to other features). The universals are abstracted/rom 
these extramental things by the mind, rather than being the free cre­
ations of the mind.
Aristotelian realists emphasize that abstraction is essentially a men­
tal process, so that abstract objects are essentially tied to the mind. 
Hence, though animality, triangularity, redness, humanness, and so forth 
do exist in mind-independent reality, they do not exist there as abstract 
objects, but only as tied to concrete particular individuals. And though 
animality, triangularity, redness, humanness, and so forth can neverthe­
less exist as abstract objects, they do not so exist in mind-independent 
reality. There is no third Platonic alternative way for universals to 
exist— namely, as both abstract and mind-independent at the same 
time. As David Oderberg sums up the view:
Consider what all squares have in common: there is something they 
literally share, namely squareness. But one might complain, “We never 
encounter squareness, only square things.” To which the [Aristote­
lian] realist replies that we do encounter squareness all the time—in 
the square things. “But I mean we never encounter squareness in the 
abstract.” To which the reply is that this is correct: we do never encoun­
ter squareness in the abstract, because squareness in the abstract is not 
something we ever could encounter—what would such an encoun­
ter be like? Rather, we do not encounter squareness in the abstract 
because squareness is something that we abstract—from the square things.
In short, nothing abstract exists without abstraction. And abstraction 
is an intellectual process by which we recognize what is literally shared 
by a multiplicity of particular things.7
7 Oderberg, Real Essentialism, p. 83 (emphasis in the original).

THE AU GU STINI AN PROOF
ΙΟΙ
An Aristotelian realist analysis can also be given of at least some 
possible and necessary truths. For the Aristotelian, what is possible or 
necessary vis-à-vis a thing is determined by its essence, and its essence 
is (apart from the mind’s abstraction of it) something that exists in the 
thing itself rather than in some Platonic “ third realm” . Hence, it is 
possible, for example, for the average man easily to hold his breath 
for ten seconds, but impossible for him to hold it for ten hours, and 
it is necessarily the case that if he dies, he cannot be brought back to 
life by natural means. These possibilities, impossibilities, and neces­
sities are grounded in human nature, and when the mind abstracts 
the universal humanness from the individual men it encounters, it can 
deduce from consideration of it these and other possibilities, impos­
sibilities, and necessities. It is also impossible for two men and two 
further men together to add up to twenty men, and necessary that 
they add up instead to four men. These truths are grounded in the 
natures not only of men but of every other thing too, and when 
the mind abstracts even more general mathematical features of things, 
it can deduce from them further mathematical truths.
However, there are universals, propositions, mathematical objects, 
necessities, and possibilities that the Aristotelian realist is bound to 
have a more difficult time dealing with. For example, suppose no 
material world or human minds had existed at all. This is surely pos­
sible. But it also would still have been possible in that circumstance 
for a material world and human minds to come into existence. What 
would ground that possibility? It cannot be grounded in the essence 
or nature of any material object, since by hypothesis there would in 
that case have been no material objects. Nor could it be grounded 
in the essence or nature of material objects at least as abstracted and 
grasped by a human mind, since by hypothesis there would in that 
case be no human minds either.
Or consider things which not only could have failed to exist, but 
in fact fail ever to exist—unicorns, centaurs, mermaids, and the like. 
It is at least possible for such things to exist, and unicornity, centaur-ness, 
mermaid-ness, and so forth are universals, even if they are uninstan­
tiated. Now what grounds their possibility cannot be the essences 
or natures of actual unicorns, centaurs, and mermaids, since there 
have never been such things. Nor can their possibility be grounded 
in the human minds which entertain the ideas of these things, for

102
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
these things were all possible even before human minds entertained 
the ideas. But what, then, can ground the possibility of these “pure 
possibles” (as they are sometimes called)?
Consider also, and again, that there are propositions that would 
be true whether or not the material world or any human mind 
existed. For example, the proposition that there is no material world nor 
any human mind in existence would be true if the material world and 
human minds all went out of existence tomorrow, and would have 
been true if neither had come into existence in the first place. The 
proposition that Caesar was assassinated on the Ides of March— and every 
other proposition about historical events— would also remain true 
even if the material world and human minds all went out of exis­
tence tomorrow.
Then there are the necessary truths of mathematics and logic. 
These too would have been true whether or not any material world 
or human minds had ever existed, and these too would remain true 
even if the entire material world and all human minds went out of 
existence tomorrow. So, what grounds this necessity?
This brings us, at last, to Scholastic realism, which is essentially Aris­
to teHan in spirit, but gives at least a nod to Platonic realism.8 Like 
Aristotelian realism, Scholastic realism affirms that universals exist 
only either in the things that instantiate them, or in intellects which 
entertain them. It agrees that there is no Platonic “ third realm” inde­
pendent both of the material world and of all intellects. However, the 
Scholastic realist agrees with the Platonist that there must be some 
realm distinct both from the material world and from human and 
other finite intellects. In particular— and endorsing a thesis famously 
associated with Saint Augustine— it holds that universals, proposi­
tions, mathematical and logical truths, and necessities and possibilities 
exist in an infinite, eternal, divine intellect. If some form of realism must 
be true, then, but Platonic realism and Aristotelian realism are in 
various ways inadequate, then the only remaining version, Scholastic 
realism, must be correct. And since Scholastic realism entails that 
there is an infinite divine intellect, then there really must be such an 
intellect. In other words, God exists.
8 Cf. John Peterson, A n  Introduction to Scholastic Realism (N ew  Y ork: Peter Lang Publishing,
1999)·

103
Informal statement of the argument: Stage 2
That, anyway, is the basic thrust of what is sometimes called the 
“ argument from eternal truths” for the existence of God, historically 
associated with Augustinian philosophy and defended also by think­
ers like G.W . Leibniz. Let’s make the reasoning of the argument 
more explicit.
We have seen why, contra nominalism and conceptualism, some 
form of realism vis-à-vis abstract objects like universals, propositions, 
numbers and other mathematical objects, and possible worlds must 
be true. Now, one implication of the arguments was that, what­
ever mode of existence these objects have, they do not (or at least a 
great many of them do not) depend on the material world. Material 
things are always particular. There’s this particular triangle and that 
one, this particular red object and that one, and so on. But triangu­
larity and redness are universal. At least some propositions would be 
true whether or not the material world exists, and this is tme espe­
cially of logical and mathematical propositions. The material world 
is contingent, whereas some propositions, including propositions of 
mathematics and logic, are true necessarily. There are possibilities 
that would remain possibilities whether or not the material world 
existed. And so forth. So, these abstract objects must exist in one 
of the two other possible ways, either in some intellect or collection of 
intellects, or in a Platonic “ third realm” . But the notion of a “ third 
realm” faces insuperable problems of its own, which means that these 
abstract objects must exist in an intellect or collection of intellects.
Now, it cannot be human intellects that they ultimately depend 
on for their existence, because human intellects are contingent. 
They come into being and pass away. At one time there were no 
human intellects, and it could happen that at some point in the 
future all human intellects will go out of existence. So, necessary 
truths, possibilities that would remain possibilities whether or not 
any human intellect ever existed, universals that could be instan­
tiated even if no human being had ever existed, propositions that 
would have been true even if no human being existed, and so forth 
cannot depend on human intellects for their existence. Notice that, 
for the same reason, they cannot depend either on the intellects of 
contingent creatures other than human beings. Suppose there are

104
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
extraterrestrials with material bodies of some sort, perhaps bodies 
radically different from ours. Precisely because, like us, they come 
into being and pass away and could have failed to exist, what is true 
of the relationship between abstract objects and our minds would 
be true of the relationship between abstract objects and their minds 
too. Or suppose there are completely disembodied intellects—  
angels, who do not pass away like we do. Since they are nevertheless 
contingent (even an angel does not exist in an absolutely neces­
sary way, but will only exist if God decides to create it), it follows 
that necessary truths, possible worlds which would remain possible 
whether or not any angel ever existed, universals which could be 
instantiated even if no angel ever existed, propositions which would 
be true even if no angel existed, and so forth cannot depend for 
their existence on angelic intellects either.
So, the only sort of intellect on which these abstract objects could 
ultimately depend for their existence would be an intellect which 
exists in an absolutely necessary way, an intellect which could not possibly 
have not existed. Now, could there be more than one such ultimate 
intellect? Might we not suppose that such-and-such possible worlds, 
necessary truths, universals, and so forth exist in necessarily existing 
intellect A, and another group of possible worlds, necessary truths, 
universals, and so forth exist in necessarily existing intellect B?
This cannot be right. Consider first that the abstract objects in 
question are not independent of one another in a way that would 
allow their ultimate ground to He in distinct necessarily existing minds. 
Rather, they form an interlocking system.9 Here are some of the 
ways in which that is the case. Suppose the traditional definition of a 
human being as a rational animal is correct. (Whether it is in fact cor­
rect is irrelevant for present purposes; it’s just an illustration.) Then to 
have an adequate grasp of the universal humanness will require a grasp 
also of the universals animality and rationality. And grasping those will 
of course require a grasp of the further universals in terms of which 
they are to be defined. An adequate grasp of any one universal thus 
requires a grasp of a whole network of universals.
9 This was a point emphasized by Leibniz. See the discussion o f the relevant texts in R ob­
ert Merrihew Adams, Leibniz: Determinist, Theist, Idealist (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1994), p. 181.

THE AU GU STINIAN PROOF
IO5
Consider also that grasp of these universals is necessary for a grasp 
of the propositions in which they feature. For example, one has to 
have a grasp of the universal humanness and of the universal mortality 
in order to grasp the proposition that all men are mortal. And every 
proposition is also logically related to every other one in various 
ways. For example, the proposition that all men are mortal and the 
proposition that Socrates is a man together logically entail the prop­
osition that Socrates is mortal. The proposition that all men are mortal 
and the proposition that cats are four-legged do not together logically 
entail the proposition that it is raining in Cleveland. Any proposition 
will be either consistent with or inconsistent with any other. Any 
proposition can be combined with any other in various ways to yield 
compound propositions whose truth values are given by the truth 
tables familiar to students of logic. And so forth. Among these prop­
ositions will, of course, be propositions about what is necessary and 
what is possible, as well as propositions of a logical or mathemati­
cal sort.
Now, these logical relationships would hold whether or not the 
material world existed and whether or not any finite mind existed. 
So, there must be a necessarily existing intellect which grasps all of 
the logical relationships between all propositions (and thus all uni­
versals), including those about what is possible and what is necessary 
and about numbers and other mathematical objects. So, all of the 
abstract objects about which we have been speaking must exist in 
this intellect. Note also that the number of these propositions and 
logical relationships is infinite. (This is obvious just from the fact that 
the number of mathematical propositions is infinite. For example, for 
every number, there will be a true proposition and a false proposition 
about whether it is odd or even. And every other proposition will 
either be consistent or inconsistent with each of these propositions.) 
So, this necessarily existing intellect is one that grasps an infinite num­
ber of universals, propositions, possible worlds, and so forth. And 
there is an obvious sense in which such an intellect would be omni­
scient. It would be what Robert Adams calls “ a conceptually omniscient 
being, a being that eternally understands all essences, possibilities, and 
necessary truths” .10
10Ibid, (emphasis added).

ιο6
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
So, the ultimate ground of the existence of the abstract objects 
we’ve been discussing would have to be a conceptually omniscient 
necessarily existing intellect, rather than a collection of intellects each 
of which knows less than “ all essences, possibilities, and necessary 
truths” . Still, a critic might ask, might there nevertheless be more 
than one such conceptually omniscient intellect? And might such an 
intellect nevertheless lack knowledge of some contingent truths, even 
though it knows all possible and necessary truths— thus making it 
omniscient only in a qualified sense? Furthermore, why should we 
suppose such an intellect would have attributes like omnipotence and 
perfect goodness?11 It might appear, then, that to arrive at the exis­
tence of an omniscient intellect is not quite to arrive at the existence 
of God.
But such appearances would be misleading. Consider that an intel­
lect that existed of absolute necessity would have to be purely actual. 
For suppose that its existence presupposes the actualization of some 
potential. In that case its existence would be contingent on such an 
actualization, in which case it wouldn't exist of absolute necessity. 
Now, we saw in chapter i that anything that is purely actual would 
have to be unique, would have to have all power, and would have 
to have perfect goodness. It would also, for reasons given there, 
have to be immutable, immaterial, incorporeal, and eternal. Hence, 
a necessarily existing omniscient intellect would have to have all of 
these attributes too. It would also have to know all truths, including 
contingent ones. For if it knew less than all of them, then it would 
have an unactualized potential— the potential to know the truths 
that it does not in fact know— and thus fail to be purely actual. So, 
it must be omniscient in an unqualified sense.12
So, realism about abstract objects entails the existence of a neces­
sarily existing intellect which is one, omniscient, omnipotent, fully 
good, immutable, immaterial, incorporeal, and eternal. In short, it 
entails the existence of God.
An argument similar to the one I have been developing in this 
chapter has been put forward by philosopher Greg Welty, who
“ See ibid., p. 180.
“ Consider also that what is actual is a subset o f what is possible. So, if an intellect knows 
all possible truths, it must know all actual truths as well.

THE AU GU STINIAN PROOF
IO7
suggests that there are six conditions an adequate theory of abstract 
objects must meet, and argues that what he calls “ Theistic Con­
ceptual Realism”— which is essentially what I have called Scholas­
tic realism—best meets all of them.13 Let’s briefly consider Welty’s 
approach. First, an adequate theory must account for the fact that 
abstract objects exhibit objectivity insofar as they have reality indepen­
dent of human minds. Second, it must account for the fact that they 
exist in a necessary rather than merely contingent way. Third, it must 
account for their intentionality, by which Welty means that abstract 
objects represent the world in something like the way thoughts do. 
For example, the universal triangularity represents triangles; the prop­
osition that all men are mortal represents the state of affairs of all men 
being mortal; possible worlds represent ways things might have been; 
and so forth.14 Fourth, an adequate theory of abstract objects must be 
relevant to explaining why there are the necessary and possible truths 
that there are. Fifth, it must meet what Welty calls a plenitude con­
dition insofar as it must affirm the existence of a sufficient number of 
abstract objects to account for everything their existence is supposed 
to account for. Finally, it must at the same time respect a condition 
of simplicity by not positing more kinds of entity than is necessary.
Now, the objectivity condition can be met only by a realist theory 
of abstract objects rather than a nominalist or conceptualist the­
ory.15 The intentionality condition points in the direction of an Aris­
totelian realist position, specifically, rather than a Platonic realist 
position, since it is easier to see how abstract objects could have 
representational content if they exist in an intellect than if they 
exist in a “ third realm” . The simplicity condition also points in the 
direction of Aristotelian realism rather than Platonic realism, since 
the former view requires us to posit only two realms— the realm 
of material objects and the realm of intellects— whereas the latter
13 Greg Welty, “ Theistic Conceptual Realism” , in Beyond the Control of God? Six Views 
on the Problem of God and Abstract Objects, ed. Paul M . Gould (London: Bloomsbury, 2014), 
pp. 81-96.
14 The abstract objects W elty himself focuses on are only propositions and possible worlds.
15 W elty himself uses the term “ conceptualism” more broadly than I have, in a way that 
includes Aristotelian realist theories. In other ways too, his terminology does not correspond 
exactly to mine. But the difference between our accounts is, I think, merely terminological 
rather than substantive.

requires a third. The necessity, plenitude, and relevance conditions, in 
turn, point in the direction of Scholastic realism rather than a brand 
of Aristotelian realism that does not appeal to the divine intellect. 
For human and other finite minds are contingent, and thus cannot 
account for the necessity of abstract objects. And since there are 
universals, propositions, possible worlds, mathematical truths, and 
so forth, which have never been entertained by any human mind, 
Aristotelian realism, unless taken in a Scholastic direction, cannot 
meet the plenitude condition.
Finally, the relevance condition points to Scholastic realism, 
specifically, in the following way. Again, there are abstract objects 
which cannot plausibly depend on human or other finite minds. 
O f course, Platonic realism can account for at least that much. But 
it is hard to see how possible worlds considered as the denizens of 
a Platonic “ third realm” would have any relevance to what might 
happen in the world. Consider (to borrow an example from Welty) 
a drawing of Socrates pounding nails into wood. Suppose we allow 
that this at least represents the possibility of Socrates being a carpenter. 
Still, Welty suggests, “it makes little sense to think that a picture on 
a piece of paper is a truthmaker for certain modal statements about 
Socrates, such that Socrates couldn’t have been a carpenter if that 
picture didn’t exist.” 16 But why, exactly, would a possible world in 
which Socrates is a carpenter, understood as an entity existing in a 
Platonic “ third realm” , be any more plausible a truthmaker than the 
picture? Even if (like the picture) the Platonic object would represent 
the possibility of Socrates’ being a carpenter, why would its exis­
tence (any more than that of the picture) make it the case that Socrates 
could have been a carpenter?
The Scholastic realist, by contrast, has a way to answer the rele­
vance question. He takes possible worlds and other abstract objects to 
exist as ideas in the intellect of an omniscient and omnipotent cause 
of the world. The way a possible world in which Socrates is a carpen­
ter makes it the case that Socrates could have been a carpenter is by 
virtue of being an idea in a divine cause who has the power to have 
created such a world in light of his idea of it, had he chosen to do so. 
God’s intellect, will, and power provide a way for abstract objects to
Ιθ8 
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
l6W elty, “ Theistic Conceptual Realism” , p. 92.

THE AU GU STINIAN PROOF
IO9
have relevance to what actually happens in the world that a Platonic 
“ third realm” lacks.
A  more formal statement of the argument
Given its foundation in the complex debate over universals and other 
abstract objects, the Augustinian argument for God’s existence devel­
oped in this chapter has taken several twists and turns. But its basic 
thmst can be summarized as follows:
1 . There are three possible accounts of abstract objects such as uni­
versals, propositions, numbers and other mathematical objects, 
and possible worlds: realism, nominalism, and conceptualism.
2. There are decisive arguments in favor of realism.
3. There are insuperable objections against nominalism.
4. There are insuperable objections against conceptualism.
5. So, some version of realism is tme.
6. There are three possible versions of realism: Platonic realism, 
Aristotelian realism, and Scholastic realism.
7. If Platonic realism is tme, then abstract objects exist in a “ third 
realm” distinct from either the material world or any intellect.
8. If Aristo teHan realism is tme, then abstract objects exist only in 
human or other contingently existing intellects.
9. If Scholastic realism is tme, then abstract objects exist not only 
in contingently existing intellects but also in at least one nec­
essarily existing intellect.
10. There are insuperable objections against the claim that abstract 
objects exist in a “ third realm” distinct from either the mate­
rial world or any intellect.
11. So, Platonic realism is not tme.
12. There are insuperable objections against the claim that abstract 
objects exist only in human or other contingently existing 
intellects.
13. So, Aristotelian realism is not tme.
14. So, Scholastic realism is tme.
15. So, abstract objects exist not only in contingently existing 
intellects but also in at least one necessarily existing intellect.

16. Abstract objects such as universals, propositions, numbers and 
other mathematical objects, and possible worlds are all logi­
cally related to one another in such a way that they form an 
interlocking system of ideas.
17. The reasons for concluding that at least some abstract objects 
exist in a necessarily existing intellect also entail that this inter­
locking system of ideas must exist in a necessarily existing 
intellect.
18. So, this interlocking system of ideas exists in at least one nec­
essarily existing intellect.
19. A necessarily existing intellect would be purely actual.
20. There cannot be more than one thing that is purely actual.
21. So, there cannot be more than one necessarily existing intellect.
22. An intellect in which the interlocking system of ideas in ques­
tion existed would be conceptually omniscient.
23. So, the one necessarily existing intellect is conceptually 
omniscient.
24. If this one necessarily existing intellect were not also omni­
scient in the stronger sense that it knows all contingent truths, 
then it would have unrealized potential and thus not be purely 
actual.
25. So, it is also omniscient in this stronger sense.
26. What is purely actual must also be omnipotent, fully good, 
immutable, immaterial, incorporeal, and eternal.
27. So, there is exactly one necessarily existing intellect, which is 
purely actual, omniscient, omnipotent, fully good, immutable, 
immaterial, incorporeal, and eternal.
28. But for there to be such a thing is just what it is for God to 
exist.
29. So, God exists.
IIO 
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Some objections rebutted
The debate over the metaphysical status of abstract objects is over 
twenty-three hundred years old, and overlaps with a wide variety of 
other issues— the problem of universals, the metaphysics of modal­
ity, and various topics in the philosophy of mathematics and the

THE AU GU STINIAN PROOF
III
philosophy of language. There is no way all of these issues can be 
canvassed here, nor can I address everything a nominalist, conceptu- 
alist, or Platonist might say about the issues there is space to address. 
But the main lines of argument for realism in general, and Scholastic 
realism in particular, have now been set out, and some objections 
aimed specifically at the latter can be addressed.
Some critics object that if universals, propositions, possible worlds, 
and so forth are taken to be ideas in the divine intellect, then they are 
not really abstract objects at all, but concrete.17 As Welty has pointed 
out, one problem with this objection is that there simply is no con­
sensus even among contemporary metaphysicians about the nature 
of abstract objects.18 Hence, the objection is not grounded in some 
settled, neutral understanding of their nature which has the burden of 
proof in its favor. Aristotelian and Scholastic realists would add that 
this objection would simply beg the question against them even if it 
did reflect a consensus of contemporary metaphysicians. For Aristote­
lian and Scholastic realists, an abstract object just is what the intellect 
forms when it abstracts from particular things. So, whereas the critic 
claims that an abstract object cannot be something that exists in an 
intellect, the claim of Aristotelian and Scholastic realists is precisely 
that it can only be something that exists in an intellect. Merely to assert 
the former claim is therefore not to show that the latter claim is false, 
but rather simply presupposes that it is false.19
17 See the remarks by Keith Yandell and William Lane Craig in “ Response to Greg W elty” , 
in Gould, Beyond the Control of God?, pp. 97-98 and 100—102, respectively.
18 Greg Welty, “ Response to Critics” , in Gould, Beyond the Control of God?, pp. 10 7 -1 1.
19 Part o f the problem here is probably that contemporary philosophers tend to conceive o f 
the intellect in a way that is very different from the way Aristotelians and Scholastics conceive 
o f it. For contemporary philosophers, to think is essentially to have a “ mental state” , under­
stood as a concrete particular existing either in the nervous system or in a Cartesian immaterial 
substance. For Aristotelians and Scholastics, to think is essentially to take on the form o f a 
thing without taking on its matter or other individualizing features. And this account reflects 
a more general set o f metaphysical and epistemological commitments which also differ radi­
cally from those with which most contemporary philosophers are familiar. For an overview of 
the Aristotelian and Scholastic understanding o f the intellect and the role abstraction plays in 
its activity, see Coffey, Epistemology, vol. 1, pt. 3, and Joseph Owens, Cognition: An Epistemo­
logical Inquiry (Houston: Center for Thomistic Studies, 1992), chap. 5.
As Oderberg notes (Real Essentialism, pp. 83-84), contemporary philosophers also tend to 
draw the abstract-concrete distinction in a way that is very different from the way Aristote­
lians and Scholastics would draw it. For example, they often characterize it as a distinction

1 12
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Brian Leftow objects to what he calls “ deity theories” of possibility 
and necessity, of which the Scholastic realist position defended here 
would be an instance.20 A deity theory holds that what is possible or 
necessary is ultimately grounded in God’s nature. Scholastic realists, 
who affirm that God is simple or noncomposite (an idea which I dis­
cussed in the last chapter and will revisit in later chapters), certainly 
hold this. For since God is simple or noncomposite, his intellect, 
power, goodness, and so forth, and indeed his very nature, must really 
all be one and the same thing considered under different descriptions. 
Hence, to say that possibilities and necessities are grounded in ideas 
in the divine intellect entails that they are grounded in God’s nature.
Now, Leftow is willing to allow that necessary truths of pure logic 
and mathematics are grounded in the divine nature in this way. But 
he thinks that there are other necessary truths which are not plau­
sibly so grounded. For example, suppose it is a necessary truth that 
water = H20 . Then on a deity theory, the fact that this is a necessary 
truth will follow from God’s nature. Hence, if God exists, then it 
will be necessary that water = H20 . But then it would also follow, 
Leftow says, that if it were not necessary that water = H20 , then God 
would not exist. And this, Leftow concludes, makes God’s existence 
depend on facts about water, which is counterintuitive.
To see what is wrong with this objection, consider the following 
parallel example. It is a necessary truth that 2 + 2 = 4, and it follows 
from this that it is necessary that if you add two rocks to two other 
rocks, you get four rocks. But then (so it might be claimed) it would 
also follow that if it were not necessary that if you add two rocks 
to two other rocks, you get four rocks, then it would also not be 
necessary that 2 + 2 = 4. And this (so the proposed argument might 
conclude) makes mathematical truths depend on facts about rocks, 
which is counterintuitive.
between what exists outside the spatiotemporal order and what exists within the spatiotempo­
ral order, and also tend to think that something is either abstract or concrete, full stop. But for 
Aristotelians and Scholastics, what makes something abstract has essentially to do instead with 
the intellect’s power o f abstraction, and something can be concrete or abstract depending on 
whether the intellect has exercised this power. Hence the same one thing— humanness, say, or 
redness— can exist both concretely, in particular things, and abstractly, as universals considered 
by the intellect.
20Brian Leftow, God and Necessity (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), pp. 209Æ

THE AU GU STINI AN PROOF
Now, it is obvious that this argument doesn’t establish that truths of 
mathematics “ depend” on facts about rocks in any interesting sense. 
Mathematical truths entail certain necessary truths about rocks, just as 
they entail certain necessary truths about everything else, but pre­
cisely because these are necessary truths, they are never going to be 
overthrown by mineralogy (a consequence which would, of course, 
be highly counterintuitive, to say the least). But by the same token, 
Leftow’s argument doesn’t establish that the divine nature “ depends” 
on facts about water in any interesting sense. The divine nature entails 
certain necessary truths about water, just as it entails certain necessary 
truths about everything else, but precisely because these are neces­
sary truths, they are never going to be overthrown by hydrology (a 
consequence which would, of course, also be highly counterintuitive).
To be sure, Leftow does not, and need not, hold that “ deity the­
ories” are implicitly committed to the bizarre thesis that claims about 
God’s existence and nature might be overthrown by hydrology. But 
that just makes the grounds for his allegation that the deity theory has 
counterintuitive implications extremely elusive. If we’re not imagin­
ing a case in which the facts about water could turn out to be such 
that they falsify God’s existence, then what exactly does the alleged 
counterintuitive “ dependence” of God’s nature on facts about water 
amount to?
Then there is the fact that Leftow’s claim is that if it were not nec­
essary that water = H20 , then (given a “ deity theory” of necessity) 
God would not exist. But why should anyone seriously entertain the 
antecedent of this conditional? Suppose someone said: “Let’s consider 
a scenario where two and two don’t necessarily make four; now, in 
such a scenario, it would follow that...” The proper response would 
be: “Whoa! What do you mean ‘Let’s consider a scenario where two 
and two don’t necessarily make four ...’? There couldn't be such a 
scenario, ergo we cannot consider it!” Similarly, the “ deity theorist” 
can reply to Leftow: “What do you mean ‘If it were not necessary 
that water = H20  ...’? It is necessary, and that’s that, and so there’s 
no point in trying to consider what would follow if it weren’t!”21 
Leftow, who thinks that the necessity of a truth Uke the proposi­
tion that water = H20  is established by God’s will (a variation on a
US
21 See Welty, “ Response to Critics” , p. 108.

view historically known as voluntarism), might respond that we can 
coherently consider this insofar as the proposition that water = H20  
would not have been necessary if God had willed otherwise. But 
this response would simply beg the question against deity theorists, 
who reject this voluntarist position.
Another objection to the Augustinian argument I’ve been devel­
oping might take aim at the very idea of what Adams calls “ a con­
ceptually omniscient being, a being that eternally understands all 
essences, possibilities, and necessary truths” .22 For it might seem 
that this notion presupposes that there is a set of all true proposi­
tions. But Patrick Grim has argued that there can be no such set, 
and that since there cannot be, there also cannot be such a thing 
as an omniscient being.23 In particular, Grim asks us to suppose 
there is a set S of all true propositions. Now consider what is called 
the “power set” of S— that is, the set consisting of all of S’s subsets. 
According to Cantor’s theorem in set theory, the power set of a set 
contains more members than the set itself, in which case the power 
set of S contains more members than S. And in that case, S doesn’t 
really contain all truths after all. So, the very idea of such a set is 
incoherent. There cannot be a set of all truths. But omniscience 
(claims Grim) requires that there can be. So, there can be no such 
thing as omniscience.
But there are several problems with this objection.24 For one 
thing, as Alvin Plantinga points out, the argument would prove too 
much.25 What Grim says about all true propositions would also hold 
of all propositions, whether true or not. That is to say, if Grim is cor­
rect, there can be no set of all propositions, let alone a set of all true 
propositions. And in that case we should be unable to make any 
coherent claims about all propositions. But in fact we can make such 
claims. For example, we can say that all propositions are either true or 
false, and that no proposition is both true and false. So, why can’t we
1 14 
five proofs of the existence of god
22 Adams, Leibniz, p. 18 1.
23 Patrick Grim, “ Logic and the Limits o f Language” , Noûs 22 (1988): 34 1-6 7.
24 For a useful summary o f the responses to Grim, see William Wainwright, “ Omnipo­
tence, Omniscience, and Omnipresence” , in The Cambridge Companion to Christian Philosoph­
ical Theology, ed. Charles Taliaferro and Chad Meister (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2010), pp. 50 -51.
25 Patrick Grim and Alvin Plantinga, “ Truth, Omniscience, and Cantorian Arguments” , 
Philosophical Studies 71 (1993): 267-306.

THE AUGUSTINIAN PROOF
also coherently say, of all true propositions, that an omniscient being 
would know them? Nor need we think of this in terms of knowl­
edge of a set of truths. As Keith Simmons points out, even if there is 
no set of all propositions known by God, it doesn’t follow that there 
is any particular proposition that God does not know.26 That suffices 
for omniscience.
Finally, as William Wainwright suggests, Grim’s objection also 
seems to assume a model of divine knowledge which would be 
rejected by those who hold (as, again, Scholastic realists do) that 
God is absolutely simple or noncomposite.27 In particular, it seems 
to assume that the truths God knows correspond to discrete ideas in 
the divine intellect, which together form a set. But given divine sim­
plicity, what we describe in terms of such discrete ideas is really one 
and the same thing in God. There is in God something analogous to 
what we call, in the case of our own intellects, a grasp of the prop­
osition that all men are mortal, something analogous to what we call a 
grasp of the proposition that Socrates is a man, and so forth. But these 
are different ways of describing what, in God, is really one and the 
same thing.
A final line of criticism of the Augustinian proof comes from an 
unexpected quarter. Defenders of the argument are Scholastic real­
ists, but not all Scholastic realists are defenders of the argument. In 
particular, some Scholastics hold that while their brand of realism is 
the correct account of abstract objects, it doesn’t provide the basis for 
an argument for God’s existence, but is rather a thesis to be brought 
into play only after God’s existence has been established on other, 
independent grounds.28 For example, Peter Coffey objects that the 
Augustinian argument presupposes that what is possible is eternally 
and necessarily possible— for example, that horses and unicorns (unlike 
round squares, say) were possible before any material world and finite 
minds existed, and would remain possible even if the material world 
and finite minds went out of existence. But how could we know 
this unless we already knew that there is a necessarily existing intel­
lect in which these possibilities are grounded? The argument also
US
26Keith Simmons, “ On an Argument against Omniscience” , Noûs 27 (1993): 2 2 -3 3 .
27 Wainwright, “ Omnipotence, Omniscience, and Omnipresence” , p. 50.
28P. Coffey, Ontology, or The Theory of Being (Gloucester, Mass.: Peter Smith, 1970), 
pp. 89-95; and Cardinal Mercier et al., A  Manual of Modem Scholastic Philosophy, vol. 2 (St. 
Louis: B. Herder, 1933), pp. 32-35.

i i  6
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
presupposes that there is an order of abstract objects independent of 
our minds, but this, Coffey suggests, results from a kind of cognitive 
illusion of the sort to which Platonism is prone.
But these objections are not very powerful, or so it seems to me. 
Consider first that even an atheist could agree that what is possi­
ble is eternally and necessarily possible. To be sure, such an atheist 
would no doubt conceive of these eternal and necessary possibilities 
in Platonic realist terms— which the Scholastic realist rejects— but the 
point is that precisely for that reason, one need not, contra Coffey, 
presuppose that they exist in a necessarily existing intellect. Consider 
also that, as a Scholastic realist himself, Coffey can hardly maintain 
that the notion of an order of abstract objects independent of our 
minds is completely illusory, since he would agree that such an order 
exists in the divine intellect. What is illusory can only be the Platonic 
realist interpretation of that order.
Read charitably, Coffey seems to be supposing that if someone 
accepts the thesis that there is an order of abstract objects existing 
independently of all finite minds, then that person must mean by this 
either (a) that this order is to be understood in Platonic realist terms, 
as a “ third realm” over and above the material world and finite minds, 
or (b) that it is to be understood in Scholastic realist terms, as an order 
of ideas in the divine intellect. But (Coffey seems to be saying) if the 
person has (a) in mind, then he is supposing something false; whereas 
if he has (b) in mind, then he is not supposing something false, but 
will nevertheless be presupposing that there is a divine intellect and 
thus cannot use the thesis in question as the basis of a non-question­
begging argument for the claim that there is a divine intellect.
But this is a false choice. Someone could instead affirm the thesis 
that there is an order of abstract objects that in some way exists inde­
pendently of all finite minds, while leaving it undetermined exactly 
what way that is. Indeed, this is precisely the thesis that Platonic real­
ists and Scholastic realists have in common, and on the basis of which 
they can go on to debate which of their views best accounts for the 
truth of the thesis. Now, since the defender of the Augustinian argu­
ment can accept this thesis without affirming (a), he is not presuppos­
ing anything false, and since he can accept it without affirming (b), 
he is not begging the question. Hence, Coffey’s objection (as I have 
interpreted it) fails.

4
The Thomistic Proof
Informal statement of the argument: Stage i
The world of our experience contains stones, trees, dogs, human 
beings, and a wide variety of other things. We know what these 
things are, and we know that they are part of reality outside our 
minds. Notice that what we thereby know about them are two dis­
tinct things. First, we know, again, what they are. You know, for 
instance, that what a human being is is a rational animal. That is the 
nature or essence of a human being. (Though once again, it doesn’t 
matter for present purposes whether you agree with this traditional 
definition of a human being or not. Substitute some other definition 
if you prefer.) Second, you know that there really are human beings. 
That is to say, you know that human beings exist.
So, we can distinguish between a thing’s essence and its existence, 
between what it is and the fact that it is. Now, some distinctions 
we draw are merely distinctions between ways in which we might 
think or talk about things, but don’t reflect any difference in reality. 
For example, we talk about bachelors and we talk about unmarried 
men, but there is nothing in the things we are talking about them­
selves that corresponds to this distinction. A bachelor and an unmar­
ried man are in reality exactly the same thing, so that the difference 
is merely verbal. Is the distinction between a thing’s essence and its 
existence like this? Or does the distinction reflect something in 
things themselves, as they really are apart from our ways of thinking 
and talking about them?
There are several reasons why the distinction between essence and 
existence must be a real distinction, a distinction that reflects objec­
tive, mind-independent reality itself and not merely the way we think
117

ι ι 8
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
about it.1 Consider first that you can know a thing’s essence without 
knowing whether or not it exists. Suppose a person had, for whatever 
reason, never heard of fions, pterodactyls, or unicorns. Suppose you 
gave him a detailed description of the natures of each. You then tell 
him that of these three creatures, one exists, one used to exist but 
is now extinct, and the third never existed; and you ask him to tell 
you which is which given what he now knows about their essences. 
He would, of course, be unable to do so. But then the existence of 
the creatures that do exist must be really distinct from their essences, 
otherwise one could know of their existence merely from know­
ing their essences. For what a thing is is part of its objective reality. 
The biological facts about Hons and pterodactyls would be exacdy the 
same whether or not we were around to study them. This would 
be true of unicorns too, if there were any unicorns. And if a thing 
exists, then its existence too is obviously part of its objective reality. 
So, if the essence and existence of a thing were not distinct features 
of reality, then knowing the former should suffice for knowing the 
latter, yet it doesn’t.
It might be objected that this argument presupposes that we have 
a complete grasp of the essence of a thing, which typically we don’t. 
For unless we had a complete grasp, how could we know whether 
or not existence was part of a thing’s essence? But the objection 
fails, for there is a crucial disanalogy between what is uncontrover- 
sially a part of a thing’s essence, on the one hand, and the existence 
of the thing on the other. Suppose you judge that a lion is a kind of 
animal but do not judge that it is a kind of cat. In that case, while 
you have only incompletely conceived of what it is to be a lion, you 
have not for that reason misconceived what it is to be a lion. By 
contrast, if you not only fail to judge that a lion is a kind of cat but 
judge that a lion is not a kind of cat, then you have misconceived 
what it is to be a lion. Now, if we suppose that you judge that fions 
don’t exist— perhaps you think they have gone extinct like ptero­
dactyls, or that they are creatures of fiction like unicorns— then 1
1 
For a detailed discussion and defense o f the real distinction between essence and exis­
tence, see Edward Feser, Scholastic Metaphysics: A  Contemporary Introduction (Heusenstamm: 
Editiones Scholasticae, 2014), pp. 2 4 1-56 ; and David S. Oderberg, Real Essentialism (London: 
Routledge, 2007), pp. 12 1-2 5 .

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
while you have judged falsely, you have not misconceived what it 
is to be a lion. Yet if the existence of a lion were not distinct from 
its essence, this would not be the case. Judging it to be nonexistent 
would be as much to misconceive what it is as judging it to be a 
noncat would be.2
A second reason why the essences of the things of our experience 
must be distinct from the existence of those things has to do with 
their contingency— the fact that, though they do exist, they could have 
failed to exist. For example, Hons exist, but had the history of life 
gone differently, they would not have existed; and it is possible that 
lions could someday go extinct. Now, if the existence of a contingent 
thing was not really distinct from its essence, then it would have exis­
tence just by virtue of its essence. It would exist by its very nature, 
and would therefore not be contingent at all but necessary— that is 
to say, it would be something that could not possibly not exist, not 
even in principle. Hence, since it is not necessary but contingent, its 
existence must be really distinct from its essence.3
One might object to this argument that we need not posit a real 
distinction between a contingent thing’s essence and its existence in 
order to account for its contingency, but can instead point to the 
facts that it has a cause and has the potentiality for nonexistence. For 
example, one might say that a lion is contingent because lions need to 
be caused— say, by previously existing lions— and if these causes are 
absent, then a new lion won’t come into being. And we might note 
that Hons can go out of existence because they have the potentiality to 
be killed by predators, to starve or catch a disease, and so forth. How­
ever, this objection simply misses the point. For we need to know why 
a contingent thing’s existence would need (or indeed could have) a 
cause in the first place if its existence were not distinct from its essence, 
and why it has (or indeed could have) a potentiality for nonexistence 
in the first place if its existence were not distinct from its essence. If 
existence were just part of what it is, then it would not need something 
else to cause it, and there would not be anything in it that could give 
it the potential to go out of existence.
I I 9
2 See Oderberg, Real Essentialism, p. 123.
3 See David S. Oderberg, “ H ow  to W in Essence Back from Essentialists” , Philosophical 
Writings 18 (2001): 39.

120
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
A third reason why the essence and existence of each of the 
things we know through experience must be distinct is that if there 
is something whose essence and existence are not really distinct—  
and we will see presently that there is and indeed must be such a 
thing— then there cannot in principle be more than one such thing. 
For consider that, if some thing’s essence and existence are not 
really distinct, then they are identical; and if they are identical in 
that thing, then that thing would be something whose essence just 
is existence itself. Now, for there to be more than one thing that 
just is existence itself—suppose there are two, and label them A 
and B— then there would have to be something that differentiated 
them. There would have to be something by virtue of which A and 
B are distinct things rather than one thing. But what could that be? 
There are only two possibilities. A and B might be differentiated in 
the way two species of the same genus are differentiated; or they 
might be differentiated in the way two members of the same species 
are differentiated. And the problem is that on analysis it turns out 
that A and B could not be differentiated in either of these ways.
Hence, consider the way two species of the same genus are dif­
ferentiated. A genus is a more general class of thing, and a species 
is a more specific class of thing.4 When we say that human beings 
are rational animals, we are saying that they as a species fall under 
the genus animal, and that their being rational is what differentiates 
them from other species of animal. To use the traditional technical 
jargon, rationality is thus what is called the “ specific difference” that 
distinguishes human beings from other species of animal. So, for our 
imagined things A and B to differ as species do, we would have to 
regard being that which just is existence itself ns a genus, and A and B as 
two species within that genus; and we’d then have to identify some 
“ specific difference” that A has that makes it a different species of 
being that which just is existence itself from the species B. But the trouble 
is that if A has such a “ specific difference” , then it will not be that 
which just is existence itself, rather, it will be that which just is existence 
itself PLUS that specific difference. (Compare: A human being is not
4 
Naturally, I am using the terms “ genus” and “ species” in the broad sense in which they 
are traditionally used in logic and metaphysics, not the narrower and technical sense in which 
they are used in modem biology.

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
I2 I
animality itself, but rather animality PLUS the specific difference ratio­
nality.) And the same will be true of B— to be differentiated from A, 
it will also have to be that which just is existence itself PLUS its own spe­
cific difference. So, there is no way to distinguish two things which 
just are existence itself in the way two different species of the same 
genus are differentiated.
Consider now the way two members of the same species are dif­
ferentiated. Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle are different members of 
the same species human being; Fido, Rover, and Spot are different 
members of the same species dog; and so forth. The way these mem­
bers are differentiated is by virtue of being associated with different 
parcels of matter. The matter that makes up Socrates’ body is differ­
ent from that which makes up Plato’s or Aristotle’s body; the matter 
that makes up Fido’s body is different from that which makes up 
Rover’s or Spot’s; and so on. (Of course, there are other differences 
between these individuals. Socrates’ brain will be wired in ways that 
are different from the way Aristotle’s brain is wired, Fido might have 
a different color of fur than Spot, and so forth. But these other dif­
ferences presuppose different parcels of matter in which the brain wir­
ing, fur color, etc. inhere.) So, though Socrates and Plato are both 
human, they can differ because Socrates is humanity plus this particular 
bit of matter, whereas Plato is humanity plus that other particular bit of 
matter; and something similar can be said for the different members 
of other species. But then it should be obvious why we cannot differ­
entiate two things A and B each of which is that which just is existence 
itself in the way that different members of a species are differentiated. 
For so differentiated, A and B will not after all be that which just is 
existence itself; rather, A will be that which just is existence itself PLUS 
this particular bit of matter, and B will be that which just is existence 
itself PLUS that other, particular bit of matter. (Compare: Socrates 
is, again, humanity plus this particular bit of matter— in which case 
Socrates is not humanity itself.)
In general, for there to be more than one thing which is that which 
just is existence itself, there would have to be something that made it 
the case that this instance of that which just is existence itself differed 
from that instance. And each such instance would, then, not really 
be that which just is existence itself after all, but rather that that which 
just is existence itself PLUS whatever the differentiating feature is. So,

122
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
there really is no sense to be made of there being more than one 
of something which just is existence itself. And in that case there is 
no way to make sense of there being more than one of something 
whose essence and existence are not really distinct. If there is such a 
thing, it will be unique. Now, the things of our experience are not 
unique in this way. With stones, trees, dogs, human beings, and the 
like, there is (or certainly could be in cases where the class has been 
reduced to a single member) more than one of each of these kinds of 
thing. Therefore there is in each of them a real distinction between 
its essence and its existence.
A possible objection to this third argument is that it neglects a 
middle possibility. For why couldn’t there be something whose exis­
tence is not distinct from its essence, not because its essence just is 
existence itself, but rather because existence is part of its essence?5 
But on reflection this suggestion makes no sense. Consider that the 
essence of human beings, rational animality, has rationality and animality 
as parts. Suppose existence were another part of this essence, alongside 
these. Then the existence of the whole human being would depend 
on this part. But that is no more plausible than saying that the whole 
human essence, rational animality, depends on animality alone. Now 
if someone insisted that the whole human essence really does depend 
on animality alone, then that would make animality itself the true 
essence. Similarly, if someone insisted that the whole human being 
depended on existence considered as a part of the human essence, 
then this would make existence the true essence. But then we would 
be back with the thesis that a thing in which there is no distinction 
between its essence and its existence is a thing whose essence just is 
existence itself—which is exactly what the objector was trying to 
avoid. So, there really is no middle ground between the case where a 
thing’s essence and existence are really distinct and the case where its 
essence just is existence itself.6
Note that to say that a thing’s essence and existence are really dis­
tinct is not to say that they can exist separately. It does not entail that 
(say) a stone’s essence is a kind of object and its existence another 
object, where either object might exist apart from the other. A real 
distinction between two things sometimes involves separability, but
5 See Peter Weigel, Aquinas on Simplicity (N ew  York: Peter Lang, 2008), p. 86.
6Ibid., pp. 144-45.

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
123
not always. For example, two dogs, or a dog and its leg, are really 
distinct, and each might exist apart from the other. By contrast,
consider a circle. It has both a radius and a circumference. There is 
obviously a real distinction between the properties having a radius and 
having a circumference. This is not because, when confining ourselves to 
circles, having a radius can ever exist apart from having a circumference ...
The radius of a circle is really distinct from its circumference, as 
proved by the fact that the latter is twice the former multiplied by 
pi. Since the radius is part of the property having a radius and the cir­
cumference is part of the property having a circumference, the properties
themselves are really distinct though inseparable__ [T]he same is true
for triangularity and trilaterality.7
Similarly, there is no such thing in mind-independent reality as a 
thing’s essence existing apart from its existence (whatever that would 
mean) or a thing’s existence existing apart from its essence (whatever 
that would mean). The essence of a stone, or a tree, or a dog, or 
a human being is not separable from its existence. Still, as with the 
radius and circumference of a circle, or the triangularity and trilater­
ality of a triangle, the essence of each of these things is really distinct 
from its existence.
So, with each of the things we know through experience, there 
is a real distinction between its essence and its existence. How is it, 
then, that these two different aspects of a thing are combined into a 
whole? It might seem that their inseparability provides an answer: 
they are together (so it might be claimed) because the essence of a 
thing and its existence are as inseparable as the radius and circumfer­
ence of a circle are, or as triangularity and trilaterality are. But this is 
no answer, because it just raises the question of why they are insepa­
rable. Now, the answer in the case of the radius and circumference of 
a circle is that these both follow from the essence or nature of a circle. 
Anything having that essence is going to have the properties having a 
radius and having a circumference. Similarly, anything having the essence 
of a triangle is going to have the property trilaterality, which follows 
from that essence.8
7 David S. Oderberg, “ The Non-Identity o f the Categorical and the Dispositional” , Anal­
ysis 69 (2009): 677 (emphasis in the original).
8 Ibid., p. 678.

124
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
However, we cannot in the same way explain how the essence of 
one of the things of our experience is conjoined with its existence. 
In particular, it cannot be that its existence follows from its essence. 
The reason is implicit in what has already been said. If you know the 
essence of a circle, then you will know that any circle will exhibit 
the properties having a radius and having a circumference; and if you 
know the essence of a triangle, then you know that it will exhibit 
the property triangularity. But as we have seen, you can know the 
essence of a lion, pterodactyl, or unicorn without knowing one way 
or the other whether any of these animals exists. Hence, the exis­
tence of one of these things does not follow from its essence in the 
way the properties having a radius and having a circumference follow 
from the essence of a circle, or the way the property triangularity 
follows from the essence of a triangle. We also have noted that the 
things of our experience exist in a merely contingent way— which is 
why they come into being and pass away— rather than in a necessary 
way. For this reason too, their existence cannot follow from their 
essence, for if it did, then they would exist necessarily. And while 
with something whose essence just is existence itself, its existence 
would, naturally, follow from its essence, we saw that there can in 
principle be only one such thing. Hence, with things of which there 
is more than one instance (stones, trees, dogs, human beings, etc.), 
it cannot be the case that they are things whose essence is identical 
with their existence, and thus cannot be the case that their existence 
follows from their essence.
Nor can it be the case that the things of our experience somehow 
impart existence to themselves— adding it, as it were, to their essences 
from outside. The very suggestion would be incoherent. A thing 
can’t impart or add something, or indeed do anything at all for that 
matter, unless it first exists. But a thing whose essence and existence 
are distinct cannot exist until existence is added or imparted to its 
essence. Naturally, then, a thing whose essence and existence are 
distinct cannot impart existence to its own essence, for in that case it 
would have to exist before it exists so as to cause itself to exist—which 
makes no sense. Nothing can be the cause of its own existence.
So, nothing in which there is a distinction between its essence 
and its existence can in any way be the source of its own existence. 
Its existence must be caused by something outside it— something 
which adds existence to its essence, as it were. Everyday experience

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
I25
would agree insofar as it tells us that stones, trees, dogs, and human 
beings have causes. But the dependence of these things on a cause for 
their existence is more radical than everyday experience would indi­
cate. For notice that everything said so far applies to a thing not 
only before it comes into being and as it comes into being but always, 
even after it has come into being. For example, consider a certain 
dog, Fido. Fido’s existence is distinct from Fido’s essence, doesn’t 
follow from Fido’s essence, and cannot be imparted by Fido to his 
essence. All of these things are true not only before Fido exists and at 
the time he is conceived, but also after he comes into being, and 
indeed at every moment he is alive. Fido’s existence here and now 
is distinct from his essence and doesn’t follow from his essence. So, 
here and now there must be some cause which adds or imparts exis­
tence to that essence. Otherwise Fido wouldn’t exist here and now 
any more than he did before he was conceived. He would “blink 
out” of existence or be annihilated. Nor can Fido be what is adding 
or imparting existence to his own essence here and now, any more 
than he could have before he was conceived. For Fido cannot do 
anything at all, not even for an instant, unless he exists at that instant. 
Among the things he cannot do unless he exists at that instant is to 
impart existence, either to himself or to anything else. So, his causing 
his own existence at that instant presupposes his own existence at that 
instant. Hence, the notion of Fido or anything else imparting exis­
tence to its own essence even at a particular instant is incoherent. 
A thing cannot cause its own existence at any one moment of time 
any more than it can cause it over a series of moments spread out 
through time.
So, anything whose essence is distinct from its existence must have 
a cause of its existence at any moment that it exists, here and now and 
not merely at some point in the past. To stick with the example of 
Fido, he must therefore have a cause which here and now imparts exis­
tence to his essence. Let’s label this cause, whatever it is, C. Suppose 
that C, like Fido, is something whose own essence is distinct from its 
existence. Then what we said about Fido and about the other things 
of our experience applies no less to C. C too must have a cause here 
and now which imparts existence to its essence. Let’s call this further 
cause B. Suppose that B, like Fido and like C, is also something 
whose essence is distinct from its existence. Then B, here and now, will 
require a cause of his own, which we might label A. And of course,

12 6
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
what was said about C and B will apply also to A, if A is something 
whose essence is distinct from its existence.
Notice that what we have here is what I called in chapter i a hierar­
chical causal series. The reason is not merely that the causes and effects 
are all simultaneous— Fido is caused by C, which is simultaneously 
being caused by B, which is simultaneously being caused by A—but, 
more fundamentally, that none of the causes mentioned so far can act 
independendy of some prior cause. C can impart existence to Fido’s 
essence only insofar as C ’s own essence has existence imparted to it 
by B, and B can do this imparting only insofar as its own essence has 
existence imparted to it by A. Now as we saw in chapter i, in the 
nature of the case, this sort of causal series cannot regress infinitely. 
There would be no such series at all unless there were a cause which 
is “first” or primary in the sense that it can cause without having, in 
the very act of causing, to be caused itself. In the present case such a 
cause would be one which can impart existence without having to 
derive it. Now, nothing whose essence is distinct from its existence 
could be such a cause, since as we have seen, anything like that has to 
have existence imparted to it. The first or primary cause in the present 
series, then, can only be something the very essence of which is identical 
to existence, something which just is existence itself. For since it just is 
existence itself, is identical with existence itself, it need not and indeed 
could not derive its existence from anything else. Its existence is, as it 
were, “built in” . It is not merely one existing thing alongside others 
but what Thomas Aquinas calls “subsistent existence itself” .9
So, for Fido to exist here and now and at any moment, his exis­
tence must here and now be caused, whether directly or indirectly, 
by something the essence of which is identical to its existence, some­
thing which is subsistent existence itself. And that entails that it must 
be caused by God.
Informal statement of the argument: Stage 2
Why should we identify that which is subsistent existence itself with 
God? Consider first that what we have said about Fido applies to each
9 
See Aquinas, De Ente et Essentia [On Being and Essence], in Selected Writings of St. Thomas 
Aquinas, trans. Robert P. Goodwin (Upper Saddle River, N .J.: Prentice Hall, 1965), chap. 4.

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
I27
and every one of the things we know from experience— stones, trees, 
Hons, human beings, and so on— and indeed to anything the essence 
of which is distinct from its existence, including immaterial things 
like angels and disembodied souls. The existence of any such thing, at 
any moment, will have to be caused by something whose essence just 
is existence itself. Consider also that, as we have seen, there can in 
principle be only one thing whose essence just is existence itself. And 
consider further that things whose essence is distinct from their exis­
tence, and a thing whose essence is identical with its existence, ex­
haust the possible kinds of thing there are. So, if there can be only 
one thing of the latter type, then everything else that exists must be 
of the former type. And since everything of the former type depends 
upon that one thing of the latter type, it follows that everything that 
exists other than that which is subsistent existence itself must be caused 
by that which is subsistent existence itself.
Hence, that which is subsistent existence itself is unique and the 
cause of everything other than itself. We have also seen that something 
which just is existence itself would exist in a necessary rather than con­
tingent way. For since its very essence would just be existence itself, 
it would not and indeed could not fail to exist. Nor, for that reason, 
would it or could it have its existence imparted to it. It would there­
fore have to be an uncaused cause of the existence of all other things.
So, what has been said so far shows that that which is subsistent 
existence itself is a unique, necessarily existing, uncaused cause of everything 
other than itself Now consider the relationship of the concepts in­
troduced in this chapter to the concepts of potentiality and actuality 
introduced in chapter 1. As Aquinas emphasized, in a thing whose 
essence is distinct from its existence, its essence and existence are 
related as potentiality and actuality. Fido’s essence, for example, by 
itself amounts only to a potential thing, not an actual thing. Only 
when Fido’s essence has existence imparted to it is there an actual 
thing— namely, Fido. Now if essence considered by itself is a kind of 
potentiality, and existence considered by itself is a kind of actuality, 
then that which just is existence, that which just is subsistent exis­
tence itself rather than merely one derivatively existing thing along­
side others, must be purely actual. It could not have some potentiality 
for existence that needs to be actualized, for then it would not be 
something which just is existence, but rather merely yet some other 
thing to which existence must be imparted.

128
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Now, just as there can in principle only be one thing which is 
subsistent existence itself, so too, as we saw in chapter i can there 
in principle be only one thing which is purely actual. Hence, the 
purely actual actualizer, to which the Aristotelian proof leads, and 
that which just is subsistent existence, to which the Thomistic proof 
leads, are really the same one cause of all things, arrived at from differ­
ent starting points. Now, we also saw in chapter i that whatever is 
purely actual must be immutable, eternal, immaterial, incorporeal, perfect, 
omnipotent, and fully good. We also saw there that, when we factor in 
the principle of proportionate causality, anything that is the cause of 
all things (as that which is subsistent existence itself is) would have to 
have intellect and omniscience.
Hence, that which is subsistent existence itself must be one, nec­
essarily existing, the uncaused cause of everything other than itself, purely 
actual, immutable, eternal, immaterial, incorporeal, perfect, omnipotent, fully 
good, intelligent, and omniscient. It is, in short, God.
A  more formal statement of the argument
As with the arguments defended in previous chapters, I have so far 
stated the Thomistic proof in an informal and unhurried way so as to 
facilitate understanding, especially among readers unfamiliar with the 
technical philosophical notions deployed in the proof. But now that 
the overall thrust of the reasoning is clear, it will once again be useful to 
have a somewhat more formal summary. It might be stated as follows: 1
1 . For any of the things we know from experience (stones, trees, 
dogs, human beings, etc.), there is a distinction to be drawn 
between its essence and its existence.
2. If this were not a real distinction— a distinction between aspects 
of reality itself and not merely between ways of thinking or 
talking about reality— then we could know whether or not a 
thing exists simply by knowing its essence.
3. But we cannot know whether or not a thing exists simply by 
knowing its essence.
4. If it were not a real distinction, then the things we know from 
experience would exist in a necessary way rather than in a 
merely contingent way.

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
I29
5. But in fact they exist in a merely contingent way, and not in a 
necessary way.
6. If there could in principle be more than one thing the essence 
of which is identical to its existence, then two or more such 
things would be distinguishable in the way that species of the 
same genus are distinguished, or members of the same species 
are distinguished, or in some other way.
7. But they cannot be distinguished in any of these ways.
8. So, there could not in principle be more than one thing the 
essence of which is identical to its existence.
9. So, for any of the things we know from experience, if the dis­
tinction between its essence and its existence were not a real 
distinction, then there could not in principle be more than 
one of them.
10. But in fact, for each of the things we know from experience, 
there is, or could be, more than one of them.
11. So, for each of the things we know from experience, the dis­
tinction between its essence and its existence is a real distinction.
12. For anything the essence of which is really distinct from its 
existence, its existence must be imparted to it either by itself 
or by some cause distinct from it.
1 3. But if it imparted existence to itself, it would be the cause of 
itself.
14. Nothing can be the cause of itself.
15. So, it cannot impart existence to itself.
16. So, for anything the essence of which is really distinct from its 
existence, its existence must be imparted to it by some cause 
distinct from it.
17. Since its essence and existence remain really distinct at every 
moment at which it exists, including here and now, its exis­
tence must be imparted to it by some cause distinct from it at 
every moment at which it exists, including here and now.
18. So, for each of the things we know from experience, its exis­
tence must be imparted to it by some cause distinct from it at 
every moment at which it exists, including here and now.
19. Either this cause is itself something the essence of which is 
distinct from its existence, or it is something whose essence 
and existence are identical, something that just is subsistent 
existence itself.

20. If this cause is something the essence of which is distinct from 
its existence, then its own existence too must be imparted to 
it by some cause distinct from it at every moment at which it 
exists, including here and now.
21. The causal series this would generate would be a hierarchi­
cal one, which cannot regress infinitely but must have a first 
member.
22. This first member could only be something whose essence 
and existence are identical, something that just is subsistent 
existence itself.
23. So, either directly or indirectly, each of the things we know 
from experience has its existence imparted to it at every 
moment at which it exists, including here and now, by some 
cause whose essence and existence are identical, something 
that just is subsistent existence itself.
24. Since there cannot in principle be more than one thing the 
essence of which is identical to its existence, this cause which 
is subsistent existence itself is unique.
25. Since it is unique, anything other than it that exists must be 
something the essence of which is distinct from its existence.
26. Anything the essence of which is distinct from its existence 
will, either directly or indirectly, have its existence imparted 
to it by a cause which is subsistent existence itself.
27. So, this unique cause which is subsistent existence itself is the 
cause of everything other than itself.
28. Since whatever lacks a real distinction between its essence and 
its existence would exist in a necessary rather than contingent 
way, this unique cause which is subsistent existence itself exists 
in a necessary way.
29. Whatever is subsistent existence itself need not and could not 
have had a cause of its own.
30. So, this unique cause which is subsistent existence itself is 
uncaused.
31. If that which is subsistent existence itself had some potentiality 
for existence which needed to be actualized, then existence 
would have to be imparted to it by some cause.
32. So, that which is subsistent existence itself has no potential 
for existence which needs actualization, but rather exists in a 
purely actual way.
130 
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
33. Whatever is purely actual must be immutable, eternal, imma­
terial, incorporeal, perfect, omnipotent, fully good, intelli­
gent, and omniscient.
34. So, each of the things of our experience has its existence 
imparted to it at every moment by a cause which is Subsistent 
Existence Itself, one, necessarily existing, the uncaused cause 
of everything other than itself, purely actual, immutable, eter­
nal, immaterial, incorporeal, perfect, omnipotent, fully good, 
intelligent, and omniscient.
35. But for there to be such a cause is for God to exist.
36. So, God exists.
I 3I
Some objections rebutted
Some of the objections a critic might raise against this argument are 
the same as those raised against the Aristotelian proof developed in 
chapter 1, to which I have already replied or will reply. For example, 
some might raise various objections to the arguments given here for 
the claim that a cause which is subsistent existence itself would have 
to have the divine attributes. The divine attributes will be discussed at 
length in a later chapter, and such objections will be addressed there. 
Suffice it for the moment to emphasize that what has been said so far 
shows that it is no good glibly to allege (as critics often do) that even 
if there is a first cause of things, it need not be a divine cause. We 
have just seen reason to think it must be a divine cause.
Some might also object that the Thomistic argument assumes that 
the universe had a beginning, or is open to the retort “ If everything 
has a cause, then what caused God?” We saw in chapter 1 why these 
objections are completely without force when raised against the Aris­
totelian proof, and they have no more force when raised against the 
Thomistic proof. Note first that the argument is simply not at all con­
cerned with the question of whether the universe had a beginning in 
time. The claim is not that the chain of causes traces backward into 
the past until it terminates in a cause which is Subsistent Existence 
Itself. Rather, the claim is that it traces here and now to a cause which 
is Subsistent Existence Itself. Even if the universe has always existed, 
or is part of a multiverse which has always existed, this would not 
change the outcome of the Thomistic proof in the slightest.

132
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Nor does the argument rest on the premise that “ everything has a 
cause.” What it says is that something whose essence and existence are really 
distinct requires a cause. And the reason God does not have a cause 
is not that he is an arbitrary exception to this general rule, but rather 
that there is no real distinction in him between essence and existence. 
Something which just is subsistent existence itself not only needs no 
cause of its existence but could not have had one. Nor is this some­
thing defenders of the argument have come up with as a way to try to 
sidestep the “What caused God?” objection. It was always what the 
Thomistic tradition had in mind from the beginning. As in the case 
of the Aristotelian proof, the “What caused God?” objection, far 
from being the devastating retort many atheists suppose, is in fact 
utterly incompetent, completely missing the point of the arguments 
at which it is directed.
The interested reader is advised to review what was said in chap­
ter i in reply to the various other objections there considered, for 
many of the points made there are relevant here also. For example, 
some critics may appeal to Hume, or to quantum mechanics, in order 
to cast doubt on the premise that something whose essence and exis­
tence are really distinct requires a cause. These objections are, for the 
reasons given in chapter i, no better when raised against the Thom­
istic proof than when raised against the Aristotelian proof.
Why need there be a first cause?
A further objection against “first cause” arguments, famously raised 
by Hume— and distinct from his criticism of the principle of causal­
ity, considered in chapter i— also has no force against the Thomistic 
proof. Hume asks, if we have explained each member of a causal 
series by appealing to an earlier member, what need do we have for 
a first cause? For even if we trace the series of causes back infinitely, 
we will never have a case where any individual thing is left unex­
plained. As we saw in chapter i, if it is linear causal series that are in 
question, we can agree with Hume that no first cause is necessary. 
But it is hierarchical causal series that the Thomistic proof, like the 
Aristotelian proof, is concerned with, and here the need for a first 
cause follows from the fact that in such a series all causes other than 
the first are purely instrumental, having no causal power of their

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
I33
own. Extending the series to infinity would not change this in the 
least. As noted in chapter 1, even if a hierarchical causal series were 
infinite, as long as each member of this infinite series is purely instru­
mental, and thus causally inert of itself, there will have to be a cause 
outside the series which imparts causal power to all of the series’ 
members— a cause which would then be “first” not in the sense of 
coming at the head of the series, but rather in the sense of being that 
on which every member of the series depends for its causal power.
The irrelevance of Hume’s objection is even more obvious when 
we consider the key role played in the Thomistic argument by the dis­
tinction between a thing’s essence and its existence. The kind of series 
which Hume (rightly) says might in principle be infinite is a series of 
things generated in time out of preexisting materials. Given Fido’s par­
ents, the matter out of which they are made, the causal powers they 
possess, and so forth, we can account for Fido’s being conceived; and 
we can account for Fido’s parents in the same way, and their parents 
in turn in the same way, and so on. But the Thomistic proof is con­
cerned instead with what conserves a thing in existence at any moment 
of time, as opposed to being annihilated. Here the question is why 
Fido, or his parents, or anything at all— including the matter out of 
which they are made and their causal powers— persist in existence 
even for an instant, given that there is nothing in their essence that 
entails their existence. Even if each dog in the linear causal series of 
dogs extending backward in time was generated by some earlier dog, 
with the series going back infinitely, as long as the existence of each 
dog is distinct from its essence, each dog will also have to be con­
served in being at each moment. Without a conserving cause, Fido or 
his parents would be nothing, and the same is true of any conserving 
cause whose own essence is distinct from its existence. An infinite 
series of such conserving causes can no more get you a real dog than 
an infinite series of IOUs can give you real money. Just as IOUs have 
to be backed at some point with real money, so too must any hierar­
chical series of causes which impart existence to Fido at any moment 
terminate in something which, since it is Subsistent Existence Itself, 
needn’t have existence imparted to it by anything else.
Barry Miller has suggested that the logical form of an explana­
tion which makes appeal to a necessarily terminating regress of causes 
would be something like the following:

134
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
A is being caused to G by [B inasmuch as it is being caused to G by
(C inasmuch as it is being caused to G by {M})].10 1
Given its form, however many iterations of “___ inasmuch as it is
being caused to G b y ___ ” we might want to add to this sentence so
as to describe a yet longer series, the sentence cannot actually be com­
pleted in a way that would leave open the possibility of there being 
an infinite number of such iterations. The only way to complete it 
will be at some point to insert a term like “M ” (or whatever), which 
names a first member.11 In the case at hand, if we substitute “ Fido” 
for “A ” and “ exist” for “ G ” , then however many intermediate causes 
of Fido’s existence we posit for the sake of argument, we are logic­
ally forced to terminate the regress with some first cause M. And 
since M ’s existence would be as much in need of a cause as Fido, B, 
or C are if it were something whose essence and existence were really 
distinct, the only way nonarbitrarily to stop with M  is if M is that 
which just is Subsistent Existence Itself.
Yet another charge often made against “first cause” arguments is 
that they commit a “fallacy of composition” . If each brick in a certain 
wall weighs a pound, it doesn’t follow that the wall as a whole weighs 
a pound; similarly (the objection continues) if each thing in the uni­
verse requires a cause, it doesn’t follow that the universe as a whole 
must have a cause. But there are two problems with this objection, at 
least considered as a criticism of the Thomistic proof. First, as is well 
known to logicians, part-to-whole reasoning of the sort in question 
is not in fact always fallacious. For example, if every brick in a wall 
built out of a child’s Lego blocks is red, then it follows that the wall as 
a whole is red. Similarly, given that the distinction between a partic­
ular material thing’s essence and its existence suffices to show that it 
requires a cause, it is surely correct to say that the space-time universe 
as a whole— which is comprised of material things and which itself 
has an essence distinct from its existence— must also have a cause.
But secondly and more importantly, the Thomistic proof does not 
in fact involve reasoning in this part-to-whole fashion in any case.
I0Barry Miller, “ Necessarily Terminating Causal Series and the Contingency Argument” , 
Mind 91 (1982): 24.
11 See Ibid., 201—15; and Miller’s From Existence to God: A  Contemporary Philosophical Argu­
ment (London: Routledge, 1992), chap. 6.

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
ISS
To get the proof going, one need not consider the universe as a 
whole, but just any individual thing whose essence is distinct from 
its existence— Fido, or a particular stone or tree or human being, or 
whatever. To explain even that single thing will require appeal to a 
conserving cause, which is Subsistent Existence Itself. To be sure, I 
said above that since everything the essence of which is distinct from 
its existence must be caused by that which is Subsistent Existence 
Itself, and since that which is subsistent existence itself is unique, it 
follows that that which is subsistent existence itself is the cause of 
everything other than itself—in which case it is the cause of the entire 
universe. But this claim about the universe as a whole is a consequence 
of the argument; no claim about the universe as a whole functions as 
a premise of the argument.
Kenny’s objection
Anthony Kenny has been highly critical of the Thomistic doctrine 
of the real distinction between a thing’s essence and its existence.12 
Kenny distinguishes between two notions of existence.13 The first 
is “ specific existence” , which is expressed by the existential quanti­
fier in modern logic. Specific existence, that is to say, is what is cap­
tured in statements of the form “ There is an x such that ...” It has to 
do with whether or not there is an instance of a certain species. Specific 
existence on this view is thus a second-order predicate of concepts—  
rather than a first-order predicate of individual objects— and “There 
is an x such that x is F” is true of a concept F when F is exemplified. 
Kenny’s second notion of existence is “individual existence” , which 
is what is captured in statements like “ The Great Pyramid still exists, 
but the Library of Alexandria does not.” Individual existence, that is 
to say, is just that which the Library of Alexandria lost when it was 
destroyed, but which the Great Pyramid still has. It has to do with 
what is true of an individual rather than a species.14
12See Anthony Kenny, Aquinas (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980), chap. 2; and 
Kenny’s Aquinas on Being (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002).
13 Kenny, Aquinas on Being, p. 42.
14 The notion o f existence as a second-order predicate of concepts (what Kenny calls “ spe­
cific existence” ) is most famously associated with the modem logician Gottlob Frege. W hat 
Kenny calls “ individual existence” corresponds to Frege’s notion o f Wirklichkeit.

Now the Thomistic proof maintains that essence and existence are 
identical in God but really distinct in everything else. But in Kenny’s 
view this cannot be true on either notion of existence. Suppose we 
read the Thomistic claim in terms of specific existence. In that case, 
Kenny argues, either essence and existence are as distinct in God as 
they are in everything else, or the Thomistic position is simply non­
sensical. For what it can intelligibly mean to say, that the essence of 
a thing is distinct from its specific existence, is merely something like 
what is captured in the statement “We can know what a unicorn is 
without knowing whether there is an x such that x is a unicorn.” 
But by the same token, we can know what God is without knowing 
whether there is an x such that x is God.15 Yet if the Thomist is insist­
ing that essence and specific existence are not distinct in God, then 
his position is not even intelligible. It amounts to saying something 
like “ God’s essence is there is an x such that .. .” l6
Suppose, then, that what the Thomist has in mind is not specific 
existence but individual existence. Unlike specific existence, individ­
ual existence can intelligibly be predicated of a thing. It makes sense 
to say of the Great Pyramid that it still exists or of Fido that he still 
exists. Now what this amounts to, Kenny says, is just for Fido to go 
on being what he is— namely, a dog. If we insist on saying that God’s 
essence and existence are identical, then in Kenny’s view this is intel­
ligible if what we mean is just that if God exists, then he goes on being 
what he is— namely, God. But in that case essence and existence will 
be identical not only in God but in Fido and in everything else. In 
having individual existence, they all go on being what they are.17
But there are several problems with Kenny’s critique, which have 
been ably exposed by Gyula Klima.18 For one thing, when arguing 
that the notion of individual existence cannot salvage the Thomist’s 
position, Kenny evidently supposes that a real distinction entails sep­
arability. He writes: “ Can we say that Fido’s essence and Fido’s exis­
tence are distinct? If a real distinction between A and B means that we
136 
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
15 Kenny, Aquinas on Being, p. 37.
16Ibid., pp. 41, 43-44.
17Ibid., p. 45-
18 See Gyula Klima, “ On Kenny on Aquinas on Being” , International Philosophical Quarterly 
44 (2004): 567-80, and Klima’s “Aquinas vs. Buridan on Essence and Existence” , in Later 
Medieval Metaphysics: Ontology, Language, and Logic, ed. Charles Bolyard and Rondo Keele 
(N ew  York: Fordham University Press, 2013), pp. 30-44.

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
I37
can have one without the other, then it seems that the answer must 
be in the negative.” 19 But as Klima points out, and for the reasons set 
out above, a real distinction does not entail separability; certainly it 
begs the question against the Thomist merely to assume otherwise.20 
Hence, Fido’s being what he is— his essence— need not be identical to 
his individual existence, even if we can’t have one without the other. 
And for all Kenny has shown, the arguments for the real distinction 
that we have considered show that they are not identical.
Kenny begs the question against the Thomist in a much deeper 
way, however, by assuming that the notions of existence he counte­
nances are the only respectable ones. For the Thomist wouldn’t agree 
with such an assumption in the first place. Now, a standard argument 
for the view that the notion of specific existence is the only legitimate 
one is that if existence were a first-level predicate of objects, then (it 
is claimed) negative existential statements Uke “Martians do not exist” 
would be self-contradictory, which they obviously are not. For if we 
think of this statement as saying that Martians do not have the attri­
bute of existence, this would seem to entail that there are (i.e., there 
exist) certain creatures— namely, Martians— who lack existence. 
Since that is absurd, the statement “Martians do not exist” cannot 
be interpreted as denying an attribute of existence to some object or 
objects. It should rather be interpreted in terms of the notion of spe­
cific existence, as saying something like “ It is not the case that there 
is at least one x such that x is a Martian.” That is to say, it says of the 
concept being a Martian that there is nothing to which it applies.
However, as John Knasas has argued, regarding existence as a first- 
level predicate need not have the absurd implication that “Martians 
do not exist” is self-contradictory.21 For this would follow only if, 
when we grasp the concept Martians, we necessarily already grasp it 
as applying to something existing in reality, so that “Martians do not 
exist” amounts to “ The existing Martians do not exist” , which of 
course is self-contradictory. But statements attributing existence or 
nonexistence to a thing, Knasas says, do not function logically in the
19Kenny, Aquinas on Being, p. 45.
20Klima, “ Aquinas vs. Buridan on Essence and Existence” , p. 33.
21 
John F .X . Knasas, Being and Some Twentieth-Century Thomists (N ew  York: Fordham 
University Press, 2003), pp. 202—3. See John F .X . Knasas, “ Haldane’s Analytic Thomism and 
Aquinas’s Actus Essendi” , in Analytical Thomism: Traditions in Dialogue, ed. C . Paterson and 
M . S. Pugh (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2006), pp. 2 3 3 -5 1.

138
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
same way other attributive statements do. In particular, their subjects 
are grasped in an existence-neutral way. In the case at hand, our mere 
grasp of the concept Martians does not by itself entail either a judg­
ment that they exist or a judgment that they do not, but leaves the 
question open. “Martians do not exist” thus says, not “ The existing 
Martians do not exist” , but rather something Uke “Martians, which 
are of themselves existentially neutral, do not in fact exist.” In gen­
eral, for the Thomist, when the mind grasps the essence of a thing, 
it grasps it as something distinct from its existence (or lack thereof), 
even if that of which the existence is ultimately predicated is the 
thing itself and not a mere concept.22
There is, in any event, ample reason to doubt that the notion of 
“ specific existence” captures everything that needs to be captured by 
an analysis of existence. Consider that when we are told that “ cats 
exist” means that “ there is at least one x such that x is a cat” or that 
something falls under the concept being a cat, there is still the question 
of what makes this the case, of what it is exactly in virtue of which there is 
something falling under this concept. And the answer to this further 
question is, as Knasas and others have pointed out, what the Thomist 
is getting at when he argues that the existence of a thing is distinct 
from its essence (in this case, from the essence of a cat), and must be 
imparted to it, so as to actualize what is otherwise merely potential, 
if the thing is to be real.23
A  real distinction or merely conceptual distinction?
One of the arguments considered above for the real distinction 
between a thing’s essence and its existence rested on the premise that 
we can know a thing’s essence without knowing whether or not it 
exists. But a critic might object that the inference to a real distinction
22 That we can predicate existence o f a thing doesn’t entail that it is a property or other 
accident, however. It is, from the Thomist’s point o f view, not a property or accident, for a 
thing can have properties or other accidents only if it first exists. Treating existence neither 
in Frege’s terms nor as a property or accident might sound odd to some contemporary phi­
losophers, but that only shows, from the Thomist’s point o f view, how impoverished and 
Procrustean is the conceptual machinery they bring to bear on metaphysical questions. See 
Oderberg, Real Essentialism, pp. 12 4 -25.
23 See David Braine, “ Aquinas, God, and Being” , in Paterson and Pugh, Analytical Thom­
ism, pp. 1—24; Gaven Kerr, Aquinas’s Way to God: The Proof in D e Ente et Essentia (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2015), pp. 72—73; and William F. Vallicella, “ A  Critique o f the 
Quantificational V iew  o f Existence” , The Thomist 47 (1983): 2 53-54 .

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
I39
is invalid, on the grounds that what logicians call the “ substitutivity 
of identicals” breaks down in intentional contexts. Aspirin is acetyl- 
salicylic acid, but if I know that aspirin is a pain reliever, it does not 
follow that I know that acetylsalicylic acid is a pain reliever. The con­
cept of aspirin is distinct from the concept of acetylsalicylic acid, which 
is why I might know the first without knowing the second, but this 
does not entail that aspirin and acetylsalicylic acid are distinct. Simi­
larly, the critic might argue, I might know what a lion or a unicorn 
is without knowing whether they exist, but it does not follow that 
the essence of either a lion or a unicorn is different from its existence. 
What is true is merely that the concept of a Hon is different from the 
concept of its existence, and the concept of a unicorn different from 
the concept of its existence.24
But in response to this sort of objection, Klima points out that 
the lesson we should draw from a breakdown of the substitutivity 
of identicals in an intentional context depends on whether or not 
the concepts involved are logically independent. Even if I clearly and 
fully grasp the concept of aspirin, I might know that something is 
aspirin without knowing that it is currently less popular an analgesic 
than acetaminophen. That is not surprising given that the concept of 
aspirin is logically independent of the concept of being currently less 
popular an analgesic than acetaminophen. But suppose I have only 
some vague and confused knowledge of what aspirin is. For example, 
I may know only that it is some sort of chemical substance commer­
cially sold for the purpose of relieving pain, but know nothing about 
its chemistry. In that case I certainly might know that something is 
aspirin without knowing that it is acetylsalicylic acid. However, if I 
have complete knowledge of the chemical essence of aspirin, I could 
not fail to know that it is acetylsalicylic acid. For the concept of aspi­
rin, when clearly and fully grasped, is not logically independent of the 
concept of acetylsalicylic acid.
Now, if the essence of some thing— a lion, say—were really iden­
tical to its existence, then the situation should be Uke this latter case. 
That is to say, a clear and complete knowledge of a lion’s essence 
should entail knowledge of its existence. Yet it is not true of a Hon, or
24 
Klima considers and responds to this objection in “ Aquinas vs. Buridan on Essence and 
Existence” . See the discussion o f Klima’s article in my review o f Bolyard and Keele’s anthol­
ogy Later Medieval Metaphysics (in which Klima’s article appears) in Metaphysica 16 (2015):
131-37·

140
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
a stone, or a tree, or of any of the other things of our experience, that 
if we had a clear and complete knowledge of its essence, we would 
know its existence.
The critic might respond that this begs the question in supposing 
that even a full and complete knowledge of some thing’s essence 
wouldn’t yield knowledge of its existence. But as Klima points out, a 
charge of circularity against an argument can be rebutted if we have 
independent reason to believe the premises. In this case, as Klima 
notes, if I know the essence of some thing which is of a certain kind, 
then I will know a priori of any other thing of that kind that does 
exist, has existed, will exist, or could exist that it will have the attri­
butes entailed by being a thing of that kind. But I will not know a 
priori whether any other thing of that kind in fact does exist, has 
existed, or will exist. I could know that only a posteriori. Now, this 
gives us a reason to think that knowing the essence of a thing does not 
entail knowing its existence, and it is a reason I could have whether 
or not it even occurs to me to ask about whether essence and exis­
tence are identical. Hence, I could accept the Thomistic argument 
for the real distinction without begging the question.
A point made earlier is also relevant to answering the critic’s alle­
gation of circularity. Suppose I know that aspirin is a pain reliever but 
not that it is acetylsalicylic acid. Then I have an incomplete concep­
tion of what aspirin is, but I have not misconceived of what aspirin is. 
However, if I judge that aspirin is not acetylsalicylic acid, then I have 
misconceived of what it is. By contrast, if I judge that aspirin does 
not exist, then while I have judged falsely, I have not misconceived 
of what aspirin is. Now, this sort of example gives one reason to 
believe that correctly conceiving of a thing’s essence can come apart 
from knowing whether it exists, and it does so whether or not it has 
occurred to one to ask whether essence and existence are identical. 
Hence, we have another non-question-begging reason for thinking 
that full and complete knowledge of a thing’s essence would not 
entail knowledge of its existence.
Do things really have essences?
Just as some have raised questions about the “ existence” side of the 
distinction between essence and existence, so too might some critics 
raise questions about the “ essence” side. Recall that the essence of a

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
thing is its nature, that whereby it is what it is. For the Thomist, it 
is what we grasp intellectually when we identify a thing’s genus and 
specific difference. Again, the traditional definition of a human being 
as a rational animal gives animal as the genus under which human 
beings fall and rationality as that which differentiates human beings as 
the species they are within that genus (hence “ specific difference”). 
If the definition is correct, it gives us the essence of a human being.
That we describe things as if they have essences is obvious. It is 
also obvious that the essences of some things are at least in part the 
product of convention. What makes something a carburetor or a 
can opener, for example, is determined by the purposes for which 
we make such artifacts. For Thomists and many other philosophers, 
however, the essences of at least some things, and in particular of nat­
ural objects or substances, are real or mind-independent as opposed 
to merely being the product of convention. Essentialism is the thesis 
that there are such real essences.25
But can it be proven that natural objects have real, mind-independent 
essences or natures? Might a critic not hold instead that all essences 
are conventional? One way to approach this issue would be to follow 
Aristotle’s view, expressed in book 2 of the Physics, that it would be 
absurd to try to prove that things have natures. The idea is not that 
it is doubtful that things have natures or essences, but rather that it is 
obvious that they do— indeed, that the belief that things have essences 
is more obviously correct than any argument that can be given for or 
against it. As with Hume’s challenge to the principle of causality, it 
is (so the Thomist would argue) only by making highly controver­
sial and indeed dubious philosophical assumptions that the reality of 
essence could seriously be doubted.
Since there are those who doubt it, though, more needs to be 
said.26 To begin with, we can note that the world is just the way
I 4I
25 Readers of the Thomist thinker Etienne Gilson should not confuse this with the “ essen- 
tialism” o f which he was famously critical. Gilson’s target was the rationahst tendency to try 
to read off reality from essences considered in the abstract, as objects o f thought. To this he 
contrasted the “ existentialism” of Aquinas, for whom knowledge o f real concrete existents 
must come through experience. There is nothing in essentialism as I have characterized it that 
entails rationalism of this sort, and Aquinas was clearly as much an “ essentialist” in m y sense 
as he was an “ existentiahst” in Gilson’s sense.
26 For detailed defense o f essentialism, see Feser, Scholastic Metaphysics, chap. 4, and Oder­
berg, Real Essentialism.

142
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
we would expect it to be if things really have essences. In particular, 
things exhibit the unity we would expect them to if they had real 
essences, in two respects.27 For one thing, they are related to one 
another in a way that exhibits unity. This oak tree, that one, and the 
other one are united in a way they are not united to stones, dogs, or 
people; this polar bear, that one, and the other one are united to one 
another in a similar way; this sample of copper, that one, and a third 
one are so united as well; and so on. These groups of things mani­
fest common causal powers and other properties in just the way we 
would expect if there were a common real essence or nature they all 
instantiated, but which would be mysterious— indeed, it would seem 
to be a miracle— if their being grouped together was merely a mat­
ter of human convention. For another thing, each individual thing 
exhibits a unity of its own. An oak, a polar bear, and a sample of cop­
per will each behave over time in a uniform and predictable manner, 
exhibiting characteristic properties and patterns of operation, per­
sisting despite changes in superficial features, and having parts that 
function in an integrated way. This too is just what we would expect 
if each of these things had a real essence or nature, and would be mys­
terious if what we thought of as their essences were merely a matter 
of human convention.
O f course, whether certain natural objects really should be grouped 
into the same class or not, and exactly which properties and opera­
tions a given object persistently exhibits, might sometimes be difficult 
questions to settle. Precisely what a thing’s essence is is by no means 
always easy to determine. But these considerations by themselves do 
not cast doubt on the reality of essence. Common caricatures aside, 
no serious essentialist believes that the natures of things can always 
be discovered easily—from the armchair as it were, or from every­
day experience. What is at issue at the moment is in any case not 
what the essences of various things are or whether we can always dis­
cover them, but whether they are nevertheless there even if we cannot 
always discover what they are. And the point is that the unity and 
order of things would be mystifying if essence were not a pervasive 
feature of mind-independent reality.
That much is evident from common sense. But both the prac­
tice and results of modern science reinforce the point. As to the
27 Oderberg, Real Essentialism, pp. 44-47.

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
M3
practice, philosophers of science of what is sometimes called the “new 
essentialist” school have (as the name implies) argued that physical 
science is in the business of discovering the essences as well as the 
causal powers of things, insofar as the powers science aims to uncover 
are powers things have essentially. As Nancy Cartwright emphasizes, 
the sorts of regularities the hard sciences tend to uncover are rarely 
observed, and in fact are in ordinary circumstances impossible to ob­
serve.28 Beginning students of physics quickly become acquainted 
with idealizations like the notion of a frictionless surface, and with 
the fact that laws like Newton’s law of gravitation strictly speaking 
describe the behavior of bodies only in the circumstance where no 
interfering forces are acting on them, a circumstance which never 
actually holds. Moreover, physicists do not in fact embrace a reg­
ularity as a law of nature only after many trials, after the fashion of 
popular presentations of inductive reasoning. Rather, they draw their 
conclusions from a few highly specialized experiments conducted 
under artificial conditions. This is exactly what we should expect if 
what science is concerned with is discovering the hidden natures of 
things. Actual experimental practice indicates that what physicists are 
really looking for are the powers a thing will manifest when interfer­
ing conditions are removed, and the fact that a few experiments, or 
even a single controlled experiment, are taken to establish the results 
in question indicates that these powers are taken to reflect a nature 
that is universal to things of that type. Writes Cartwright: “Modern 
experimental physics looks at the world under precisely controlled or 
highly contrived circumstance; and in the best of cases, one look is 
enough. That, I claim, is just how one looks for natures.”29
Philosopher of science Brian Ellis takes the view (which I briefly 
discussed in chapter 1) that essences are necessary in order to ground 
laws of nature.30 And as Ellis also notes, the actual results of modem 
science (let alone the practice or method) support the claim that there 
are natural kinds of thing, each with its own essence:
28 See Nancy Cartwright, “ Aristotelian Natures and the M odem  Experimental Method” , 
in Inference, Explanation, and Other Frustrations: Essays in the Philosophy of Science, ed. John Ear- 
man (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University o f California Press, 1992); and Nancy Cartwright, 
The Dappled World: A  Study of the Boundaries of Science (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1999), chap. 4.
29 Cartwright, Dappled World, p. 102.
30 See Brian Ellis, Scientific Essentialism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), and 
Brian Ellis, The Philosophy of Nature: A  Guide to the New Essentialism (Chesham: Acumen, 2002).

144
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Every distinct type of chemical substance would appear to be an 
example of a natural kind, since the known kinds of chemical sub­
stances all exist independendy of human knowledge and understand­
ing, and the distinctions between them are all real and absolute. Of 
course, we could not have discovered the differences between the 
kinds of chemical substances without much scientific investigation. 
But these differences were not invented by us, or chosen pragmati­
cally to impose order on an otherwise amorphous mass of data. There 
is no continuous spectrum of chemical variety that we had somehow 
to categorize. The chemical world is just not like that. On the con­
trary, it gives every appearance of being a world made up of substances 
of chemically discrete kinds, each with its own distinctive chemical 
properties. To suppose otherwise is to make nonsense of the whole 
history of chemistry since Antoine Lavoisier.31
The view that all essences are conventional is, in any event, ulti­
mately incoherent, as has been pointed out by philosopher Craw­
ford Elder.32 The conventionalist holds that a thing’s essence, that 
whereby it is what it is, is a product of our ways of thinking, our lin­
guistic habits, and so forth. It is, in short, mind-dependent. But for the 
consistent conventionalist this would have to be as true of the human 
mind itself (whether we identify the mind with the brain or think of 
it as something immaterial) as it is of everything else. That is to say, 
what makes the mind what it is would have to be mind-dependent—  
dependent on our ways of thinking, linguistic conventions, and so 
forth. But for something to be mind-dependent entails that it pre­
supposes, and is thus posterior to (ontologically if not temporally), the 
existence of the mind. Yet the mind will necessarily be prior to that 
which depends upon it, to that which exists only relative to its ways 
of thinking and linguistic habits. Hence, the consistent convention­
alist will have to say that the mind is both prior to itself and posterior 
to itself. But this makes no sense.
So, we cannot coherently take a conventionalist view about our 
own essence, or at least about the essence of our minds. That there is
31 
Brian Ellis, The Metaphysics of Scientific Realism (Montreal and Kingston: M cGill-Q ueen’s 
University Press, 2009), p. 59. To be sure, while Ellis finds ample grist for the essentialist mill 
in physics and chemistry, he would not extend essentialism to biological kinds. But other 
contemporary essentialists would. See e.g., Oderberg, Real Essentialism, chaps. 8 and 9.
32Crawford L. Elder, Real Natures and Familiar Objects (Cambridge, Mass.: M IT  Press, 
2004), chap. i.

THE THOMISTIC PROOF
I 45
at least one real essence, our essence, cannot be denied. And Elder’s 
point can be supplemented as follows. The arguments for conven­
tionalism would, if they had any force at all, apply to us just as much 
as to anything else. Yet we know they are wrong when applied to us. 
What reason can we have, then, to take them seriously when applied 
to other things?
In any event, that the essences of at least some natural objects are 
mind-independent rather than conventional suffices for purposes of 
the Thomistic proof of God’s existence. Even if it turned out that the 
essences of other natural objects are conventional, that would no 
more be a difficulty for the proof than is the fact that the essence of 
a carburetor or a can opener is conventional. Suppose, for example, 
that it turned out that the essence of a dog is a matter of convention. 
What really exist objectively (so it might be claimed) are only phys­
ical particles of certain sorts, and when the particles are arranged in 
such-and-such a way, the human mind applies the concept dog to 
them. Even in this case, the physical particles themselves would have 
a nonconventional essence, and so too (as we have seen) would the 
human mind which applies the concept dog to arrangements of these 
particles. And the essence of each of these things would be really 
distinct from its existence, which opens the door to the reasoning of 
the Thomistic proof.
So, the objections to the Thomistic argument all fail, leaving us 
with a fourth proof of the existence of God.


5
The Rationalist Proof
Informal statement of the argument: Stage i
Common sense and science alike suppose that there are explanations 
for the existence of the things we encounter, the attributes things 
exhibit, and the events that occur. And typically we find that this 
is indeed the case. You find an unfamiliar pair of sunglasses lying 
on your sofa, and after asking around you determine that they were 
inadvertently left there by a visiting friend. You notice a rash on your 
arm and upon reflection realize that you probably brushed up against 
some poison oak during a recent hike. You hear a series of scratching 
sounds coming from the roof above and find upon investigation that 
it was made by a neighborhood cat or a family of raccoons. Biologists 
explain the origin of new forms of fife in terms of mutation and nat­
ural selection. Physicists explain the temperature of water in terms of 
mean molecular kinetic energy, and the orbits of the planets in terms 
of Kepler’s laws of planetary motion. Even when we don’t find an 
explanation, we don’t doubt that there is one, and we often at least 
do have an explanation of the fact that we don’t have an explanation 
of whatever it is we are investigating. For example, when a murder 
remains unsolved, we know that the reason is that the murderer was 
very careful to avoid leaving fingerprints, to make sure there were no 
witnesses, to hide the body so that it would take a long time to find 
it, and so forth.
But does everything in fact have an explanation, even if it’s an expla­
nation we haven’t discovered and never will discover? The thesis that 
this is the case is known as the principle of sufficient reason, or PSR for 
short. This principle is most famously associated with the early mod­
ern rationalist philosopher G. W. Leibniz, but has been formulated in
147

148
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
many ways by writers of diverse philosophical commitments. Two 
characteristic Thomistic formulations would be “ everything which 
is, has a sufficient reason for existing” and “ everything is intelligi­
ble.” 1 A third is that “ there is a sufficient reason or adequate necessary 
objective explanation for the being of whatever is and for all attri­
butes of any being.”1 2
PSR  is reminiscent of the principle of causality, which we’ve consid­
ered in previous chapters, but it is important to emphasize that they 
are distinct principles. One difference is that, while a cause must be 
distinct from its effect, there need not be a distinction between a suf­
ficient reason and that for which it is a sufficient reason. That is to say, 
though nothing can be the cause of itself, there could in principle be 
something which is self-explanatory. (Whether there is in fact such a 
thing is a question we’ll address presently.) A related difference is that 
while (as we have seen) the principle of causality does not entail that 
everything has a cause, PSR does entail that everything has a suffi­
cient reason. Everything which has a cause has its sufficient reason in 
something distinct from it, whereas if there is something which does 
not have a cause, it would have to have its sufficient reason in itself. 
All causes are reasons in the sense of making their effects intelligible, 
but not all reasons are causes.
Why should we believe PSR? One important argument for it is a 
variation on the empirical argument for the principle of causality we 
considered in chapter 1. Considered as an inductive generalization, 
PSR is as well supported as any other. For one thing (and as noted 
already) we do in fact tend to find explanations when we look for 
them, and even when we don’t, we tend to have reason to think 
there is an explanation but just one to which, for whatever reason 
(e.g., missing evidence), we don’t have access. For another thing, the 
world simply doesn’t behave the way we would expect it to if PSR 
were false.3 Events without any evident explanation would surely be
1 Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange, God: His Existence and His Nature; A  Thomistic Solution of 
Certain Agnostic Antinomies, vol. 1 (St. Louis: B. Herder, 1939), p. 181.
2Bernard Wuellner, Summary of Scholastic Principles (Chicago: Loyola University Press,
1956), p. 15.
3 Alexander R . Pruss, “ The Leibnizian Cosmological Argument” , in The Blackwell Compan­
ion to Natural Theology, ed. William Lane Craig andJ.P. Moreland (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 
2009), p. 32.

THE RATIONALIST PROOF
I49
occurring constantly, and the world would simply not have the intel­
ligibility that makes science and everyday common sense as successful 
as they are. That the world is as orderly and intelligible as it is would 
be a miracle if PSR were not true.
But PSR is far more certain than a mere empirical hypothesis can 
be. If it seems difficult to prove, that is not because it is doubtful, but 
on the contrary because it is more obviously true than anything that 
could be said either for or against it. As Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange 
writes, “ Though it cannot be directly demonstrated, it can be indi­
rectly demonstrated by the indirect method of proof known as reduc­
tio ad absurdum."4 One way in which this might go is suggested by 
some remarks made by Alexander Pruss, who was in turn develop­
ing a point made by Robert Koons.5 Denying PSR, Pruss notes, 
entails radical skepticism about perception. For if PSR  is false, then 
there might be no reason whatsoever for our having the perceptual 
experiences we have. In particular, there might be no connection at 
all between our perceptual experiences and the external objects and 
events we suppose cause them. Nor would we have any grounds for 
claiming even that such a radical disconnect between our perceptions 
and external reality is improbable. For objective probabilities depend 
on the objective tendencies of things, and if PSR  is false, then events 
might occur in a way that has nothing to do with any objective 
tendencies of things. Hence, one cannot consistently deny PSR and 
be justified in trusting the evidence of sensory perception, nor the 
empirical science grounded in perception.
O f course a determined critic of PSR might suppose he can bite 
the bullet and accept perceptual skepticism, but the Pruss/Koons fine 
of argument can be pushed further than they push it. Consider that 
whenever we accept a claim that we take to be rationally justified, we 
suppose not only that we have a reason for accepting it (in the sense 
of a rational justification) but also that this reason is the reason why 
we accept it (in the sense of being the cause or explanation of our 
accepting it). We suppose that it is because the rational considerations
4 Garrigou-Lagrange, God, p. 18 1.
5Pruss, “ Leibnizian Cosmological Argument” , p. 28; see also Robert C . Koons, Realism 
Regained: An Exact Theory of Causation, Teleology, and the Mind (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2000), p. n o .

150
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
in favor of the claim are good ones that we are moved to assent to 
the claim. We also suppose that our cognitive faculties track truth 
and standards of rational argumentation, rather than leading us to 
embrace conclusions in a way that has no connection to truth or 
logic. But if PSR is false, we could have no reason for thinking that 
any of this is really the case. For all we know, what moves or causes 
us to assent to a claim might have absolutely nothing to do with the 
deliverances of our cognitive faculties, and our cognitive faculties 
themselves might in turn have the deliverances they do in a way 
that has nothing to do with truth or standards of logic. We might 
believe what we do for no reason whatsoever, and yet it might also 
falsely seem, once again for no reason whatsoever, that we do believe 
what we do on good rational grounds. Now, this would apply to 
any grounds we might have for doubting PSR as much as it does 
to any other conclusion we might draw. Hence, to doubt or deny PSR 
undercuts any grounds we could have for doubting or denying 
PSR. The rejection of PSR is therefore self-undermining. Even the 
critic of PSR willing to embrace perceptual skepticism and retreat 
into a redoubt of a priori knowledge will find no shelter there. To 
reject PSR is to undermine the possibility of any rational inquiry.
There is another way in which science in particular implicitly pre­
supposes PSR. Some philosophers have taken the view that there 
can be genuine explanations, including scientific explanations, even 
if PSR is false. One finds such a view in J.L . Mackie and Bertrand 
Russell.6 The idea is that we can explain at least some phenomena 
in terms of laws of nature, those laws in terms of more fundamen­
tal laws, and perhaps these in turn of some most fundamental level of 
laws. The most fundamental laws would, however, lack any explana­
tion. That the world is governed by them would just be an unintel­
ligible “brute fact” .
But this is incoherent. Suppose I told you that the fact that a cer­
tain book has not fallen to the ground is explained by the fact that it 
is resting on a certain shelf, but that the fact that the shelf itself has not 
fallen to the ground has no explanation at all but is an unintelligible
6J.L . Mackie, The Miracle of Theism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982), pp. 84-87; Bertrand 
Russell and F. C . Copleston, “ A  Debate on the Existence o f God” , in The Existence of God, 
ed. John Hick (N ew  York: Macmillan, 1964), pp. 168—78.

THE RATIONALIST PROOF
brute fact. Have I really explained the position of the book? It is hard 
to see how. For the shelf has in itself no tendency to stay aloft—it is, 
by hypothesis, just a brute fact that it does so. But if it has no such 
tendency, it cannot impart such a tendency to the book. The “ expla­
nation” the shelf provides in such a case would be completely illu­
sory. (Nor would it help to impute to the book some such tendency, 
if the having of the tendency is itself just an unintelligible brute fact. 
The illusion will just have been relocated, not eliminated.)
By the same token, it is no good to say: “ The operation of law of 
nature C is explained by the operation of law of nature B, and the 
operation ofB  by the operation of law of nature A, but the operation 
of A has no explanation whatsoever and is just an unintelligible brute 
fact.” The appearance of having “ explained” C and B is completely 
illusory if A is a brute fact, because if there is neither anything about 
A itself that can explain A ’s own operation nor anything beyond A 
that can explain it, then A has nothing to impart to B or C that could 
possibly explain their operation. The notion of an explanatory nomo- 
logical regress terminating in a brute fact is, when carefully examined, 
no more coherent than the notion of an effect being produced by an 
instrument that is not the instrument of anything. (A series of ever 
more fundamental “laws of nature” is in this regard like a hierarchical 
causal series of the sort discussed in earlier chapters.)
So, rational inquiry in general, and scientific inquiry in particu­
lar, presuppose PSR. A further argument which supports this judg­
ment has been put forward by philosopher Michael Della Rocca.7 
Della Rocca notes that even among philosophers who reject PSR, 
philosophical theses are often defended by recourse to what he calls 
“ explicability arguments” . An explicability argument (I’ll use the 
abbreviation EA from here on out) is an argument to the effect that 
we have grounds for denying that a certain state of affairs obtains if it 
would be inexplicable or a “brute fact” . Della Rocca offers a number 
of examples of this strategy. When materialist philosophers of mind 
defend some reductionist account of consciousness on the grounds 
that consciousness would (they say) otherwise be inexplicable, they 
are deploying an EA. When early modem philosophers rejected the 
Aristotelian notion of substantial form (or what Aristotelians would
I5I
7Michael Della Rocca, “ P S R ” , Philosophers’ Imprint 10 (2010): 1- 1 3 .

152
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
regard as a caricature of that notion, anyway), they did so on the 
grounds that the notion was insufficiently explanatory. When philos­
ophers employ inductive reasoning, they are essentially rejecting the 
claim that the future will not be relevantly like the past nor the unob­
served like the observed, on the grounds that this would make future 
and otherwise unobserved phenomena inexplicable. And so forth.
Now, Della Rocca allows that to appeal to an EA does not by 
itself commit one to PSR. But suppose we apply the EA approach 
to the question of why things exist. Whatever we end up thinking the 
correct answer to this question is— it doesn’t matter for purposes of 
Della Rocca’s argument—if we deploy an EA in defense of it, we will 
implicitly be committing ourselves to PSR, he says, because PSR  just 
is the claim that the existence of anything must have an explanation.
In responding to these different examples of EAs, one could, says 
Della Rocca, take one of three options:
1. Hold that some EAs are legitimate kinds of argument, while 
others— in particular, any EA for some claim about why things 
exist at all— are not legitimate.
2. Hold that no EA for any conclusion is legitimate.
3. Hold that all EAs, including any EA for a claim about the sheer 
existence of things, are legitimate kinds of argument.
Now, the critic of PSR  cannot take option no. 3, because that 
would, in effect, be to accept PSR. Nor could any critic of PSR 
who applies EAs in defense of other claims— and the EA approach is, 
as Della Rocca notes, a standard move in contemporary philosophy 
(and indeed, in science)— take option no. 2.
So, that leaves option no. 1. The trouble, though, is that there 
doesn’t seem to be any non-question-begging way for the critic of 
PSR to defend option no. 1. For why should we believe that EAs 
are legitimate in other cases, but not when giving some account of 
the sheer existence of things? It seems arbitrary to allow the one sort 
of EA but not the other sort. The critic of PSR  cannot respond by 
saying that it is just a brute fact that some kinds of EAs are legitimate 
and others are not, because this would beg the question against PSR, 
which denies that there are any brute facts. Nor would it do for the 
critic to say that it is just intuitively plausible to hold that EAs are

THE RATIONALIST PROOF
ISS
illegitimate in the case of explaining the sheer existence of things, 
since Della Rocca’s point is that the critic’s acceptance of EAs in 
other domains casts doubt on the reliability of this particular intu­
ition. Hence, to appeal to intuition would also be to beg the question.
So, Della Rocca concludes that there seems no cogent way to 
accept EAs at all without accepting PSR. The implication is that we 
can have no good reason to think anything is explicable unless we also 
admit that everything is.
Della Rocca’s argument can, in my view, be pushed even fur­
ther than he pushes it. Della Rocca allows that while it would be 
“ extremely problematic” for someone to bite the bullet and take 
option no. 2, it may not be strictly “logically incoherent” to do so. 
However, I think this is too generous to the critic of PSR. Even if 
the critic decides to reject the various specific examples of EAs cited 
by Della Rocca—EAs concerning various claims about conscious­
ness, substantial forms, and the like— the critic will still make use of 
various patterns of reasoning he considers formally valid or induc­
tively strong, will reject patterns of reasoning he considers fallacious, 
and so forth. And he will do so precisely because these principles of 
logic embody standards of intelligibility or explanatory adequacy.
To be sure, it is a commonplace in logic that not all explanations 
are arguments, and it is also sometimes claimed (less plausibly, I think) 
that not all arguments are explanations. But certainly many arguments 
are explanations. What Aristotelian philosophers call “ explanatory 
demonstrations” (e.g., a syllogism like All rational animals are capable 
of language, all men are rational animals, so all men are capable of language) 
are explanations. Arguments to the best explanation are (obviously) 
explanations, and as Della Rocca notes, inductive reasoning in gen­
eral seems to presuppose that things have explanations.
So, to give up EAs of any sort (option no. 2) would seem to be to 
give up the very practice of argumentation itself, or at least much of 
it. Needless to say, it is hard to see how doing that could fail to be 
logically incoherent, at least if one tries to defend one’s rejection of 
PSR with arguments. Hence, to accept the general practice of giv­
ing arguments while nevertheless rejecting EAs of the specific sorts 
Della Rocca gives as examples would really be to take Della Rocca’s 
option no. 1 rather than option no. 2. And as we have seen, there is 
no non-question-begging reason to accept no. 1.

154
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
So, we have the best of reasons to affirm the principle of suffi­
cient reason. Now, the explanation of anything is going to be found 
either in the thing’s own nature, or in something outside it. In the 
latter case, we can say that the thing is contingent—that it depends on 
circumstances outside itself, and thus will not exist if those circum­
stances do not hold. In the former case, we can say that the thing is 
necessary— that there is something in its own nature that entails that 
it cannot fail to exist, so that it depends on nothing outside itself. 
There is no third possibility. If a thing is explained neither by its own 
nature nor by anything outside itself, then it would be explained by 
nothing at all. But something’s having no explanation at all is ruled 
out by PSR.
Now, we know that there are contingent things, since they are all 
around us— stones, trees, dogs, human beings, and so on. Might every­
thing be contingent? Suppose that for every contingent thing, there 
is some other contingent thing that caused it. Suppose that this series 
of contingent things regresses infinitely. There are different ways in 
which the details of this scenario might be spelled out. We might 
think in terms of a beginningless universe, in which contingent thing 
A was caused by some previously existing contingent thing B, which 
in turn was caused by some previously existing contingent thing C, 
and so on, in this fashion forever into the past, without there being in 
any sense a start to the series. Or we may think in terms of a series that 
is like this one except that this particular universe of contingent things 
does have a beginning, at the Big Bang—but where the Big Bang was 
in turn the result of some previously existing universe imploding in a 
Big Crunch. We can then imagine that previously existing universe 
having come into existence with a Big Bang of its own, which had 
been the result of the implosion of some yet earlier universe. And we 
might suppose that there has been an infinite series of universes, each 
arising with a Big Bang and ending with a Big Crunch which gen­
erates the next Big Bang. We might also suppose that during the life 
span of a universe, other universes branch off from it, carrying on 
after it collapses in on itself. We can imagine this process resulting in 
a “ multiverse” , a series of parallel universes preceded by other parallel 
universes which were preceded by yet others, with no beginning.
Exactly how these details go doesn’t matter for present purposes, 
however. What matters is that we would have in each case some

THE RATIONALIST PROOF
I 55
variation on an infinite series of contingent things. Let’s allow for the 
sake of argument that such a series is possible. It might seem that if 
there is such a series, then we would have an explanation for every­
thing, just as PSR requires, and without affirming the existence of 
a necessary being. For every contingent thing will be explained by 
some previously existing contingent thing. Hence, there will be no 
need to posit anything that exists in a necessary way. David Hume 
famously draws precisely this conclusion in his Dialogues Concerning 
Natural Religion.
But this is an illusion. Not everything that requires explanation is 
in fact explained on this scenario. There are several ways of seeing 
how this is so, beginning with a consideration emphasized by the 
rationalist philosophers Leibniz and Samuel Clarke. Even if there is 
an infinite series of contingent things, each caused by a previous one, 
there is still the question of why the series itself exists at all. For the 
series is just as contingent as the individual contingent things that 
make it up are. It could have failed to exist; so why doesn’t it?8
It is sometimes claimed that there is something illegitimate about 
this question, but the reasons given for this judgment are not good 
ones. For example, it is sometimes alleged that the question rests on 
a fallacy of composition. If each stone in a certain collection of stones 
weighs less than an ounce, it doesn’t follow that the entire collec­
tion weighs less than an ounce. Similarly, if each individual thing 
in a series is contingent, then (so it is claimed) it doesn’t follow that 
the series as a whole is contingent. But as we saw in the previous 
chapter, this argument is a bad one. Not every inference from part 
to whole commits a fallacy of composition. Whether such a fallacy 
is committed depends on what sort of feature of the parts we are 
reasoning about. Where weight is concerned, we can’t validly reason
8 This is sometimes, and famously, put by asking, w hy is there something rather than 
nothing? H owever, this is a potentially misleading way o f framing the issue, since some 
interpret this question as implying that there could, at least in theory, have been nothing 
at all. And the arguments o f the previous chapters, as well as the argument o f this one, 
imply that it is not the case that there could have been nothing. W hat is purely actual, what 
is absolutely simple or noncomposite, what grounds all necessity and possibility, what just is 
subsistent existence itself, and what exists in an absolutely necessary way could not possibly 
have not existed— in which case, if there really is something that fits these descriptions, 
then it is not true that there could have been nothing at all. The better way o f framing the 
question is, w hy are there any contingent things at all?

156
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
from what is true of the parts to what is true of the whole. But where 
color (for example) is concerned, we can validly reason from the parts 
to the whole. If each Lego block in a pile of Lego blocks is red, then 
any object we make out of those blocks will also be red.
Now, contingency is, in the sense that is relevant to the present 
issue, more like color then it is like weight. Take any contingent 
thing— a stone, a Lego block, a tree, a human being, whatever. A 
collection of three stones is obviously no less contingent than a single 
stone is, and a collection of three hundred or three million stones 
is obviously no less contingent than the collection of three stones. 
Indeed, the collections are if anything more obviously contingent than 
the individual stone is. The individual stone is contingent on things 
like the laws of physics continuing to operate in such a way that 
the atoms making up the stone don’t dissipate, for example. But the 
collection is dependent both on all of its component stones being 
gathered together in just the way they are, and on each individual 
stone in the collection existing insofar as the laws of physics continue 
to operate in such a way that the atoms making up the stone don’t 
dissipate, for example. The collection is thus doubly contingent. It is 
quite silly to pretend, then, that when we get to the collection of all 
the stones there are, or all the contingent things there are, we might 
somehow suddenly have something that is not contingent.
Moreover, it is simply false to suppose (as Hume does) that when, 
for each individual contingent thing, we’ve identified some further 
contingent thing as its immediate cause, then we’ve explained every­
thing that there is to explain. To borrow an example from Leibniz, 
suppose there were an infinite series of geometry books, each one 
of which was copied from a preexisting one.9 We would have an 
immediate cause for each book, but obviously we would not have 
explained everything. For example, why does the series of books 
have the specific content that it has rather than some other content? 
Why is it that geometry is the subject matter of each of them? Why 
isn’t it instead a book of Shakespeare plays, or a coloring book, or an 
automotive repair manual, that gets copied and recopied infinitely? 
By the same token, even if we suppose that the series of contin­
gent things that make up our universe in one way or other extends
9G. W . Leibniz, “ On the Ultimate Origination o f Things” (essay, 1697).

THE RATIONALIST PROOF
IS?
backward infinitely, we still have not explained everything. For exam­
ple, why does the series consist of just the specific kinds of contingent 
things it does, rather than some other kinds? Why is it stones, trees, 
dogs, human beings, planets, stars, solar systems, galaxies, and so forth, 
that make up the infinite series of contingent things that we actu­
ally have? Why not some other sorts of contingent things entirely? 
Why is our infinitely old universe (supposing that it is infinitely old), 
or the infinite series of universes (if we suppose instead that there 
is such a series), or the multiverse (if we suppose that that is the correct 
scenario), governed by exactly the laws of nature which do in fact 
govern it, rather than some other laws?
To answer such questions, we need to appeal to something over 
and above the series of contingent things, even if we suppose the series 
to regress infinitely. Now, someone might acknowledge this but still 
think that we need not affirm the existence of a necessary being. He 
might say that there is a cause of the entire infinite contingent series 
we happen to have, which lies outside that series but is itself contin­
gent. But the problem with this proposal, of course, is that since such 
a cause is contingent, it would require a cause of its own. And if that 
cause is also contingent, then it will require a cause of its own, and the 
same will be true of any further cause which is contingent. And if we 
postulate an infinite series of such higher-order contingent causes, then 
we will have just relocated the problem we were trying to solve, rather 
than solved that problem. We will be explaining one infinite series of 
contingent causes in terms of a second higher-order infinite series 
of contingent causes. And the reasons why we had to move beyond 
the first series to the second one will apply to the second one as well—  
which means that, if we still want to avoid affirming a necessary being, 
we will have to posit a third infinite series of contingent causes in order 
to explain the second, a fourth in order to explain the third, and so on 
ad infinitum. And each time we will merely be passing the explanatory 
buck rather than explaining anything. For the same reason why the 
first infinite series of contingent causes was insufficient will apply to 
the second, the third, the fourth, and indeed even to an infinite series of 
infinite series of contingent causes.
Thus, as rationalist philosophers like Leibniz and Clarke con­
cluded, given PSR, there is no way to avoid the conclusion that 
there is a cause outside the series of contingent things which is not

158
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
contingent but necessary— something which of its nature could not 
possibly have not existed and which therefore depends on nothing 
else for its existence. Nothing less than such a necessary being could 
possibly terminate the regress of explanation.
One need not proceed exactly the way Leibniz and Clarke do, 
however— namely, by asking for a cause of the collection of con­
tingent things as a whole. One could instead proceed as follows. 
Suppose once again, for the sake of argument, that the series of 
contingent things extends backward infinitely— whether we spell 
this out in terms of a beginningless universe, or a series of universes, 
or a multiverse, or whatever. We still need to ask of any particular 
contingent thing why it stays in existence at any moment at which 
it exists, rather than being annihilated. That is not a question that 
is answered by identifying the contingent thing that generated it at 
some point in the past. After all, being contingent, there is nothing 
in its nature that entails its existence, and that is as true now and at 
any other moment as it was when it was first generated. So, given 
that there is nothing in its nature that can explain why it exists here 
and now, why does it?
To explain why it exists here and now, then, we will, given PSR, 
have to appeal to something which causes it to exist here and now. 
And if that cause is a contingent one, then we will need to ask the 
same question about it. The regress of simultaneous causes this entails 
will have the same problems as the regress of temporally ordered 
causes we were considering when discussing Leibniz’s and Clarke’s 
line of argument. That is to say, as long as we confine ourselves 
to contingent causes, we will be led into an infinite regress of such 
causes, and thus to something— the simultaneous causal series consid­
ered as a whole— which will require an explanation outside itself no 
less than did the particular contingent thing we started out with. The 
only way to terminate the regress of explanations and thus satisfy PSR 
is by affirming the existence of a cause which exists necessarily, of its 
own nature rather than by virtue of something else. And in this case, 
we will have arrived at that conclusion, not by asking for an explana­
tion of the universe as a whole, or the series of universes, or the mul­
tiverse, or anything else as fancy as that. Rather, we will have arrived 
at it merely from a consideration of the question of what explains the 
existence here and now of some particular contingent thing.

THE RATIONALIST PROOF
I59
Needless to say, this way of formulating the argument is remi­
niscent of the Aristotelian, Neo-Platonic, and Thomistic arguments 
we have considered in earlier chapters. And one can take the argu­
ment of this chapter, and the arguments of those earlier chapters, to 
complement one another. The deep reason why the things of our 
experience are contingent, and thus require an explanation outside 
themselves— both for their being generated by preceding causes, and 
for their continuing in existence at any particular moment—is that 
they are mixtures of actuality and potentiality, are composed of parts, 
and have essences distinct from their existence. And the deep reason 
why all such things require causes is that they would not otherwise be 
intelligible, and in light of PSR we know that all things are intelligible.
There are several ways, then, in which the basic thrust of the ratio­
nalist proof might be developed. We could proceed by arguing that 
the collection of contingent things that makes up the universe (or 
multiverse, or whatever) requires an explanation in terms of some 
cause distinct from it. Or we could proceed by arguing that the exis­
tence of any particular contingent thing requires, at any moment, a 
cause distinct from it. Or (borrowing from some of the other proofs 
we have considered) we could proceed by arguing that anything 
which is a mixture of actuality and potentiality, or composed of parts, 
or has an essence distinct from its existence, requires, at any moment, 
a cause distinct from it. However we develop the argument, the 
rationalist proof begins with a defense of PSR, and shows— via one 
or more of the routes just described—that, given PSR, we are ineluc­
tably led to the existence of an absolutely necessary being. That is to 
say, we are ineluctably led to the existence of God.
Informal statement of the argument: Stage 2
Why should we think of the necessary being as God? Consider first 
that, from the fact that it is necessary, it follows that it exists in a 
purely actual way, rather than by virtue of having potentialities that 
need to be actualized. For if it had such potentialities, then its exis­
tence would be contingent upon the existence of something which 
actualizes those potentialities— in which case it wouldn’t really exist 
in a necessary way after all. For the same reason, a necessary being

ι6ο
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
cannot be composed of parts of any kind, for if were, then its exis­
tence would be contingent upon something combining its parts, in 
which case, again, it wouldn’t really be necessary after all. Nor could 
it be something with an essence distinct from its existence, since 
in that case it would require a cause which imparts existence to its 
essence, and thus once again not really be necessary. So, a necessary 
being in the strictest sense has to be one which is purely actual, abso­
lutely simple or noncomposite, and something which just is subsistent 
existence itself.10
Now we saw in earlier chapters that there cannot even in principle 
be more than one thing which is purely actual, absolutely simple, or 
subsistent existence itself. Hence, if we begin with the existence of the 
collection of contingent things and reason to a necessary being as its 
cause, we know that there is only one such necessary being. Or, if 
we begin with the question of what keeps some particular contingent 
thing in existence at any moment, and reason to a necessary being 
as its cause— and then go on to note that every other contingent 
thing will, for the same reason, have to have a necessary being as its 
sustaining cause at any moment— then since there can only be one 
necessary being, we know that it is the same one necessary being that 
is the cause of all contingent beings. Furthermore, since this necessary 
being is unique in this way, and the only other things there are are 
contingent things— all of which, again, are caused by the necessary 
being—we can infer that this necessary being is the cause of every­
thing other than itself.
Furthermore, since, as we saw in previous chapters, what is purely 
actual, absolutely simple or noncomposite, a necessarily existing 
intellect, and subsistent existence itself are really all one and the same 
thing arrived at from different starting points, we know that the nec­
essary being that is the cause of all contingent things is— given that
101 say “ in the strictest sense” because Aquinas and some other writers use the phrase 
“ necessary being” in a broader sense, to connote something which has no natural tendency 
toward corruption. Hence, angels, like God, would be “ necessary” in this sense, since they 
are o f their nature immortal. But they would not in Aquinas’ view be necessary in the strictest 
sense, since— being mixtures o f actual and potential, being composed o f parts, and having an 
essence distinct from their existence— they require a cause, as God does not. Hence, for Aqui­
nas they have their necessity only in a derivative or secondary way. See Aquinas’ Third W ay 
in Summa Theologiae 1.2.3, and my discussion o f the argument in Aquinas (Oxford: Oneworld 
Publications, 2009), pp. 90-99.

THE RATIONALIST PROOF
l 6 l
it is something purely actual, noncomposite, and so forth (of which, 
again, there cannot in principle be more than one)— this same one 
divine reality arrived at by yet another starting point.
Hence, everything we already said about this one divine reality in 
earlier chapters— for example, that it is immutable, eternal, imma­
terial, incorporeal, perfect, omnipotent, fully good, intelligent, and 
omniscient— is true of the necessary being arrived at via the rational­
ist proof But for there to be something that is absolutely necessary, 
one, the uncaused cause of everything other than itself, purely actual, 
simple or noncomposite, subsistent existence itself, immutable, eter­
nal, immaterial, incorporeal, perfect, omnipotent, fully good, intel­
ligent, and omniscient is just what it is for God to exist. So, the 
rationalist proof leads us, as the other proofs we have considered do, 
to the existence of God.
A  more formal statement of the argument
With the overall thrust of this fifth argument for God’s existence 
having now been made clear, it will be useful once again to have 
a summary presented in a somewhat more formal way. It might be 
stated as follows: 1
1 . The principle of sufficient reason (PSR) holds that there is an 
explanation for the existence of anything that does exist and for 
its having the attributes it has.
2. If PSR  were not true, then things and events without evident 
explanation or intelligibility would be extremely common.
3. But this is the opposite of what common sense and science alike 
find to be the case.
4. If PSR were not true, then we would be unable to trust our 
own cognitive faculties.
5. But in fact we are able to trust those faculties.
6. Furthermore, there is no principled way to deny the truth of 
PSR while generally accepting that there are genuine explana­
tions in science and philosophy.
7. But there are many genuine explanations to be found in science 
and philosophy.

162
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
8. So, PSR  is true.
9. The explanation of the existence of anything is to be found 
either in some other thing which causes it, in which case it 
is contingent, or in its own nature, in which case it is neces­
sary; PSR  rules out any purported third alternative on which 
a thing’s existence is explained by nothing.
10. There are contingent things.
1 1 . Even if the existence of an individual contingent thing could 
be explained by reference to some previously existing contin­
gent thing, which in turn could be explained by a previous 
member, and so on to infinity, that the infinite series as a 
whole exists at all would remain to be explained.
12. To explain this series by reference to some further contingent 
cause outside the series, and then explain this cause in terms 
of some yet further contingent thing, and so on to infinity, 
would merely yield another series whose existence would 
remain to be explained; and to posit yet another contingent 
thing outside this second series would merely generate the 
same problem yet again.
13. So, no contingent thing or series of contingent things can 
explain why there are any contingent things at all.
14. But that there are any contingent things at all must have some 
explanation, given PSR; and the only remaining explanation 
is in terms of a necessary being as cause.
15. Furthermore, that an individual contingent thing persists in 
existence at any moment requires an explanation; and since it 
is contingent, that explanation must He in some simultaneous 
cause distinct from it.
16. If this cause is itself contingent, then even if it has yet another 
contingent thing as its own simultaneous cause, and that 
cause yet another contingent thing as its simultaneous cause, 
and so on to infinity, then once again we have an infinite 
series of contingent things the existence of which has yet to 
be explained.
17. So, no contingent thing or series of contingent things can 
explain why any particular contingent thing persists in exis­
tence at any moment; and the only remaining explanation is 
in terms of a necessary being as its simultaneous cause.

THE RATIONALIST PROOF
18. So, there must be at least one necessary being, to explain why 
any contingent things exist at all and how any particular con­
tingent thing persists in existence at any moment.
19. A necessary being would have to be purely actual, absolutely 
simple or noncomposite, and something which just is subsis­
tent existence itself.
20. But there can in principle be only one thing which is purely 
actual, absolutely simple or noncomposite, and something 
which just is subsistent existence itself.
21. So, there is only one necessary being.
22. So, it is this same one necessary being which is the explanation 
of why any contingent things exist at all and which is the cause 
of every particular contingent thing’s existing at any moment.
23. So, this necessary being is the cause of everything other than 
itself.
24. Something which is purely actual, absolutely simple or non­
composite, and something which just is subsistent existence 
itself must also be immutable, eternal, immaterial, incorporeal, 
perfect, omnipotent, fully good, intelligent, and omniscient.
25. So, there is a necessary being which is one, purely actual, abso­
lutely simple, subsistent existence itself, cause of everything 
other than itself, immutable, eternal, immaterial, incorporeal, 
perfect, omnipotent, fully good, intelligent, and omniscient.
26. But for there to be such a thing is for God to exist.
27. So, God exists.
163
Some objections rebutted
Some might reject this argument precisely because it is presented 
as a rationalist argument, and the rationalist school of thought—  
most famously represented by thinkers like Descartes, Spinoza, and 
Leibniz— is associated with controversial theses like the doctrine of 
innate ideas and the claim that all knowledge is founded on truths 
knowable a priori, or independently of sense experience. However, 
the argument of this chapter by no means requires acceptance of 
everything that has historically been defended under the label “ ratio­
nalism” , and certainly does not presuppose doctrines like the ones

just mentioned. It is “ rationalist” only in the sense that it rejects the 
idea that there are or could be any inexplicable “brute facts” , but 
instead takes reality to be intelligible through and through. That is to 
say, its rationalism consists merely in its commitment to the principle 
of sufficient reason.
But it is important to emphasize that even here, the argument by no 
means requires acceptance of everything that has been defended in the 
name of PSR. For instance, some contemporary philosophers suppose 
that propositions are among the things which require an explanation 
given PSR. Some have also supposed that PSR requires that an expla­
nans must logically entail the explanandum.11 But not all proponents 
of PSR make these assumptions; Thomist philosophers, for example, 
would reject them.1 12 For this reason, some objections raised against 
other versions of PSR do not apply to their construal of the principle.
Hence, consider a common objection to PSR which asks us to con­
sider the proposition comprising the conjunction of all true contingent 
propositions. Since each of its components is contingent, this single 
big proposition is contingent. In that case, the objection holds, the 
explanation of this big proposition cannot be a necessary proposition, 
for whatever is logically entailed by a necessary proposition is itself nec­
essary. But neither can its explanation be a contingent proposition. For 
if it were, then that contingent proposition would itself be one among 
others in the big conjunction of contingent propositions. That would 
mean that the big conjunctive proposition explains itself. But no con­
tingent proposition can explain itself. So (the objection concludes), the 
big conjunctive proposition cannot have an explanation. In that case 
there is something without an explanation, and PSR is false.13
164 
f i v e  p r o o f s o f t h e  e x i s t e n c e  o f g o d
11 In an explanation, the explanandum is that which stands in need o f explanation, and the 
explanans is that which explains it. For example, the feet that the ground is wet one morning 
might be an explanandum, for which the explanans might be the feet that it rained the pre­
vious night.
12See Peter Weigel, Aquinas on Simplicity (N ew  York: Peter Lang, 2008), pp. 127—30. For 
more detailed discussion o f the differences between the Thomist understanding o f P S R  and 
that o f rationalists and other non-Thomists, see Edward Feser, Scholastic Metaphysics: A  Con­
temporary Introduction (Heusenstamm: Editiones Scholasticae, 2014), pp. 13 7-4 2 .
13 See James F. Ross, Philosophical Theology (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1969), pp. 295— 
304; Peter van Inwagen, An Essay on Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983), 
pp. 202-4; and William L. R ow e, “ Cosmological Arguments” , in A  Companion to Philosophy 
of Religion, ed. Philip L. Quinn and Charles Taliaferro (Oxford: Blackwell, 1997), pp. 3 3 1—37.

THE RATIONALIST PROOF
165
It is easy to see why this objection would seem to have force if 
we think of propositions as Platonic objects, existing “ out there” in 
the objective world alongside stones, trees, dogs, and people. Just 
as we want to know how the stones, trees, dogs, and people got there, 
we would need to know how the propositions got there, including 
the big conjunctive proposition in question. But propositions are 
abstract objects, and as we saw in chapter 3, for the Scholastic realist 
this means that they exist only in the minds which do the abstracting. 
They don’t exist in some Platonic realm any more than triangularity, 
redness, or other universals do. Now, for the Thomist qua Scholastic 
realist, what stand in need of explanation are concrete objects and 
their attributes. Where triangularity is concerned, for example, once 
we have explained individual concrete triangles and the individual 
concrete minds (including the divine mind) which entertain the con­
cept triangularity, there is nothing left to explain. Triangularity isn’t 
some third kind of object which exists over and above the individual 
triangles and the minds in question, remaining to be explained after 
they have been. Propositions are like that. When we explain the 
concrete objects and states of affairs that propositions describe and 
the minds (including the divine mind) which entertain the propo­
sitions, we have explained everything that needs to be explained. 
Propositions aren’t some third kind of object over and above these, 
remaining to be explained after they have been.
It is also easy to see why the objection in question might seem to 
have force if we think of explanation as essentially a matter of logical 
entailment. But the Thomist does not suppose that all explanations 
are like this, nor is such a supposition plausible. As Alexander Pruss 
notes, “ Scientific causal explanations, in general, simply do not give 
conditions that entail the explanandum.” 14 This is obviously true in 
the case of statistical explanations, but it is also true of nonstatistical 
scientific explanations. For example, when we explain the elliptical 
orbits of the planets by reference to the gravitational influence of the
For critical discussion o f this objection, see Lloyd P. Gerson, “ T w o  Criticisms o f the Prin­
ciple o f Sufficient Reason” , International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 21 (1987): 129 -42; 
Alexander R . Pruss, The Principle of Sufficient Reason: A  Reassessment (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2006), chap. 6; and Pruss, “ Leibnizian Cosmological Argument” , pp. 50-58.
14Pruss, “ Leibnizian Cosmological Argument” , p. 52.

sun, we don’t mean that the existence of this gravitational influence 
strictly entails that the planets will move in elliptical orbits, since they 
could still fail to do so if there were some interfering gravitational 
influences. What PSR  requires is that an explanans make an expla­
nandum intelligible, and there is no reason to think that that requires 
logical entailment.
Other common objections to PSR are variations on those directed 
against the principle of causality (e.g., Humean objections to the 
effect that it is conceivable that something might come into being 
without any explanation), and they fail for the reasons already con­
sidered in chapter i. Objections that appeal to quantum mechanics 
are even less plausible when directed against PSR than when directed 
against the principle of causality. For whether or not we want to say 
that eccentric quantum phenomena have a cause, they certainly have 
an explanation, since they presuppose and are made intelligible by the 
laws of quantum mechanics.15
Nor will it do in any event for the critic merely to try to raise odd 
puzzles (such as the puzzle concerning the big conjunction of con­
tingent propositions) for some particular formulation of PSR  (such as 
formulations which include propositions as among the things which 
stand in need of explanation). For one thing, there are, again, for­
mulations of PSR which do not make the presuppositions that open 
the door to the puzzles. For another, as we have seen above, there 
are arguments for the conclusion that some version of PSR  is true, and 
indeed reason to think that even the critics of PSR  must implicitly 
presuppose it. These arguments are not answered merely by raising 
puzzles of the sort in question. (As Della Rocca points out, someone 
who tries to use quantum mechanics against PSR  still owes us an 
answer to Della Rocca’s question about where we are supposed to 
draw the line between legitimate “ explicability arguments” and ille­
gitimate ones, and why we should draw it precisely where the critic 
says we should.) Hence, the burden of proof is not on the proponent 
of PSR  to show that it is true (though this is, as I have suggested, a 
burden which can be met), but rather on the critic of PSR  to show 
how it can coherently be rejected.
166 
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
15 See ibid., p. 58; andJ.J. C . Smart andJ.J. Haldane, Atheism and Theism, 2nd ed. (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2003), pp. 125—26.

THE RATIONALIST PROOF
167
Other objections to rationalist arguments for the existence of God 
like the one defended in this chapter concede PSR at least for the 
sake of argument, but deny that God’s existence really follows from 
it. For even if PSR  requires that there be something which exists in 
a necessary rather than contingent way, why (the critic asks) need this 
necessary being be God? Why not suppose instead that it is just the 
universe itself? But what has already been said should indicate what is 
wrong with this objection. As we have seen, what exists in a necessary 
way must be purely actual, simple or noncomposite, and so on. But 
the universe undergoes change, which entails that it has potentials 
which are actualized and thus is not purely actual; and it has diverse 
parts, which entails that it is not simple or noncomposite. Hence, it 
cannot be a necessary being. And we have also seen why the necessar­
ily existing thing which is the ultimate explanation for the existence of 
contingent things must have various other divine attributes.16
Other objections which have been raised against the rationalist 
proof are variations on objections raised against the Aristo teHan proof, 
the Neo-Platonic proof, and the Thomistic proof. We have already 
seen in earlier chapters how such objections can be answered. Notice 
that one popular superficial objection to those other arguments— the 
“ If everything has a cause, then what caused God?” objection— is, 
if anything, even less effective when directed against the rationahst 
proof than when directed against those others. For one thing, Uke 
those other arguments, the rationalist proof does not maintain in 
the first place that everything has a cause. For another thing, while it 
does maintain that everything has an explanation, it does not make 
an exception in the case of God. Hence, it is not open to the critic 
to object: “ If the existence of God lacks an explanation, then why 
couldn’t we say that the existence of the universe lacks an explana­
tion?” God’s existence does not lack an explanation. The explanation 
lies in his own nature as that which is purely actual, simple or
16Note that it is no good to appeal to numbers, universals, propositions, etc. as examples 
of necessarily existing things which are not divine. For as I argued in chapter 3, we have 
reason, independent of any argument for God’s existence, for concluding that such abstract 
objects cannot exist apart from all minds which might entertain them. Hence, if they are 
necessary— which we also have independent reason to think they are— then their necessity 
must be derivative rather than absolute, a consequence o f the necessity of some infinite mind 
which entertains them.

ι6 8
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
noncomposite, and subsistent existence itself. The universe’s exis­
tence cannot be explained in terms of its own nature, because it is not 
purely actual (given that it has potentialities), not simple (given that it 
has parts), and not subsistent existence itself (since it is as contingent 
as its parts are). Its explanation must therefore be found in something 
distinct from it. The difference between God and the world then is 
not that one has an explanation and the other lacks it, but rather that 
one is self-explanatory while the other is not.17 And the distinction is 
not arbitrary, but grounded in the independently motivated distinc­
tions between what is purely actual versus what is a mixture of actual 
and potential, what is simple versus what is composite, and what is 
subsistent existence itself versus what has a distinction between its 
essence and its existence.
Like the objections to the other arguments we’ve considered, 
then, the objections to the rationalist proof fail, leaving us with a fifth 
successful argument for the existence of God.
17 Note that to be self-explanatory does not entail being self-caused, because the notion of 
an explanation is not the same as the notion o f a cause. Having a cause entails having some 
potential that is actualized. But to have an explanation does not entail having some potential 
that is actualized. Hence, while all causes are explanations o f what they cause, not all expla­
nations are causes.

6
The Nature o f God and o f 
His Relationship to the W orld
We have now examined five arguments for the existence of God, 
which can be summarized briefly as follows. The Aristotehan proof 
begins with the fact that there are potentialities that are actualized 
and argues that we cannot make sense of this unless we affirm the 
existence of something which can actualize the potential existence of 
things without itself being actualized, a purely actual actualizer. The 
Neo-Platonic proof begins with the fact that the things of our expe­
rience are composed of parts and argues that such things could not 
exist unless they have an absolutely simple or noncomposite cause. The 
Augustinian proof begins with the fact that there are abstract objects 
like universals, propositions, numbers, and possible worlds, and 
argues that these must exist as ideas in a divine intellect. The Thomistic 
proof begins with the real distinction, in each of the things of our 
experience, between its essence and its existence, and argues that the 
ultimate cause of such things must be something which is subsistent 
existence itself. The rationahst proof begins with the principle of suf­
ficient reason and argues that the ultimate explanation of things can 
only He in an absolutely necessary being.
Our focus so far has been on the existence of God, though we have 
also said something about his nature, and about the nature of his causal 
relationship to the world. This chapter will address the latter two top­
ics in greater detail. Investigating these particular issues will require 
application of several more general philosophical principles, so let us 
set those out first. After doing so, we can deploy them to infer from 
the nature of the world, considered as an effect, to the nature of God 
as its cause.
169

Some background principles
The principle of proportionate causality
In chapter i we introduced the principle of proportionate causality 
(PPC), which states that whatever is in an effect must be in its cause, 
insofar as a cause cannot give what it does not first have. Let’s now 
examine this principle more carefully. Recall first that, stated more 
precisely, PPC holds that whatever is in an effect must be in its total 
cause in some way or other, whether formally, virtually, or eminently. 
A simple example will illustrate the idea. Suppose I give you a $20 
bill. Your having it is the effect. One way in which I could cause 
you to have it is by virtue of having a $20 bill in my wallet and 
handing it to you. I have the “ form” of possessing a $20 bill, and I 
cause you to have the same form. That would be a case of what is 
in the effect being in the cause “formally” . But it might be that I 
do not have a $20 bill on hand ready to give you, but I do have at 
least $20 in the bank, and I can wire the money from my account to 
yours so that you can withdraw it from an ATM . In that case what 
is in the effect was in the total cause— me plus my bank account—  
“virtually” rather than formally. Or it might be that I do not have 
even $20 in my account, but I do somehow have access to a U.S. 
Federal Reserve Bank printing press and can get a genuine $20 bill 
printed off for you on demand. In that case what is in the effect is in 
the total cause— me, the printing press, and so forth— “ eminently” . 
For while in this case I don’t have an actual $20 bill or even $20 in 
the bank, I would have something even more fundamental, causally 
speaking— namely, the power to make $20 bills.
PPC follows straightforwardly from the principle of causality (PC) 
and the principle of sufficient reason (PSR), both of which have been 
defended at length in earlier chapters. If there were some aspect 
of an effect that didn’t come from its total cause, then that would 
involve a potentiality that was actualized without anything doing 
the actualizing, which would violate PC. It would be an aspect 
of the effect that lacked any explanation, which would violate PSR. 
Yet it is sometimes claimed that PPC is easily refuted. John Cot- 
tingham characterizes it as “seemfing] to imply a kind of ‘heir­
loom’ view of causation” insofar as it regards properties as passed 
down from causes to effects, and he suggests that it is open to

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
I7 I
counterexamples.1 For instance, “ helium has properties which were 
not present in the hydrogen from which it was formed by fusion” 
and “ a sponge cake ... has many properties— e.g. its characteristic 
sponginess— which were simply not present in any of the material 
ingredients (the eggs, flour, butter).” 2
But there are several problems with this sort of objection. First of 
all, Cottingham’s examples, by his own admission, concern only the 
materials out of which the effects in question are made. Yet PPC 
is not concerned merely with the material factors involved in an 
effect’s production. It says that whatever is in an effect can in some 
way be found in its total cause, not in the material factors alone. 
It would be absurd, then, to qualify the PPC in a way its defenders 
would reject (by confining its application to material factors), attack 
this qualified version, and then pretend that one has struck a blow 
against the PPC itself. This would be a clear example of a straw 
man fallacy.
Second, to attribute an “ heirloom” view of causation to defend­
ers of the PPC is also to attack a straw man, and indeed to attribute 
to them a thesis they sometimes explicitly reject. As one Thomistic 
author writes:
We must not interpret [the PPC] in the more restricted and literal 
sense of the words giving and having, lest we be met with the obvious 
objection that it is by no means necessary for a boy to have a black eye 
himself in order to give one to his neighbour!3
And Aquinas writes:
A hot body is not said to give off heat in this sense, that numerically 
the same heat which is in the heating body passes over into the heated 
body. Rather, by the power of the heat which is in the heating body, 
a numerically different heat is made actual in the heated body, a heat 
which was previously in it [potentially]. For a natural agent does not
qohn Cottingham, Descartes (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986), p. 50. Cottingham is here 
criticizing the variation on PP C advocated by Descartes, and commonly labeled the “ Causal 
Adequacy Principle” by Descartes scholars.
2 Ibid., p. 51.
3P. Coffey, Ontology, or The Theory of Being (Gloucester, Mass.: Peter Smith, 1970), p. 60.

hand over its own form to another subject, but it reduces the passive 
subject from [potential] to act[ual].4
The “ heirloom” interpretation of PPC essentially supposes that the 
principle holds that what is in the effect must be in the cause formally. 
But that is not the case. It could be in the total cause virtually or emi­
nently instead.
Now Cottingham does agree that “ the sponginess does not arise ex 
nihilo; it emerges from the complex chemical changes produced by the 
mixing and the baking.” 5 But he thinks this does not help the PPC:
But this fact simply does not support the conclusion that the spongi­
ness was somehow present in some form in the materials from which 
it arose. (One may be tempted to say that the sponginess must have 
been “potentially” present in the materials, but this seems to defend 
the [PPC] at the cost of making it trivially true.)
As the passage from Aquinas just quoted indicates, the defender of the 
PPC would indeed say that the characteristics that end up in the effect 
were in it potentially. In my example above, the total cause’s having 
virtually or eminently what is in the effect involved having various 
potentialities— for instance, the potentiality of my bank account to 
have $20 drawn from it, and the potential of the Federal Reserve 
Bank printing press to run off a new $20 bill. But this hardly makes 
the explanation of your getting $20 from me in those cases only “ triv­
ially true” . Explanations in terms of potentialities may often be only 
minimally informative, but they are not for that reason nomnformative 
or trivial.
That the PPC is not trivial is evident from the fact that naturalis­
tic philosophers, who in general would have no truck with Thom­
istic metaphysics, sometimes implicitly make use of the principle 
in their own argumentation. For example, the materialist philoso­
pher Paul Churchland argues that both the individual human being 
and the human species as a whole have purely material beginnings
172 
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
4Thomas Aquinas, Summa Contra Gentiles, txans. Anton C . Pegis et al. (Notre Dame, Ind.: 
University o f Notre Dame Press, 1975), bk. 3, chap. 69, par. 28.
5 Cottingham, Descartes, p. 51.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
173
and develop from these beginnings via purely material processes. The 
end result, he concludes, must therefore be purely material.6 What 
this assumes, of course, is that if the total cause is material, so too 
must the effect be material. The mind-body dualist would agree with 
Churchland about that, but argue that since part of the effect (the 
human intellect) is not material, neither could the total cause have 
been purely material. PPC itself is implicitly taken for granted by 
both sides.
This naturally leads us to the question of evolution, which is 
also sometimes taken to be a counterexample to PPC.7 The idea 
is that if simpler life forms give rise to more complex ones, then 
there is something in the effect that was not in the cause. But in 
fact that is not the case even on the standard naturalistic account of 
evolution (as opposed, say, to theistic evolutionary theories). On 
that account, every species is essentially just a variation on the same 
basic genetic material that has existed for billions of years from the 
moment life began. A new variation arises when there is a muta­
tion in the existing genetic material which produces a trait that is 
advantageous given the circumstances of a creature’s environment. 
The mutation in turn might be caused by a copying error made 
during the DN A replication process or by some external factor like 
radiation or chemical damage. So, it is not that a simpler life form 
just up and gives rise to a more complex one, full stop. Rather, the 
existing genetic material, the mutation, and the environmental cir­
cumstances work together to generate a new biological variation, 
where none of these factors by itself would be sufficient to do so. 
So, even on the standard naturalistic account, evolution respects 
the principle that a total cause must contain what is in its effect in 
some way, whether formally, virtually, or eminently. Indeed, as the 
physicist Paul Davies has pointed out, to deny that the information 
contained in a new kind of life form derives from some combina­
tion of preexisting factors— specifically, in part from the organism’s 
environment if not from its genetic inheritance alone— would con­
tradict the second law of thermodynamics, which tells us that order,
6Paul M . Churchland, Matter and Consciousness, 3rd ed. (Cambridge, Mass.: M IT  Press, 
2013), pp. 43-44.
7 See Cottingham, Descartes, pp. 5 1—52.

174
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
and thus information content, tends inevitably to decrease within a 
closed system.8
The PPC, then, is well-founded entirely independently of natural 
theology. But as we have seen, and will see in greater detail, it is very 
useful in inferring from the nature of the world to the nature of its 
divine cause.
Agere sequitur esse
Aquinas and other Scholastic philosophers often employ the prin­
ciple agere sequitur esse (Latin for “ action follows being”). The basic 
idea is that what a thing does necessarily reflects what it is. Eyes 
and ears function differently because they are structured differently. 
Plants take in nutrients, grow, and reproduce while stones do none 
of these things, because the former are living things and the latter 
are inanimate. And so forth. The thesis that agere sequitur esse can be 
understood as an application, in the context of what Aristotelian phi­
losophers call formal causes, of the basic idea that the PPC expresses 
with respect to efficient causes. An efficient cause is what brings about 
the existence of something or a change in something. The PPC tells 
us, again, that whatever is in the thing that changes or comes to exist 
must in some way have been in the total set of factors that brought 
about this change or existent. In this sense, the effect cannot go beyond 
the cause. A formal cause is the nature of a thing, that which makes 
it the kind of thing it is.9 For example, being a rational animal is the 
nature of a human being. The characteristic attributes and activities 
of a thing flow or follow from its nature— as, for instance, the use of 
language flows from our nature as rational animals. The principle 
agere sequitur esse basically says that these attributes and activities can­
not go beyond that nature, any more than an effect can go beyond its 
efficient cause. Hence, a stone cannot exhibit attributes and activities 
like nutrition, growth, and reproduction, because these go beyond
8 Paul Davies, The Fifth Miracle: The Search for the Origin and Meaning of Life (N ew  York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1999), chap. 2.
9 To be more precise, in a material substance it is the substantial form (as opposed to an 
accidental form) which is its nature. Formal causality in a broad sense involves both kinds of 
form. For detailed discussion o f formal causality, see Edward Feser, Scholastic Metaphysics: A  
Contemporary Introduction (Heusenstamm: Editiones Scholasticae, 2014), chap. 3.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
175
the nature of a stone. Anything that could do these things wouldn’t 
be a stone in the first place.
The principle agere sequitur esse, like the PPC, follows from the PSR. 
If an effect could go beyond its total efficient cause, then the part of the 
effect that went beyond it would have no explanation and be unintel­
ligible. Similarly, if a thing’s activities could go beyond its nature— if, 
for example, a stone could take in nutrients or use language— then 
this activity would lack an explanation and be unintelligible.10 1
I noted above that the PPC is implicit even in the argumentation 
of some naturalistic philosophers who are otherwise unsympathetic 
with the metaphysical views defended by thinkers like Aquinas. The 
same thing is true of the principle that agere sequitur esse. Aquinas 
himself perhaps most famously deploys this principle when arguing 
that the human soul can persist beyond the death of the body.11 His 
reasoning is as follows: Intellectual activity, which is among the 
human soul’s activities, is (so Aquinas holds, on independent grounds) 
essentially immaterial. But for a material thing to carry out an im­
material activity would violate the principle that agere sequitur esse. So, 
the human soul must be an immaterial thing. And since immaterial 
things have, unlike material things, no natural tendency to decay, the 
soul does not go out of existence when the material body does.
O f course, a materialist would disagree with the claim that intel­
lectual activity is immaterial, but that is neither here nor there for 
present purposes.12 The point is that even a materialist could agree 
that if intellectual activity were immaterial, then the thing which carries 
out that activity would itself have to be immaterial. And indeed, the 
naturalist philosopher John Searle takes precisely that view in criticiz­
ing a theory known as property dualism. Property dualism holds that
10 O f course, a thing can in a sense “ go beyond” its nature if someone makes it do so. For 
example, the bits o f wood that make up a puppet can move when the puppeteer makes them 
do so, even though they cannot move on their own. But the point is precisely that they can’t 
do so on their own. It is their doing so on their own which would violate the principle that agere 
sequitur esse.
11 See Summa Theologiae 1.75.2.
12 For exposition and defense o f Aquinas’ argument, see Edward Feser, Aquinas (Oxford: 
Oneworld Publications, 2009), chap. 4. See also Edward Feser, “ Kripke, Ross, and the Imma­
terial Aspects o f Thought” , American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 87 (2013): 1-3 2 , reprinted 
in Edward Feser, Neo-Scholastic Essays (South Bend, Ind.: St. Augustine’s Press, 2015), 
pp. 2 17 -5 3 .

mental properties are immaterial but that they are nevertheless prop­
erties of a material thing— namely, the brain. The theory is essentially 
an attempt to acknowledge the problems with materialist theories of 
the mind without having to accept the dualist view that the mind is 
an immaterial thing. Searle’s criticism is that the theory is unstable. 
If the property dualist maintains that a mental property is something 
“ over and above” the brain, then the trouble in Searle’s view is that 
such a property cannot be a property of the brain, but must be “ a sep­
arate thing, object, or non-property type of entity” .13 On the other 
hand, if a mental property really is a property of the brain, then it can­
not be something “ over and above” the brain. Other critics of prop­
erty dualism have complained that it is mysterious how an entirely 
material thing like the brain could give rise to immaterial properties.
Needless to say, this dispute goes well beyond the subject matter 
of this book, and I do not call attention to it here for the purpose of 
settling it. The point is just to provide an illustration of the fact that, 
as with the PPC, so too with the principle agere sequitur esse, what 
might appear at first glance to be a relic of the Scholastic tradition that 
contemporary secular philosophers would reject is in fact something 
to which many of those philosophers are at least implicitly commit­
ted. In any event, as with the PPC, PC, and PSR, the principle agere 
sequitur esse is, whatever many contemporary philosophers happen 
to think, well-founded and available for application to questions in 
natural theology.
The analogy of being
In chapter 2 we briefly introduced the notion of the analogical use of 
terms, as opposed to the univocal and equivocal uses. When I say “ Fido 
is a dog” and “Rover is a dog” , I am using the term “ dog” univo­
cally, or in the same sense. When I say “ There was a bat flying around 
the attic” and “ I swung the bat at it” , I am using the using the term 
“bat” equivocally, or in completely different and unrelated senses. 
The analogical use of terms is an intermediate kind of usage. When I 
say “ This wine is still good” and “ George is a good man” , I am not
176 
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
I3John R . Searle, “ W hy I Am  N ot a Property Dualist” , in Philosophy in a New Century: 
Selected Essays (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008), 160.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
177
using the term “ good” in exactly the same sense, since the goodness 
of wine is a very different thing from the goodness of a man, but the 
two uses are not utterly different and unrelated either. The goodness 
of the one is analogous to that of the other, even if it is not exactly the 
same thing.
When we speak of the being or reality of different kinds of thing, 
we are once again using terms in an analogical way. For example, 
consider a substance and its attributes, such as a stone and the color 
and shape of the stone. Both the stone on the one hand and its 
color and shape on the other are real, but the reality of the latter is 
not the same as that of the former. The color, shape, and other attri­
butes exist only in the stone which has them, whereas the stone itself 
does not in the same sense exist in another thing. Attributes modify 
and depend on substances in a way substances don’t modify or depend 
on anything else. But neither is the reality of a substance and that of 
its attributes totally unrelated. It is not as if substances are real and 
attributes ««real (the way that something that is a “bat” in the sense 
of a stick used in baseball is a «o«bat in the sense of a flying mammal). 
Hence, they have being or reality not in either univocal or equivocal 
senses, but in analogical senses.
Things are more complex than that summary lets on, however. 
The first complication to note is a distinction between two main 
types of analogy, the analogy of attribution and the analogy of propor­
tionality. A stock illustration of the analogy of attribution would 
involve sentences Uke “ George is healthy” , “ This is healthy food” , 
and “ George’s complexion is healthy.” George in this case would 
be what is called the “primary analogate” , and food and George’s 
complexion would be “secondary analogates” . What makes the anal­
ogy in question here one of attribution is that health exists intrinsi­
cally only in George, and it is attributed to the secondary analogates 
merely by virtue of their relation to the primary analogate— in the 
case of food because it is a cause of health in living things Uke George, 
and in the case of complexion because it is caused by and a sign of 
health in living things like George.
The analogy of proportionality is itself divided into two sorts, proper 
proportionality and improper or metaphorical proportionality. An example 
of the analogy of proper proportionality would be the predication of 
life to plants, animals, human beings, and angels. What makes the

178
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
analogy in question here one of proper proportionality is, first, that 
life exists intrinsically in each of the analogates (in contrast to the 
analogy of attribution); and second, that it exists formally in each of 
them— that is to say, each has the form or nature of being alive. This 
latter aspect distinguishes such a case from an analogy of improper or 
metaphorical proportionality, as when we say (of an animal we see in 
the zoo) “ That is a lion” and (of a certain man) “ George is a Hon.” 
In this case, what we are predicating of each analogate exists intrin­
sically in each (which is why this is not an analogy of attribution) 
but formally only in the animal at the zoo, and merely figuratively in 
the man George. For there is something intrinsically in George (his 
courage, say) that leads us to call him a Hon, but of course the form or 
nature of being a Hon is not HteraHy in him. By contrast, the form 
or nature of being aHve is HteraHy in plants, animals, human beings, 
and angels, despite their differences. (Remember that though meta­
phor is a kind of analogy— namely, the analogy of improper or met­
aphorical proportionaHty— not aU analogy is metaphorical.)
The analogy of proper (i.e., «oranetaphorical) proportionaHty is 
crucial for understanding metaphysical notions Hke the concept of 
being or reaHty. For “being” is to be understood as a term appHed to 
substances, to attributes, to things in which essence and existence are 
distinct, to that in which essence just is existence, and so forth by an 
analogy of proper proportionaHty. Now, the analogy of proper pro­
portionaHty differs from the univocal use of terms in that the concept 
expressed is not appHed in exactly the same way to each analogate, 
even if we do not have (as we do in the equivocal use of terms) the ex­
pression, in each appHcation of the term, of utterly different concepts. 
Rather, the concept is appHed to aH the analogates in an indistinct and 
indeterminate way on the basis of a real Ukeness or similarity they bear 
to one another.
O f course, a univocal term can be appHed to very different things, 
but there is a crucial difference in the case of an analogical term Hke 
“being” . A univocal term Hke “animal” is appHed to things as diverse 
as fish, birds, reptiles, and so forth, because these are aH species of ani­
mal. “Animal” is appHed in just the same way to aU of them, to name 
a genus under which they faU, and what distinguishes each from the 
other is captured by its specific difference. (RecaU that we introduced 
these logical terms in chapter 4.) But “being” does not name a genus,

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
179
so that substances, attributes, and so forth are not to be understood as 
different species of being. Human beings fall under the genus animal 
and have the specific difference of rationality; gold falls under the 
genus metal and has the specific difference of having atomic number 
79; and so forth. We can grasp rationality without grasping animality, 
and we can grasp having atomic number 79 without grasping being a 
metal. In that sense each of these specific differences is extrinsic to the 
genus under which the thing it specifies falls. By contrast, we cannot 
grasp what it is to be a substance or an attribute without grasping 
them as having being. In that sense they are not extrinsic to being. 
There is nothing that can serve as a specific difference to mark out 
something as a species within being considered as a purported genus, 
because the only thing extrinsic to being is nonbeing or nothing, and 
nonbeing or nothing cannot differentiate anything, precisely because 
it is nothing.
So, though being in its relation to substance, attribute, and so forth 
superficially resembles the relationship between genus and species, 
that is not in fact how they are related, and thus “being” cannot 
be predicated of things in a univocal way. Again, though, neither is 
it predicated of them equivocally. It is rather predicated of things on 
the basis of a “proportional similarity” between them. The notion of 
a proportional similarity can be illustrated by the analogical use of a 
term Hke “ seeing” , as when one says “ I see the tree in front of me” 
and “ I see that the Pythagorean theorem is true.” These are obviously 
not univocal uses, since the way one sees with one’s intellect is rad­
ically different from the way one sees with one’s eyes. But they are 
not completely unrelated, as the meanings of equivocal terms are. For 
the eyes are to a tree as the intellect is to the Pythagorean theorem. It 
is the similarity of the relations between the eyes and the tree on the one 
hand, and the intellect and the Pythagorean theorem on the other, 
that grounds the application of the same concept “ seeing” , applied in 
an indistinct or indeterminate way, to each of them. And when we 
more distinctly or determinately conceptualize the “ seeing” involved 
in seeing the tree (which involves light from a material object striking 
the eyes) and the “ seeing” involved in seeing the theorem (which 
involves understanding the logical relationships between concepts), 
they are not conceived of as species of the same genus, as things 
described univocally are.

ι8ο
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
We apply “being” and related terms to different things in just this 
manner. The existence of a man is to his essence as the existence of 
an angel is to his essence, as the existence of God is to his essence. The 
existence of each is related to its essence in a different way: in the case 
of God, his existence is identical to his essence; in the case of an angel, 
his existence actualizes a potential essence to which it is not identi­
cal, where what is actualized is the essence of something essentially 
immaterial; in the case of a man, his existence actualizes the potential 
essence of something with (so thinkers Hke Aquinas would argue) 
both material and immaterial operations; and so forth. Because the 
relations are not absolutely identical, the predication is not univocal; 
but because there is nevertheless a similarity between the relations, 
the predications are not equivocal. They are predications of a sort 
intermediate between equivocal and univocal predictions— in partic­
ular, predications by an analogy of proper proportionaHty.14
That “being” is to be understood in an analogical way is clear 
given the distinction between potentiaHty and actuaHty, which (as 
we saw in chapter i) is entailed by the reality of change. For potential 
being is not the same as actual being, but precisely because it is not 
nothing either, it is stiH reaHy a kind of being. More expHcitly, the 
reasoning can be represented as foHows:
1. ActuaHty is real; that is, it has being.
2. PotentiaHty is real; that is, it has being.
3. PotentiaHty is reaHy distinct from actuaHty.
4. If potentiaHty had being in the same, univocal sense in which 
actuaHty does, then it wouldn’t be reaHy distinct from actuaHty.
5. If potentiaHty had being only in an equivocal sense, then it 
wouldn’t have being at aH.
6. The only sense remaining is an analogical sense.
7. So, potentiaHty has being in a sense that is analogous to that in 
which actuaHty has it.
14 This does not exclude “ being” from being predicated o f things also by an analogy of 
attribution (as distinct from an analogy o f proper proportionaHty). In light o f the Thomistic 
argument for God’s existence defended in chapter 4, when we predicate “ being” o f things, 
God is the primary analogate in such a predication insofar as his essence just is existence, 
whereas all other things are secondary analogates insofar as they are beings only by virtue of 
having been caused to exist by God.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
l 8 l
Now, to deny premise 2 of this argument would be implicitly to 
deny the reality of change— something which, as we saw in chapter 1, 
the Pre-Socratic philosopher Parmenides did deny. But we also saw 
that the reality of change cannot coherently be denied. Hence, premise 2 
of the argument cannot coherently be denied either.
Nor can premise 1 coherently be denied. Another Pre-Socratic 
philosopher, Heraclitus, took (on a traditional interpretation, any­
way) the opposite extreme view from Parmenides, to the effect that 
change and change alone is real— the implication being that there is 
no stability or persistence of even a temporary sort, nothing that 
corresponds to actuality, in which case premise 1 is false. But the 
consequences of this position are no less incoherent than those of 
Parmenides’ view. For one thing, if there is no stability of any sort, 
how could the Heraclitean philosopher so much as reason through 
the steps of his own argument so as to be convinced by it? For there 
will on the Heraclitean view be no persisting self, so that the person 
who reaches the conclusion will not be the same as the person who 
entertained the premises. Nor will there be any such thing as “ the” 
argument for his conclusion— some single, stable pattern of reasoning 
which the Heraclitean might rehearse in his attempts to convince his 
critics, or even repeat to himself on future occasions.
Nor is there any sense to be made of change in the first place 
except as change toward some outcome, even if only a temporary out­
come. When an ice cube melts on the pavement, this is not merely 
a move away from solidity and having a square shape; it is a move 
in the direction of liquidity and flatness, and thus in the direction of 
new actualities. Furthermore, a thing changes in precisely the ways it 
does only because it is actually a thing of a certain type. For example, 
it is because it is actually made of water— rather than wood or glass, 
say— that the ice cube will melt in the sun on a hot day. Hence, 
premise 1 cannot coherently be denied.
Nor can premise 3 coherently be denied, or so Thomist philoso­
phers argue. For one thing, as I argued in chapter 4, the distinction 
between the essence of a thing and its existence is a real distinction, 
and essence and existence are related to one another as potential and 
actual. Hence, we have at least one instance in which potentiaHty is 
really distinct from actuaHty. For another thing, if we were to say 
that the distinction between potentiaHty and actuaHty is not a real

i 82
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
distinction but only a distinction between different ways of thinking 
or talking about what is in reality just the same one thing, then we 
would implicitly be saying either that only actuality is real and poten­
tiality is not, or that only potentiality is real and actuality is not. That 
is to say, we would implicitly be denying either premise i or prem­
ise 2— which, as we have just seen, we cannot coherently do. Hence, 
we cannot deny premise 3 either.
Now premise 4 is also clearly true upon reflection. For if potenti­
ality and actuality had being or reality in exactly the same sense, then 
what could that mean if not that potentiality is really a kind of actu­
ality or that actuality is really a kind of potentiaHty? Premise 5 too is 
clearly true upon reflection. For what could it mean to have “being” 
only in a sense that is totally unrelated to the usual sense, unless it is just 
to be utterly unreal? Finally, premise 6 too is clearly true insofar as 
the univocal use of terms, the equivocal use, and the analogous use, 
as the middle ground between them, exhaust the possibiHties for the 
Hteral use of terms.
Thus do we have our conclusion. And thus does the distinction 
between actuality and potentiality give us grounds for affirming that 
there is an analogical use of terms alongside the univocal and equiv­
ocal uses— grounds independent of arguments for God’s existence 
(since someone could accept the theory of actuaHty and potentiaHty 
whether or not he went on to apply it the way that the Aristote- 
Han proof of chapter 1 does). It also gives us grounds for affirming 
that “being” , specificafly, is a term whose uses must be understood 
in an analogical way. The significance of these results for natural 
theology cannot be overstated. For as we have seen, the proofs for 
God’s existence lead us to affirm the existence of something radically 
unHke the beings or reaUties we experience or could experience—  
something purely actual, utterly simple or noncomposite, immaterial, 
immutable, eternal, and so forth. It is therefore difficult to see how 
the language we use to describe the things we experience— things 
which have potentiaHties as weH as actualities, are composed of parts, 
are material, changeable, and exist in time— could possibly be appHed 
to God in a univocal way. For example, if to be a being of the sort we 
experience is to be a material and changeable thing, then God cannot 
have being or reaHty in that sense.
If we had to confine ourselves to univocal language, then it 
seems that the most we could say is what God is not—that he is not

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
183
potential in any way, not material, and so forth— leaving us with a 
purely apophatic or negative theology (as this approach is traditionally 
labeled). But then how can we so much as say that God exists, which 
is an affirmative rather than negative statement? How could we say 
that he causes things to exist, or explains why there is a world at all—  
which are also affirmative rather than negative claims? While negative 
theology is part of the story of God’s nature, then (since attributes Hke 
immateriality and immutability obviously tell us what God is not), it 
cannot be the whole story, or it would undermine the very arguments 
that led us to affirm that there is a God in the first place.
Nor does equivocal language provide an alternative. Suppose we 
said that God exists and is cause of the world, has power, and so 
forth, but that these terms had a completely different sense from the 
sense we usually attach to the terms “ exists” , “ cause” , “power” , and 
so forth— as different as the sense the word “bat” has in baseball 
is from the sense “bat” has when we apply it to a flying mammal. 
Naturally, this would raise the question of exactly what sense these 
terms do have if it is not the usual sense. And no answer is forth­
coming. For example, no one has ever explained exactly what it 
means to say that God has power if his “power” has nothing at all to 
do with power in the usual sense. But suppose someone did come 
up with an answer. Suppose someone said “ God has ‘power’ in the
sense that h e______” If the blank is filled in with a term that is used
in a univocal way, then the problem with applying terms univocally 
both to God and to the things we experience reappears; whereas if 
the blank is filled instead with a term used in an equivocal way, then 
we have not solved the problem of explaining the novel meaning 
of the equivocal terms we apply to God, but simply exacerbated it.
So, confining ourselves to univocal and equivocal terms would 
make it impossible to assign any positive content to what we say 
about God. We would be left with agnosticism, or (if we cannot even 
explain what we mean by the claim that God exists) even atheism. 
Indeed, it would not be clear that we are saying anything with any 
meaning at all. Yet the proofs for the existence of God that we have 
considered seem perfectly intelligible and give us positive knowledge 
about God’s existence and nature. The way to resolve this impasse 
is to see that there is a third use of language, the analogical use, which is 
motivated independently of the problem of theological language but 
is readily applicable to that problem. We can make literal, positive

statements about God and his nature by applying the analogy of attri­
bution and the analogy of proper proportionality.
It is worth reemphasizing a point made in chapter 2— namely, 
that this sort of situation is by no means unique to theology. Mod­
ern physics too requires us to take language far beyond its ordinary 
application, in order to describe the strange entities posited by phys­
ical theory. Common sense thinks of particles as discrete, localized 
entities and waves as nonlocalized and spread out, yet physics tells us 
that there are things that exhibit properties of both waves and parti­
cles. Common sense thinks of curvature as a property of the material 
objects that occupy space, but relativity theory tells us that space itself 
is curved. It is hard to see how this sort of talk makes sense unless 
we understand it as analogical. It is only to be expected, then, that we 
would have to rely on analogical language when we speak of levels 
of reality even more fundamental than those described by physics, 
which is precisely what we are doing when we try to describe the 
cause of there being any material world at all.
184 
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
The divine attributes
Unity
With these background ideas in place— the principle of proportion­
ate causality, agere sequitur esse, and the analogy of being— let’s turn 
to the question of what we can deduce concerning the nature of the 
God whose existence has been argued for in the first five chapters 
of this book. What are the attributes of God? What can we know 
about him beyond his being the cause of the world? Let us begin 
with God’s unity— the fact that there is, and in principle can be, 
only one God.
Recall that in chapter 1, it was argued that the things of our expe­
rience, which are mixtures of actuality and potentiality, could not 
exist even for a moment apart from a cause that is pure actuality. Only 
something whose existence is always already actual, and thus need 
not and could not be actualized by anything else, could terminate 
what would otherwise be a vicious explanatory regress. Now, a 
critic might wonder whether there might be a sense in which even 
a cause which could terminate that regress might nevertheless have

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
185
potentiality. For suppose we agree that its existence involved no actu­
alization of potential. Might not we still say that its activity involved 
the actualization of potential? Might not we thus say that while it had 
no potentialities with respect to its existence, it does have potential­
ities with respect to its activity (such as its activity of actualizing the 
existence of other things)?
There are several problems with this suggestion, however, one 
of which might be obvious now that we have set out the principle 
agere sequitur esse, according to which what a thing does reflects what 
it is. If the first cause of things exists in a purely actual way, how 
could it act in a less than purely actual way? How could its acting 
involve potentiality any more than its existence does? A thing’s 
existence is, after all, what is metaphysically most fundamental about 
it; everything else follows from that. In this case we are talking 
about something whose very existence is purely actual and devoid 
of potentiality. So, from where in its nature are the (metaphysically 
less fundamental) potentialities for activity that the critic suggests it 
has supposed to derive?
Another problem with the suggestion in question is that to say of 
God that he has potentiality with respect to his activity, though not 
with respect to his existence, entails that God has parts— a purely 
actual part, and a part that is a potentiaHty. Now, as we saw in chap­
ter 2, whatever has parts requires a cause. The reason is that the whole 
of which the parts are constituents is merely potential until actualized 
by some principle which combines the parts. This principle cannot 
be something intrinsic to the thing, for in that case it would be the 
cause of itself, which is incoherent. So, it must be something extrinsic 
to the thing. Keep in mind that this is true even if we think of the 
thing in question as having always existed, since we still need some 
explanation of why the parts are combined at all regardless of how 
long they have been combined. Even if the thing had no temporally 
prior cause, it would still require an ontologically prior cause. But to 
say of the first cause of things that it has a cause of its own is also inco­
herent, since if it has a cause of its own, it just isn't really the first cause 
at all, and it isn’t what terminates the regress of a hierarchical series of 
the causes of the existence of things. For this reason too, then, there 
isn’t any sense to be made of the idea that God qua first cause has 
potentialities with respect to his activity.

ι8  6
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
So, again, God is purely actual, with no potentiality at all. And this 
entails his unity, because there cannot, even in principle, be more 
than one thing which is pure actuality. The reason is that for there 
to be more than one thing of a certain kind, there must be a distinc­
tion between the thing and the species of which it is a member, or (if 
the thing in question is a species) between the species and the genus 
of which it is a member. And there can be no such distinction with­
out there also being a distinction between a thing’s potentialities and 
its actualities.
Consider the species human being, the essence of which is being a 
rational animal15 That is to say, to be a human being is to be a mem­
ber of that species which falls under the genus animal, and which is 
distinguished from other species in that genus by the specific differ­
ence rationality. Now, animality and rationality are distinct metaphys­
ical parts of this species essence. To be rational is one way of being 
an animal, but obviously not the only way, since most animals are 
nonrational. So, rationality must be added to animality to make up 
the species human being. Being an individual member of this species 
involves having a further metaphysical part— namely, the matter that 
makes up an individual human being’s body and differentiates him 
from other individual human beings.16
But to have any such parts entails having potentiality. For example, 
the matter that makes up a body is potentially a human being but also 
potentially some other kind of thing, so that its potentiality to be a 
human being needs to be actualized in order for a member of that 
species to exist. To be of the genus animal is by itself to be potentially 
either a rational animal or a nonrational animal, so that the former 
potentiality has to be actualized in order for the species human being to 
exist. And something similar can be said for any individual member of 
any species, and any particular species within any genus. All of them 
will involve a mixture of potentiality and actuality. Indeed, as we saw 
in chapter 2, anything with any parts at all will thereby be a mixture
15 Once again, nothing rides on whether one agrees with this characterization o f the essence 
o f human beings; the reader can substitute a different example if he prefers.
16 For further discussion o f the individuation of members o f a species, see Feser, Scholastic 
Metaphysics, pp. 19 8 -20 1, and David S. Oderberg, Real Essentialism (London: Routledge, 
2007), pp. 10 8 -17.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
187
of actuality and potentiality, since the parts as such merely potentially 
compose the whole until that potential is actualized.17 (And as we’ve 
seen, this remains true even if there was no temporally first point at 
which this actualization began.)
So, for there to be more than one thing of a kind requires that that 
thing have metaphysical parts like genus and specific difference, or 
matter together with the species essence that the matter instantiates, 
and that in turn entails having potentiality. But God, being purely 
actual, is devoid of potentiality. Hence, he cannot have parts of the 
sort in question, and therefore, he does not belong to a kind of which 
there could be more than one instance. He is, accordingly, unique, 
so that the theism to which the arguments defended in chapters i 
through 5 lead us is a monotheism.
I have also indicated in those chapters why it is the same one God 
to which each of those arguments leads. As we saw in chapter 2 and 
just reiterated above, anything that is composite or composed of parts 
is a mixture of potentiality and actuality. Hence, what is purely actual 
must be simple or noncomposite. And the inference runs in the other 
direction as well. That is to say, what is absolutely simple or noncom­
posite, though it is actual— if it had no actuality at all, it would not 
exist— cannot also be potential in any way, for then it would have an 
actual part and a part that is a potentiality, and thus not be simple or 
noncomposite. So, something is purely actual if and only if it is abso­
lutely simple. It follows that the purely actual actualizer of chapter 1 
and the One of chapter 2 are one and the same God.
It was also argued in chapter 4 that, in anything the essence of 
which is distinct from its existence, that essence and existence are 
related to one another as potentiaHty to actuaHty. Hence, anything 
that is purely actual cannot have an essence distinct from its existence, 
but must be subsistent existence itself. Here too the inference goes 
in the other direction as weH. That is to say, anything that just is 
subsistent existence itself must exist in a purely actual way. For if its 
existence depended on the actuaHzation of some potentiaHty, it would
17 
Hence it will not do to appeal to parts o f some other kind— such as substance and acci­
dents, for example— in order to try to differentiate one purely actual cause from another. For 
anything composed o f parts o f any kind will be a mixture o f potentiaHty and actuaHty, and 
thus fail to be purely actual.

188
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
have existence in a derivative way, and thus it wouldn’t be subsis­
tent existence itself, but rather would be just one more thing which 
depends on a cause which is subsistent existence itself. So, something 
is purely actual if and only if it is subsistent existence itself. It follows 
that the purely actual actualizer of chapter i and the first cause of the 
existence of things of chapter 4 are one and the same God.
Naturally, since it has just been argued that what is purely actual 
must also be absolutely simple, it follows that the first cause of the 
existence of things of chapter 4 and the One of chapter 2 are also 
one and the same God. But more can be said about why this must 
be the case. Consider that what is absolutely simple or noncomposite 
cannot have an essence distinct from its act of existence, for then it 
would have metaphysical parts and thus not be simple after all. So, 
it can exist only as that which is subsistent existence itself. Consider 
also that that which just is subsistent existence itself not only cannot 
have an essence distinct from its existence, but cannot have parts of 
any other sort. For if it did, it would be a mixture of potentiaHty and 
actuality (since parts, as we have seen, always entail potentiality) and 
thus not be purely actual. But we have just seen that it must be purely 
actual. So, it cannot have parts but must be absolutely simple. Again, 
the arguments of chapters 2 and 4 are arguments for one and the same 
God looked at from different points of view.
Finally, consider that what is purely actual, simple or noncompos­
ite, or subsistent existence itself must exist in an absolutely necessary 
way. For if it were not necessary but contingent, then that would en­
tail that it had some potentiality the actuaHzation of which would 
be required in order for it to exist. And in that case it would not be 
purely actual. If it were not necessary but contingent, that would also 
entail that it had parts— at the very least an essence distinct from its 
existence— the combination of which would be required in order for 
it to exist. And in that case it would not be simple or noncomposite. 
Since it would have an essence distinct from its existence, it would 
also fail to be subsistent existence itself.
Once again, the inference goes in the other direction as well. 
That is to say, something that exists in an absolutely necessary way 
would have to be purely actual, simple or noncomposite, and subsis­
tent existence itself. If it had potentiality, its existence would depend 
on the actualization of that potentiality, in which case it would be

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
189
contingent and not necessary after all. If it had parts of any sort, its 
existence would depend on those parts being combined, and if it had, 
in particular, an essence distinct from its existence, it would depend 
on those parts being combined. And in that case it would, again, be 
contingent rather than necessary.
So, something can be purely actual, simple or noncomposite, or 
subsistent existence itself if and only if it exists in an absolutely nec­
essary way. It follows that the absolutely necessary cause of chap­
ter 5 and the necessarily existing intellect of chapter 3 are one and the 
same as the purely actual actualizer of chapter 1, the One of chap­
ter 2, and the cause of the existence of things of chapter 4. The five 
proofs we have been examining are not proofs of distinct deities, 
then, but rather distinct paths to one and the same God.
Simplicity
It cannot be emphasized too strongly that the unity of God is insepa­
rable from his simplicity. If there were in God a distinction between 
genus and specific difference, or between his essence and his exis­
tence, then there could in principle be more than one God. God’s 
status as First Cause is also inseparable from his simplicity. If there 
were in God a distinction between actuaHty and potentiality, or his 
essence and his existence, or any other parts at all, then he would, Hke 
everything else, require a cause of his own. Hence, to deny that God 
is simple or noncomposite is impUcitly to deny his uniqueness and 
ultimacy. Insofar as such a denial makes of God a mere instance of a 
genus, it reduces him to the status of a member of a pantheon of gods, 
and it does so even if we think of him as the unique member. (After 
aH, the nature of a Zeus or an Odin would not change even if they 
became the sole occupants of Olympus and Asgard, respectively.) 
Insofar as such a denial makes of God yet one further thing in need 
of a cause, it reduces him to the level of a creature, and it does so 
even if we think of him as somehow the one creature who happens 
to lack a cause. (Into the bargain, aUowing that there could be some 
composite thing which lacked a cause would also undermine the very 
arguments that got us to God in the first place.) Neither would any 
of this change even if we continue to insist that God is immaterial 
and incorporeal (as Zeus, Odin, and the creatures famiHar to us in

190
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
everyday experience are not). We would still have reduced God to 
what is, in essence, nothing more than a kind of superangel. Wor­
shiping him would therefore constitute a kind of idolatry. Indeed, 
to deny that there is anything simple or noncomposite would entail 
atheism, because it implicitly denies that there really is anything hav­
ing the ultimacy definitive of God.
For reasons Hke these, the mainstream of the Western tradition 
in philosophical theology— whether in the thought of pagans Hke 
Aristotle and Plotinus, Jews Hke Maimonides, MusHms Hke Avicenna 
and Averroes, or Christians Uke Athanasius, Augustine, Anselm, and 
Aquinas— has always insisted on divine simplicity as a nonnegotiable 
element of any sound conception of God. The CathoUc Church too 
has insisted on it as a key component of basic orthodoxy, teaching 
it as binding doctrine at the Fourth Lateran Council (1215) and the 
First Vatican Council (1869—1870). It is also affirmed by Protestant 
thinkers Hke Luther and Calvin. The doctrine of divine simplicity 
has, accordingly, come to be regarded as the core of what is caHed 
classical theism.
Nevertheless, there has in recent decades been resistance to the 
doctrine from (of aH people) certain theologians and philosophers 
of a broadly theistic bent. These writers have been characterized as 
“ neo-theists” and “theistic personalists” , to distinguish them from 
the classical theist tradition against which they are reacting. The view 
is caHed “theistic personalism” because it essentiaHy treats God as the 
unique member of a species faHing under the genus person, alongside 
other species of persons Hke human beings and angels, and differ­
ing from them in lacking their Hmitations on power, knowledge, 
goodness, and so forth.18 (Note that what distinguishes neo-theism 
or theistic personaUsm from classical theism is not that it regards God 
as personal as opposed to impersonal. Since most classical theists attri­
bute inteHect and wiH to God, they too generaHy regard God as per­
sonal. Rather, what sets the views apart is that theistic personaUsts
18 
The label “ neo-theism” is applied to these thinkers by Norman Geisler in Creating God 
in the Image of Man? (Minneapolis: Bethany House Publishers, 1997), and by Norman Geisler, 
H. Wayne House, and M ax Herrera in The Battle for God (Grand Rapids: Kregel Publications, 
2001). The label “ theistic personalism” is appHed to them by Brian Davies in An Introduction 
to the Philosophy of Religion, 3rd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), chap. 1. Among 
the well-known contemporary theistic philosophers Davies classifies as theistic personaUsts are 
Alvin Plantinga, Richard Swinburne, and Charles Hartshome.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
I9 I
regard God’s being personal as entailing that he falls under a genus, 
and that in this and other ways he is not simple or noncomposite.19)
Alvin Plantinga is one prominent neo-theist or theistic personalist 
critic of the doctrine of divine simplicity.20 Commenting on Aquinas’ 
defense of the doctrine, Plantinga claims that the doctrine holds that 
“ God is identical with each of his properties” , which entails that “ each 
of his properties is identical with each of his properties, so that God 
has but one property.”21 But this, Plantinga complains, “ seems flatly 
incompatible with the obvious fact that God has several properties 
... [such as] power and mercifulness” , and also entails, absurdly, that 
“ God ... is a property” and is therefore “ a mere abstract object” .22
But Plantinga very badly misunderstands the doctrine, because he 
interprets it in light of a metaphysics of his own that Aquinas and other 
defenders of divine simplicity would regard as completely wrong­
headed. First of all, Plantinga applies the term “property” extremely 
broadly, to almost anything we might predicate of something. We 
say that Socrates was human, that he was wise, that he walked around 
barefoot, that he was married to Xanthippe, that he was Plato’s 
teacher, and so forth. Hence, for Plantinga, being human, being wise, 
being barefoot, being married to Xanthippe, and being Platoys teacher are 
all “properties” of Socrates. Indeed, being Socrates is a “property” of 
Socrates, and “ among a thing’s properties is its nature or essence.”23 
Second, Plantinga speaks of these “properties” as if they existed in 
a Platonic “third realm” of abstract objects, Hke the Forms, which, 
for Plato, concrete individual things participate in or exempHfy. 
Third, Plantinga interprets predications of properties to God and to 
created things in a univocal way. When we say that Socrates is wise 
and that God is wise, “wise” is, in Plantinga’s view, to be understood 
in the same sense in each case.
Now, given these assumptions, it is no surprise that the doctrine 
of divine simpHcity seems highly problematic to Plantinga. Power
19 For example, some theistic personaUsts, such as process theologians like Hartshome, deny 
that God is immutable or changeless. They claim that, just as human persons undergo change, 
so too does God. But to be changeable entails having potentialities as well as actualities, and 
thus entails being composite rather than simple.
20 See Alvin Plantinga, Does God Have a Nature? (Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 
1980), esp. pp. 26 -6 1.
21 Ibid., p. 47.
22 Ibid.
23 Ibid., p. 30.

192
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
and knowledge (for example) are distinct things in us. Hence, if God 
has power and knowledge in exactly the same sense we do, how 
could his power and knowledge also fail to be distinct, contrary to 
the doctrine of divine simplicity? If God is identical to his power, and 
power is a “property” in Plantinga’s sense, how could God fail to be 
a “property” ? And if “properties” are Platonic abstract objects, how 
could God fail to be an abstract object?
But Aquinas and most other classical theists would reject each of 
Plantinga’s metaphysical assumptions. First of all, and as we have seen, 
when we predicate knowledge or power to God, we are for most clas­
sical theists not using the terms “knowledge” and “power” in the same 
sense as when we predicate knowledge or power to human beings 
or other created things. Rather, we are saying that there is in God 
something analogous to what we call knowledge in us, and something 
analogous to what we call power in us. Hence, though what we call 
“knowledge” and “power” in us are certainly distinct, it doesn’t fol­
low that what we call “knowledge” and “power” in God must be 
distinct, because the latter are not exactly the same as the former, even 
if they are related. To be sure, Plantinga does briefly discuss the idea 
that language about God is to be understood analogically rather than 
univocally, but unfortunately, he badly misunderstands that claim as 
well. For one thing, he characterizes Aquinas’ view as the thesis that 
“ our language about God is analogical rather than literal.”24 But as 
I emphasized above, the analogy of attribution and the analogy of 
proper proportionaHty are literal uses of language, not metaphorical 
uses. “Nonunivocal” does not entail “nonliteral” . For another thing, 
Plantinga supposes that the analogical use of language is intended as 
a way to understand the claim that God is a “property” , and he finds 
that claim implausible even so understood. But neither Aquinas nor 
any other classical theist would say that God is a “property” in the first 
place, whether “property” is understood univocally or analogically. 
The thesis is simply a straw man of Plantinga’s own devising, so that his 
inabiHty to find a plausible way of reading it is neither here nor there.
That brings us to a second point, which is that Aquinas and 
other classical theists simply would not accept Plantinga’s assump­
tions about what an essence is or what a property is. For one thing, 
it is simply far too crude to lump together all the various kinds of
24Ibid., p. 58.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
193
predications we might make of a thing, indiscriminately to apply to 
them the same label (namely, “properties”), and then treat them as 
if they were on a metaphysical par. Rather, we need to distinguish 
the essence of a thing from its properties, its properties from its merely 
contingent accidents, its intrinsic accidents from mere relations it bears 
to other things, and so forth. For example, the essence of a human 
being is his rational animality. A capacity to find things amusing, by 
contrast, is not the essence or part of the essence of a human being, 
but it is nevertheless a property of human beings in the sense that it is 
“proper” to human beings to be able to find things amusing insofar as 
this capacity “flows” or follows from their being rational animals. Hav­
ing a certain skin color, however, is not in this sense a “property” of 
human beings, because it does not flow or follow from being a ratio­
nal animal. Having a certain skin color is instead a merely contingent 
accident of human beings. It is, however, an intrinsic accident insofar 
as having a certain skin color is something inherent in a human being 
himself, rather than merely a matter of his being related to something 
else in a certain way. Socrates’ being the teacher of Plato, however, is 
merely a matter of his bearing a certain relation to something distinct 
from him, rather than being something intrinsic to him.25
For another thing, as Aquinas and many other classical theists 
understand them, the essence of a thing, its properties, and its intrin­
sic accidents (contingent and otherwise) are not entities external to it. 
In particular, they are not abstract Platonic Forms which the thing 
“instantiates” or in which it “participates” . Rather, they are concrete, 
intrinsic constituents of the thing itself. For example, Socrates’ ratio­
nal animality is a constituent of Socrates himself, as is his property of 
being capable of finding things amusing, and his contingent accident 
of having a certain skin color.26
Now, since Plantinga tends to assimilate these very different aspects 
of a thing under the single blanket label “properties” (in his sense of
25 For more detailed discussion and defense o f Aquinas’ understanding o f essence, acci­
dents, properties, etc., see Feser, Scholastic Metaphysics, pp. 189-93, 230—35; and Oderberg, 
Real Essentialism, pp. 152-66.
26 For this reason, Nicholas Wolterstorffhas suggested that the doctrine o f divine simplicity 
cannot properly be understood unless one recognizes that its proponents are committed to 
what he calls a “ constituent ontology” . See Nicholas Wolterstorff, “ Divine Simplicity” , in 
Philosophical Perspectives 5 ; Philosophy of Religion, ed. J. Tomberlin (Atascadero, Calif.: Ridge- 
view, 1991), pp. 5 3 1-5 2 .

194
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
the word “property” rather than Aquinas’ sense), and treats these 
“properties” as if they were Platonic abstract objects, his interpre­
tation of the doctrine of divine simplicity makes it sound very odd 
indeed. For example, it sounds as if the advocate of divine simplicity 
regards God’s having created human beings as every bit as essen­
tial to God as his wisdom, which is odd given that God could have 
refrained from creating Adam but could not have failed to be wise. 
And it sounds like the doctrine of divine simplicity, insofar as it iden­
tifies God with his wisdom, power, and so forth, is making of God 
an abstract object. But in fact these odd results follow not from the 
doctrine of divine simplicity itself, but rather merely from the meta­
physical assumptions Plantinga has read into the doctrine, assumptions 
which proponents of the doctrine would reject.27
Plantinga also appears not to grasp what is at stake in the doctrine 
of divine simplicity. To be sure, he is aware that defenders of the doc­
trine maintain that if God were not simple or noncomposite, then he 
would depend on something external to him.28 But he seems to think 
of the dependence in question in merely Platonic terms, as a matter of 
God’s “participating” in various Platonic “properties” . That would, 
for the classical theist, be bad enough, but the problem goes well 
beyond that. The problem, as we have seen, is that whatever is com­
posite or nonsimple is causally dependent on something else and thus 
cannot be the First Cause; and that what has an essence distinct from 
its existence, or falls under a genus distinct from its specific difference, 
cannot be unique. The rationality and animality that define human 
beings can in principle exist apart from one another. Hence, there 
must be some cause which combines them so that human beings 
exist. Similarly, if God’s wisdom and power (say) were distinct, then 
there would have to be some cause which combines them so that God 
exists. If God were merely one existing thing which participated in the
27 
Plantinga does acknowledge that Aquinas would not use the term “ property” as broadly 
as Plantinga himself does (Plantinga, Does God Have a Nature?, pp. 40—43). But Plantinga insists 
that what matters is that predications o f the various sorts w e’ve been discussing all involve 
identifying “ characteristics” o f God, whether or not we want to use the term “ property” for 
all o f them. But this completely misses the point. Aquinas’ concern is not merely semantic, an 
eccentric insistence on using the word “ property” in a certain restricted way. Rather, his point 
is that there is an objective, extralinguistic metaphysical difference between a thing’s essence, its 
properties (in his sense o f the term “ property” ), its contingent accidents, its intrinsic accidents, 
its relations, and so forth.
28Ibid., pp. 3 1-3 5 .

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
195
divine essence, or were a single member of a genus, then there could 
at least in principle be more than one God. Monotheism would not 
be true in principle, but only as a matter of contingent fact. In both of 
these respects, God would lack the ultimacy that is definitive of him. 
That is to say, he would not really exist at all. Rather, what would 
exist instead is merely a quasi-divine ersatz, a “ god” in the sense of a 
very powerful but nevertheless essentially creaturely being.
But in fact, we would not be justified in saying even that that sort 
of “ god” exists. Or at least, nothing in the arguments defended in 
this book would justify the conclusion that such a theistic personalist 
or neo-theist “ god” exists. For as we have seen, those arguments all 
entail that there must be a cause which is in no way a mixture of 
actuaHty and potentiality or of essence and existence, or in any other 
way composite. As arguments for a First Cause, they are ipso facto 
arguments for an absolutely simple or noncomposite cause. In short, 
classical theism and the doctrine of divine simplicity necessarily go together. 
To deny the one is implicitly to deny the other. Hence, again, from 
the classical theist point of view, to deny simplicity is implicitly to 
affirm atheism. But (as the first five chapters of this book have 
shown) atheism is false. Hence, the doctrine of divine simplicity must 
be true.
Objections to the doctrine raised by other recent philosophers are 
no better than those leveled by Plantinga. It is sometimes claimed 
that divine simpHcity is incompatible with the thesis that while some 
things are necessarily true of God, others are true only contingently. 
For example, it is necessarily true that God is omnipotent, but only 
contingently true that he created the world, since he could have 
refrained from creating it. But, judges Thomas Morris, “ there seems 
to be no other good way to capture this truth than to say that God 
has both necessary (essential) and contingent properties.”29 And since 
a necessary property cannot also be a contingent property, it follows 
that not all God’s properties can be identical.
Leave aside the point, already emphasized, that the term “prop­
erty” is being used here in a way that Aquinas and other proponents 
of divine simplicity would not use it. There is another problem with
29 Thomas V . Morris, Our Idea of God: An Introduction to Philosophical Theology (Downers 
Grove, 111.: InterVarsity Press, 1991), p. 117 . See Christopher Hughes, On a Complex Theory 
of a Simple God (Ithaca, N .Y .: Cornell University Press, 1989), chap. 4.

this objection, as has been pointed out by Barry Miller.30 Building on 
a distinction made by Peter Geach, Miller differentiates between real 
properties and mere “ Cambridge properties” (momentarily to adopt, 
for ease of exposition, Plantinga’s and Morris’ broad sense of the term 
“property”). For example, for Socrates to grow hair is a real change 
in him, the acquisition by him of a real property. But for Socrates to 
become shorter than Plato, not because Socrates’ height has changed 
but only because Plato has grown taller, is not a real change in Socra­
tes but what Geach called a mere “ Cambridge change” , and therefore 
involves the acquisition of a mere “ Cambridge property” .31
Now, the doctrine of divine simplicity does not entail that God 
has no contingent properties of any sort, but only that he has no 
contingent real properties. He can have contingent Cambridge prop­
erties. And just as Socrates’ being shorter than Plato is a mere Cam­
bridge property (because it involves Plato’s growing taller rather 
than any change in Socrates himself), so too is God’s having cre­
ated the world a mere Cambridge property (because it involves the 
world’s coming into being rather than any change in God himself). 
Similarly, divine simplicity properly understood does not entail that 
all of God’s properties are identical (again, using “property” in Mor­
ris’ sense for the sake of argument), but rather only that all of his 
real properties are identical. Now, omnipotence is one of God’s real 
properties and one he has necessarily, whereas creating the world is 
a Cambridge property and one he has only contingently, so that, as 
Morris says, God’s omnipotence and his having created the world 
cannot be identical. But this is not a problem for the doctrine of 
divine simplicity, because it does not imply in the first place that 
these properties are identical.32
196 
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
30Barry Miller, A  Most Unlikely God: A  Philosophical Enquiry (Notre Dame, Ind.: University 
o f Notre Dame Press, 1996), pp. 10 6 -12.
31 See P. T . Geach, God and the Soul (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1969), pp. 7 1—72. 
Geach calls changes o f the sort in question “ Cambridge changes” because o f the use which 
Cambridge philosophers like Bertrand Russell and J. M .E . McTaggart made o f the notion.
32 It might be objected that creation is analogous to Socrates’ causing Plato to change, and 
that if we think o f creation on that model, then there would have to be a real change in God 
when he creates. But that would be so only on the assumption that changes Hke the ones 
Socrates undergoes as he changes other things would have to be manifest in anything that 
causes change in another thing. And as we will see in the sections to follow on immutability, 
eternity, and freedom, to make that assumption is to commit a fallacy o f accident.

197
Immutability
Change, as we saw in chapter i, is the actualization of potential. We 
have also seen that God is pure actuality, devoid of potentiality. Now, 
if he has no potential that needs to be, or indeed could be, actualized, 
then he cannot change. He is therefore immutable or changeless. To 
be sure, it might seem that he changes insofar as he creates the world. 
For doesn’t this involve a transition from God’s not creating it to 
his creating it? But as I have just argued, God’s being Creator of the 
world is a Cambridge property rather than a real property, and his 
becoming the world’s Creator is thus a mere Cambridge change. Just 
as, in our example, Socrates’ becoming shorter than Plato involved a 
real change only in Plato and not in Socrates, so too does God’s 
becoming Creator of the world involve a real change only in the 
world’s status, not in God. To say that God is immutable is to say 
that there is no real change in him, though there may of course be 
Cambridge changes.
Divine immutability also follows from divine simplicity. When 
a thing undergoes a real change (as opposed to a merely Cam­
bridge change), it changes in some particular respect while remain­
ing the same in other respects. For example, a substance loses one 
of its attributes while remaining the same substance and while 
retaining its other attributes. But that presupposes that the changing 
thing is composed of parts, some of which remain while another 
or others are lost. Since God is simple or noncomposite, then, he 
cannot change.
It might be objected that in creating the world, God acts, and that 
acting always involves a change in the one acting and not merely in 
the thing he acts upon. For example, when I type these words, it is 
not just the computer screen in front of me which changes. There 
are also various changes in me—in the positions of my fingers, in the 
state of my nervous system, in the thoughts that pass through my 
mind, and so on.
However, while it is true that the things of our experience happen 
to undergo changes themselves in the course of acting upon other 
things, it simply does not follow that absolutely anything that acts must 
necessarily undergo change itself as it does so. To draw such an infer­
ence would be to commit what is called a fallacy of accident. Such a

198
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
fallacy would be committed, for example, if one were to conclude 
from the premise that every college professor who has ever lived has been 
under nine feet tall to the conclusion that any possible college professor 
must be under nine feet tall. For though there has in fact been a correla­
tion, historically, between being a college professor and being under 
nine feet tall, the correlation is merely contingent (or “ accidental”) 
rather than necessary or essential. There is nothing in the notion of 
being a college professor that strictly entails that one must be under 
nine feet tall. At least in theory, there could someday be a college 
professor who is over nine feet tall. Similarly, even if the things 
of our experience always undergo change in the course of acting, 
it doesn’t follow that any possible thing that acts necessarily must 
undergo change as it acts.
As Brian Davies points out in responding to this sort of objection, 
what is essential to acting is the bringing about of an effect in another 
thing, rather than undergoing change oneself as one does so.33 For 
example, what is essential to teaching is that one causes someone 
else to learn, and not that one does so by lecturing, specifically, or 
by writing books, or what have you. Similarly, what is essential to 
creating is simply that God causes the world to exist. There is nothing 
in this that requires that it be done by virtue of the Creator’s under­
going change himself.
A fallacy of accident is also committed by those who claim that 
if God were immutable, then he could not be said to have life. For 
while the living things of our experience do indeed change in various 
ways (by growing, taking in nutrients, moving about, learning, and 
so forth), it doesn’t follow that any possible living thing must undergo 
change. What is essential to a thing’s being alive, at least on the tra­
ditional Aristotelian account of life, is that the thing operate in the 
basis of an internal principle, as opposed to being entirely dependent 
on external forces.34 Hence, an animal can be said to be alive insofar 
as at least much of what it does flows from its own nature, whereas a 
stone is not alive because it is entirely passive, and can do things (such 
as breaking a window) only insofar as other things act upon it (by
33 Davies, Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion, pp. 165—67.
34 To use the Scholastic jargon, whereas nonliving things exhibit only transient causation, 
living things also exhibit immanent causation. See Oderberg, Real Essentialism, pp. 17 7-8 3.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
199
throwing it toward the window, for example). Now, as the uncaused 
cause of all things, God certainly acts in a way which does not require 
his being acted upon by anything else. Hence, he can certainly be said 
to have life. Indeed, unlike other living things (all of which to some 
extent, even if not entirely, require being acted upon by other things, 
insofar as they need to eat, breathe, and so forth), God acts in a way 
which is completely independent of anything else. Hence, he can be 
said to have life in the fullest way possible.
Immateriality and incorporeality
That God does not have a body, and indeed is entirely immaterial, 
follows straightaway from his pure actuaHty and absolute simplicity. 
This is clear whether we think of matter and material objects in the 
Aristotelian terms favored by classical theists Hke Aquinas, or instead in 
less philosophically controversial terms. From an AristoteUan point of 
view, any material object is a composite of substantial form and prime 
matter. Since God is absolutely simple or noncomposite, and thus 
lacks parts Hke substantial form and prime matter, he cannot have 
a body but must instead be incorporeal. Also, from an AristoteHan 
point of view, matter is, essentiaHy, the potentiaHty to take on form. 
Matter aH by itself (“prime matter” , to use the technical jargon) is pure 
potentiaHty. NaturaHy, then, what is pure actuality and utterly devoid 
of potentiaHty cannot be in any way material.35
Even apart from a specificaHy AristoteHan view of matter, though, 
it is obvious that what is pure actuaHty and absolutely simple cannot 
be corporeal or material. By anyone’s reckoning, material things have 
parts— not only parts of the sort evident to our senses (the wood, plas­
tic, or metal parts that make up a piece of furniture, the body parts of 
an animal, and so forth), but microscopic parts Hke molecules, atoms, 
and subatomic particles. These parts are capable of being arranged and 
rearranged in various ways, which entails that anything made up of 
them has potentiaHty. Even the fundamental particles— fermions and 
bosons— though they are not composed of other particles, stiU have 
parts in the sense that they have distinctive attributes. Furthermore, 
they exhibit potentiaHty insofar as they come into being and pass
35 
For defense o f the Aristotelian view o f material substance, see Feser, Scholastic Metaphys­
ics, chap. 3.

200
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
away. Hence, again, since God is devoid of potentiality and without 
parts, he cannot be material.
Eternity
It is clear from what has been said in the preceding chapters that God 
neither comes into being nor passes away. What comes into being has 
parts that need to be combined— most fundamentally, its essence and 
existence— is merely potential until they are combined, and exists 
contingently rather than necessarily. Accordingly, what comes into 
being requires a cause. But as we have seen, God is without parts, 
without potentiaHty, is absolutely necessary, and just is existence itself 
rather than something in need of deriving existence from something 
else. Accordingly, he not only need not have a cause but could not 
have had one. Hence, he does not come into being, but has always 
existed. What passes away has parts that can be separated—most fun­
damentally, its essence can fail to be conjoined with existence— is 
potentially nonexistent, and is, accordingly, contingent rather than 
necessary. Since God is without parts, without potentiaHty, is abso­
lutely necessary, and just is existence itself (and thus can hardly lose 
existence), he cannot pass away. Now what neither comes into being 
nor passes away is eternal. Hence, God is eternal.
But God’s eternity amounts to more than this. It is not mere lon­
gevity, but strict timelessness. That is to say, it is not merely that God has 
existed throughout aH past time, and wiU continue to exist through­
out aH future time. Rather, he exists outside of time altogether. This 
foUows from both his immutabUity and his simpHcity. If God existed 
within time, he would constantly be adding new seconds, days, and 
years to his life; would be acting at one moment in a way that differs 
from the way he acts at another moment; and (given that, as we wiU 
see below, God can be said to have knowledge) would constantly be 
acquiring new pieces of knowledge, such as the knowledge that it is 
now time tl9 the knowledge that it is now time t2f and so forth. But aU 
of this would involve change, and God is immutable. Hence, he does 
not exist within time, but rather timelessly.36 Furthermore, if God
36See William Lane Craig, Time and Eternity (Wheaton, 111.: Crossway Books, 2001), 
pp. 3 0 -3 1. Craig, who rejects divine immutability, also rejects the view that God is timeless. 
But he argues that, for the reasons just summarized, if God is immutable, then he would indeed 
be timeless.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
2 0 1
were in time, then there would be different stages of his life, each of 
which would be distinct from the others. In that case, he would have 
distinct parts. But God is simple or noncomposite, and thus without 
parts. Hence, he is timeless.
Now, I have argued in earlier chapters that the existence of any­
thing at any moment is ultimately caused by God. It might seem that 
that claim is incompatible with the claim that God is timeless. For 
if the existence of something at time 
is caused by God, and the 
existence of something at time t2 is caused by God, doesn’t that entail 
that God is acting at time tj and also acting at the later time t2? And 
doesn’t that in turn entail that God is in time?37
However, this does not follow. In particular, from the proposition 
that God causes it to be the case that such-and-such exists at time tl9 it does 
not follow that at time tl9 God causes it to be the case that such-and-such 
exists.38 It is not that at time tT God causes some object to exist, then 
at a later time t2 carries out a second action of causing that thing to 
remain in existence, then at some yet later time t3 carries out a third 
action of causing it to remain in existence for a while longer, and so 
forth. It is rather that God, from outside of time, in a single act causes 
to exist a temporal world in which the object exists at times tl, ^2) t3, 
and so on. You might compare his action to that of an author who 
comes up with an entire story in a single flash of insight. He deter­
mines, all at the same moment, what the beginning, middle, and end 
of the story will be. From the point of view of the characters in the 
story, what happens in the middle of the story follows what happened 
at the beginning and precedes what happens at the end. But the author 
himself did not first come up with the beginning, and then later the 
middle, and then later still the ending. Rather, he did it all at once.39
But this brings us to another objection sometimes raised against 
the claim that God is timeless. If God causes Socrates to exist in 469 
B.c., then Socrates’ existing then must be simultaneous with God’s 
eternity. And if God causes Barack Obama to exist in a .d . 1961, 
then Obama’s existing then must be simultaneous with God’s eter­
nity. But if some time ίτ is simultaneous with some time t2, and t2
37 See Richard Swinburne, The Coherence of Theism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977), 
p. 221; and Nelson Pike, God and Timelessness (New York: Schocken Books, 1970), pp. 106—7.
38 See Brian Davies, Thinking about God (London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1985), p. 154.
39 See Stephen M . Barr, Modem Physics and Ancient Faith (Notre Dame, Ind.: University o f 
Notre Dame Press, 2003), p. 262.

20 2
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
is simultaneous with t3, then ίτ must be simultaneous with t3. And 
in that case, it would follow that Socrates’ existence is simultaneous 
with Obama’s existence. But obviously that is absurd. So (the objec­
tion concludes), the claim that God is timeless leads to absurdity.40
The problem with this objection, though, is that it misses the point. 
It treats timeless eternity as if it were a point in time, for only if it were 
a point in time could it be simultaneous with some point in time. But 
the whole idea that God exists timelessly is precisely that he does not 
exist at some point in time, but rather outside of time altogether.41
Necessity
The rationalist proof of chapter 5 argues directly for the existence of 
an absolutely necessary being, and we have discussed how the other 
proofs also imply that God exists of necessity. But some have objected 
to the very idea of a necessary being. One such objection rests on 
the claim that necessity is entirely a matter of linguistic convention 
and has nothing to do with extralinguistic reality. For example, the 
proposition that all bachelors are unmarried is necessarily true, but this 
reflects nothing more than its status as an analytic statement— that is, 
a statement that is true by virtue of the meanings of its terms. It tells 
us only how, as a matter of linguistic convention, we use the term 
“bachelor” , and nothing about reality. Extralinguistic reality itself 
cannot intelligibly be said to be necessary. But God is supposed to 
be part of extralinguistic reality. Hence, the objection concludes, it 
makes no sense to characterize God as a necessary being.42
One problem with this objection is that the thesis that all necessity 
is a product of linguistic convention can be shown to be false even 
independently of considerations drawn from natural theology. For 
one thing, conventionalism confuses sentences, which are linguistic
40 See Swinburne, Coherence of Theism, pp. 22 0 -2 1; and Anthony Kenny, The God of the 
Philosophers (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979), pp. 38-39.
41 See Davies, Thinking about God, pp. 165-66; and Paul Helm, “ Divine Timeless Eternity” , 
in God and Time, ed. Gregory E. Ganssle (Downers Grove, 111.: InterVarsity Press, 2001), p. 35.
42J .N . Findlay, “ Can God’s Existence Be Disproved?” , in New Essays in Philosophical The­
ology, ed. Antony Flew and Alasdair MacIntyre (London: S C M  Press, 1955). Bertrand Russell 
raised a similar objection in his famous 1948 B B C  debate with Father Frederick Copleston. 
See Bertrand Russell and Frederick Copleston, “ A  Debate on the Existence o f God” , in The 
Existence of God, ed. John Hick (N ew  York: Macmillan, 1964), pp. 16 7-9 1.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
203
items, with propositions, which are not.43 The proposition that snow is 
white is not the same thing as the English sentence “ Snow is white” , 
since the very same proposition can be conveyed by the German 
sentence “ Schnee ist weiss.” Furthermore, that proposition would 
have been true even if neither English, nor German, nor any other 
language had ever existed. So, the fact that sentences are products 
of convention does not entail that the propositions that sentences 
express are the products of convention. Hence, it does not entail that 
the necessity of a proposition is always a product of convention.
To be sure, the proposition that snow is white is not a necessarily 
true proposition in the first place. But propositions of mathematics 
and logic— for example, the proposition that 2 + 2 = 4  and the prop­
osition that everything is identical to itself—are necessarily true, and it 
is notoriously difficult plausibly to argue that the truths of mathe­
matics and logic are merely conventional. (See the discussion of these 
issues in chapter 3.) So, we have reason, completely independent of 
considerations drawn from the rationalist argument for God’s exis­
tence, to reject the conventionalist view of necessity.
But those considerations do indeed give us further reason to reject 
conventionalism, which brings us to a deeper problem with the objec­
tion under consideration. The claim that God cannot be necessary 
because necessary truths are all conventional simply begs the question 
against the arguments defended in this book. For the arguments pur­
port to show that there must be an extralinguistic reality— namely, a 
cause of the existence of things— which exists of necessity, and these 
arguments also give an account of the nature of this necessity that has 
nothing to do with linguistic convention. In particular, they claim 
that the necessary existence of this cause amounts to its being purely 
actual and devoid of potentiaHty, of its being absolutely simple, and 
of its essence being identical with its existence. To respond to these 
arguments with the mere assertion that necessity is a matter of con­
vention presupposes that the arguments are wrong, but does nothing 
to show that they are.
Another objection to divine necessity derives from David Schrader, 
who suggests that we can imagine a possible world in which nothing
43 
See Alvin Plantinga, “ Self-Profile” , in Alvin Plantinga, ed. James E. Tomberlin and Peter 
van Inwagen (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1985), pp. 7 1-7 3 ·

204
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
exists, not even God. Hence, God does not exist in every possible 
world, in which case he does not exist of necessity.44 But this objec­
tion fails for several reasons. For one thing, Schrader’s procedure 
is to suggest that he can imagine a scenario in which only a single 
green marble exists, and then imagine a further scenario in which 
even this green marble is absent. To imagine this, he supposes, is 
to conceive of a scenario in which nothing exists, not even God. 
But that would be true only if everything that exists or might exist, 
including God, is the sort of thing of whose presence or absence 
one might form a mental image. And that is simply not the case.45 It 
would be ridiculous to suppose that one could show that 2 + 2 = 4  
is not really a necessary truth by first imagining a scenario in which 
the only thing that exists is the sentence “ 2 + 2 = 4” written on a 
chalkboard, and then imagining a further scenario in which that sen­
tence is erased. The reason is that numbers are not material objects 
whose presence or absence one could imagine in the first place. One 
can, of course, form mental images of numerals like “ 2” and “ 4” , but 
that is not the same thing as imagining the numbers themselves, any 
more than to form mental images of the Roman numerals “ II” and 
“ IV” amounts to forming mental images of the numbers themselves. 
Numbers are abstract objects rather than material things, and numer­
als are merely labels by which we refer to them. Hence, you are not 
going to be able to determine anything one way or the other about 
numbers, or about other abstract objects for that matter, by trying 
to imagine the presence or absence of this or that. What we can form 
a mental image of is in this case simply irrelevant to what we can 
strictly conceive.
But the same thing is true of God. As we saw above, God is not 
a material object of any sort. Hence, you cannot form a mental image 
even of God existing, let alone of him not existing. Mental images are 
thus completely irrelevant to what may or may not be true of God 
in different “possible worlds” , and have nothing to do with what we 
might coherently conceive of in the context of natural theology any 
more than they do in the context of mathematics.
44 David Schrader, “ The Antinomy o f Divine Necessity” , International Journal for Philosophy 
of Religion 30 (1991): 5 1-5 2 .
45 See Brian Leftow, “ Necessity” , in The Cambridge Companion to Christian Philosophical 
Theology, ed. Charles Taliaferro and Chad Meister (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2010), pp. 28-29.

But even if Schrader avoided the error of supposing that con­
ceiving of God’s existence involves forming mental images, there 
is another serious problem with his argument. The methodologi­
cal supposition that we can investigate necessity and other modal 
notions by trying to conceive of what would be the case in various 
possible worlds is very commonly made in contemporary philos­
ophy. But from the Aristotelian-Thomistic point of view, it gets 
things backward. We do not first investigate what is true in various 
possible worlds, and then from there determine what is possible for 
a thing, what is necessarily true of it, and so forth. Rather, we start 
with actual things, determine their essences, and then from there go 
on to draw conclusions about what is possible for them, necessarily 
true of them, and so on.46
In the specific case at hand, then, the proper procedure is not to 
start by trying to conceive of whether God would exist in every 
possible world and then determine from that whether he is a neces­
sary being. Rather, the proper procedure is to start by determining 
whether God exists, and then to determine what his nature is, and 
then in turn determine from that what is possible for him what is 
necessarily true of him, and so forth. That is just what we have done 
in previous chapters. What we determined is that God does indeed 
exist, that among the aspects of his nature are that he is purely actual 
and without potentiaHty, that he is absolutely simple or noncompos­
ite, that he is subsistent existence itself and thus depends on nothing 
else for his existence, and so forth. From that, we saw, it follows in 
turn that he exists necessarily rather than merely contingently. And 
that entails that he exists in every possible world (if, for the sake of 
argument, we go along with the “possible worlds” talk popular in 
much contemporary metaphysics).
Schrader might disagree with all of this, but his objection does 
not show that there is anything wrong with it. Rather, his objection 
merely implicitly assumes that there is something wrong with it, and 
thus begs the question.
Omnipotence
Power is the capacity to act or to make. Now, most of the arguments 
for God’s existence that we have been examining are arguments for a
THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
205
46 See Feser, Scholastic Metaphysics, pp. 239 -4 1, and Oderberg, Real Essentialism, pp. 1-6 .

20  6
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
cause of the existence of things, and causing things to exist is a kind 
of acting and a kind of making. Naturally, then, there is power in 
God. But God does not merely have power. He is ^//-powerful or 
omnipotent. There are several ways to see this.
Consider first that we have seen that anything that exists or could 
exist other than God would have potentials that need actualization, 
parts that need to be combined, and an essence distinct from its exis­
tence, and would therefore be contingent. We have also seen that 
such things can exist, even for an instant, only insofar as they are 
caused by that which is purely actual, absolutely simple, subsistent 
existence itself, and absolutely necessary; and we have seen that there 
cannot in principle be more than one such cause. It follows that 
anything that exists or could exist other than God depends at every 
instant on God for its existence.
Recall also the principle agere sequitur esse, according to which a 
thing’s attributes and activities cannot go beyond its nature. When 
we combine this principle with the thesis that the sheer existence 
of anything at any moment depends on God’s causing it to exist, 
we get the result that the operation or activity of anything at any 
moment also depends on God. For if a thing could not even exist 
for an instant apart from God, how could it act at any instant apart 
from God? If the thing has no independent capacity for existence, 
where could an independent capacity for action possibly come 
from? Existing, after all, is more fundamental than acting, since it is 
presupposed by acting. So, if a thing’s essence gives it no capacity 
even to exist apart from God, it cannot intelligibly give it power to 
act apart from God.
So, everything that exists or could exist other than God depends 
at every instant not only for its existence, but also for its capacity to 
do anything, on God. Nothing that exists or could exist is outside the 
range of his power or has any power that does not derive from him. 
But to be that from which all power derives, and which has nothing 
outside the range of its power, is to be all-powerful or omnipotent. 
Hence, God is all-powerful or omnipotent.
Recall also that, of his very nature or essence, God exists in a 
fully actual way, as that which just is subsistent existence itself rather 
something which in any way derives existence from anything else. 
Factor in once again the principle agere sequitur esse, that a thing’s

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
207
attributes and activities reflect what it is. And consider that to do or to 
make is to actualize some potential, so that to have power is to have 
the capacity to actualize potential. It follows that since God exists 
in the fullest possible way, he must have the capacity to act in the full­
est possible way. Hence, there is no potential that he cannot actual­
ize, and thus nothing outside the range of his power. For suppose that 
there was some potential that could be actualized, but that God could 
not actualize it. What could possibly prevent him from doing so? 
What could prevent him from acting in that particular possible way if 
he exists in the fullest possible way, given that agere sequitur esse?
So, whether we start with God’s effects and work back to his 
nature, or start with his nature itself and work forward to his attri­
butes, we arrive at the same result— namely, that God is all-powerful 
or omnipotent.
Can God do absolutely anything, then? That depends on what we 
have in mind by “ anything” . If the question is whether God can 
cause to exist or occur anything that could in principle exist or occur, 
then the answer is that he can indeed do so. But if the question is 
whether he can make things like round squares, or cause 2 and 2 to 
equal 5, or the Hke, then the answer is that he cannot do so. The rea­
son, though, is not that there is any Hmitation on his power. It is not 
that there is such a thing as the capacity to actuaHze round squares, 
and God lacks that capacity. It is rather that there is and could be no 
such thing as the capacity to actuaHze round squares in the first place, 
because the very idea is self-contradictory.
It is in this light that we should understand puzzles Uke the famous 
“paradox of the stone” . Can God make a stone that is too heavy for 
him to Hft? If we say that he can, then it seems that there is some­
thing he cannot do— namely, Hft the stone. If we say that he cannot, 
then it seems once again that there is something he cannot do—  
namely, make the stone. So, either way, it seems there is something 
God cannot do. And if there is something he cannot do, then how 
can he be omnipotent? The problem with this aHeged difficulty for 
omnipotence is that the very idea of a stone that is too heavy for God to 
lift is as self-contradictory as the idea of a round square. For since a 
stone’s rising is certainly something that could occur, it is something 
God could cause to occur. Hence, God cannot make a stone that is 
too heavy for him to Hft any more than he can make a round square,

208
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
and the reason is that there is no such thing in the first place as the 
capacity to make a stone too heavy for God to Hft.47
For the same reason, other difficulties that might seem to face 
the claim that God is omnipotent are also illusory. As we will see 
below, God possesses perfect goodness, and thus cannot sin. But this 
is no more inconsistent with his being omnipotent than his being 
unable to create a round square is. For the notion of something that 
is perfectly good but also sins is, Hke the notion of a round square, 
self-contradictory.
Omniscience
As with omnipotence, so too with omniscience we can show that 
God possesses it either by working backward from his effects to the 
nature of their cause, or by working forward from God’s nature. 
Again, anything that exists or could exist, and anything that some­
thing does or could do, depends at every moment on God’s causal 
action. Now, recaH the principle of proportionate causaHty, according 
to which whatever is in an effect must in some way be in its cause. 
It foHows from these two propositions that whatever is in anything 
that exists or could exist must in some way be in God as their cause.
So, in some way or other, colors, sounds, shapes, sizes, spatial loca­
tions, atomic structures, chemical compositions, surface reflectance 
properties, nutritive powers, locomotive capacities, and every other 
feature of everything that exists or might exist— whether mineral, 
vegetable, animal, human, or angel— must exist in God. Now, obvi­
ously these features cannot exist in God in the same way they exist in 
all these effects. For example, God cannot be of a certain color, shape, 
or chemical composition, because these are all essentially features of 
material objects, and God is immaterial. But God’s immateriaHty is 
not the only reason these features cannot exist in him in the way 
they do in other things. Even if God were material, if he merely
47 
See George I. Mavrodes, “ Some Puzzles concerning Omnipotence” , Philosophical Review 
72 (1963): 2 2 1-2 3 . As Harry Frankfurt points out, even if we supposed that God could cause 
self-contradictory things or events, the paradox o f the stone would not refute the claim that 
God is omnipotent. For if God can cause self-contradictory things and events, then he can 
not only make a stone that is too heavy for him to lift, but he can also go on to lift a stone that 
is too heavy for him to hft. See Harry Frankfurt, “ The Logic o f Omnipotence” , Philosophical 
Review 73 (1964): 262-63.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
20Ç
instantiated redness and roundness (for example), then he wouldn’t 
be the ultimate cause of all red and round things. For in that case 
his own redness and roundness, being mere instances of universal 
forms or patterns, would themselves require explanation just as much 
as other instances do. And the same thing is true of any features that 
angels, who are immaterial, might possess. If God merely instantiated 
those features just as angels do, then he couldn’t be the ultimate cause 
of all things which have those features.
Now, as we saw in chapter 3, redness, roundness, and other uni­
versals are real; nominalism and conceptualism, the alternatives to 
realism, are false. We also saw that where universals don’t exist in 
the concrete individual things which instantiate them, the only other 
ways they might exist are either as concepts or ideas in an intellect, 
or as the denizens of some Platonic “ third realm” . But we also saw 
that there is no such “ third realm” , for Platonism too is false. So, if 
redness, roundness, and all the other universal forms or patterns that 
everything that exists or might exist exhibit don’t exist in God in 
the way in which they exist in the concrete individual things which 
instantiate them, then the only other way in which they can exist in 
him is as concepts or ideas in an intellect. But again, they must exist 
in him in some way, given the principle of proportionate causality. 
So, it follows that they exist in him as concepts or ideas in an intellect. 
And so we have to attribute intellect to God.
Nor is it just concepts which exist in this intellect. Consider a cat 
sitting on a mat. That the cat and the mat exist at all at any instant at 
which they do exist is due to God’s causal activity. But that the state 
of affairs of the cat’s being on the mat holds at any instant is also due to 
God’s causal activity. So, just as, given the principle of proportionate 
causality, the “ catness” of the cat must exist in God as the concept 
catness, so too must the state of affairs of the cat’s being on the mat in 
some way exist in God. In particular, it must exist as the proposition 
that the cat is on the mat. For just as the concept catness is the correlate 
within an intellect of the universal form or pattern catness that exists 
in actual cats, the proposition that the cat is on the mat, considered as 
the content of a thought, is the correlate within an intellect of the 
state of affairs of the cat’s being on the mat. And just as the concept of 
anything that might exist would have to be in God’s intellect, so too 
must the propositions corresponding to any state of affairs that might

210
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
obtain exist as thoughts in the divine intellect, since these states of 
affairs can obtain only insofar as God causes them to.
Naturally, among the states of affairs that obtain are the state of 
affairs that the proposition that the cat is on the mat is a true propo­
sition, and the state of affairs that the proposition that unicorns exist 
is a false proposition. So, thoughts corresponding to these states of 
affairs will be among those in the divine intellect. That is to say, 
there is in the divine intellect the thought that it is true that the cat is 
on the mat, the thought that it is false that unicorns exist, and so forth. 
Furthermore, since everything that exists or might exist other than 
God, and every state of affairs that obtains or might obtain other 
than God’s existence, depends on God’s causal activity, all propo­
sitions about such things will be true or false only because God 
causes the world to be such that these propositions are either true or 
false. Again, he is like an author who comes up with a story in a sin­
gle, instantaneous flash of insight. Such an author can hardly be mis­
taken about whether a certain character exists in the story, or about 
whether such-and-such a situation involving the character occurs 
in the story. Nor could the author be mistaken at that instant about 
whether, at that instant, he has framed the story in just that way. 
Similarly, God can hardly be mistaken about whether he is causing 
such-and-such things to exist or such-and-such states of affairs to 
obtain, and thus can hardly be mistaken about whether such-and- 
such things really do exist or such-and-such states of affairs really 
do obtain.
O f course, the analogy is not perfect. A human author might go 
on to forget some of the details of the story he came up with. But 
that is because the human author exists in time, transitions from one 
cognitive state to another, knows what he knows in part by virtue of 
brain processes which can malfunction, and is otherwise subject to 
forces outside of his control which might cause him to forget. None 
of those things is true of God, who, as has been shown above, is eter­
nal, immutable, incorporeal, and omnipotent.
Now, on the standard philosophical account of knowledge, one 
knows some proposition p when (a) one thinks p is true, (b) p really 
is true, and (c) one thinks p is true as a result of some reliable process 
of thought formation. Now each of these conditions (or rather, keep­
ing in mind the doctrine of analogy, something analogous to each of

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
2 1 1
them) is true of God. Again, consider the proposition that the cat is 
on the mat. We have seen that there must be in the divine intellect the 
thought that it is true that the cat is on the mat. So, condition (a) obtains. 
And it really is true that the cat is on the mat, precisely because God 
is causing that to be the case. So, condition (b) obtains. Furthermore, 
there can be no more reliable way of determining whether some 
proposition p is true than being able to make it the case that it is true. 
(The author in our example certainly has a reliable way of finding out 
whether a certain character exists in his story, insofar as he is the one 
who decided to put the character in the story in the first place!) So, 
since the cat is on the mat only insofar as God himself causes it to be 
the case that the cat is on the mat, God certainly has a reliable way 
of “finding out” whether such a proposition is true. So, condition 
(c) obtains. So, God has knowledge.
Now, what is true of the proposition that the cat is on the mat is 
true also of every other proposition about what things exist or might 
exist, and what states of affairs obtain or might obtain. God knows all 
such propositions. Moreover, he can hardly have any less knowledge 
about himself than he has about things other than himself, any more 
than an author can know less about his own creative act of coming 
up with a story than he knows about the story itself. O f course, a 
human author might not know certain other things about himself, 
such as what is going on at the moment in the interior of his body. 
But that is because a human author is composed of parts; his intellect 
is a distinct thing from his digestive system or circulatory system or 
muscles or bones or what have you. Nothing like that is true of God, 
who is absolutely simple or noncomposite. His intellect just is his 
power, which just is his existence, and so forth. (More on simplicity 
in a moment.)
Now, if God has knowledge of all propositions about himself 
and everything else, then he has all knowledge. He is omniscient. 
We arrived at this result by beginning with the world as God’s 
effect and working backward to determine the nature of its cause, 
but, again, we can also begin with God himself and work forward 
to determine whether omniscience is among his attributes. That is 
essentially what the argument for omniscience developed in chapter 
3 did, insofar as it began with the thesis that God is an infinite intel­
lect and then argued that such an intellect must have all knowledge.

2 1 2
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
I also responded in that chapter to an objection to the very notion 
of omniscience raised by Patrick Grim.
There is more to be said, however, beginning with some remarks 
about the manner in which God knows the world. Recall that I 
emphasized that God can hardly be mistaken about the cat being on 
the mat, insofar as he is the cause of the cat’s being on the mat in the 
first place. I compared this to an author’s knowledge of the characters 
and events of the story he has come up with. Now, the way an author 
knows these characters and events is not by observing them. It is not 
a kind of perceptual knowledge. Rather, the author knows them by 
virtue of knowing himself, by virtue of knowing his own thoughts 
and intentions as author. And that is precisely the way in which God 
knows the world. His knowledge is not the result of a kind of obser­
vation of what happens as history unfolds. God is not, after all, in 
time, and thus he does not need to wait until something happens in 
order to know that it happens. Nor does he have perceptual organs 
by which he comes to know things, since he is incorporeal. Nor does 
he learn anything in any other way, since learning is a kind of change 
and God is immutable. As I said above, it is in a single, timeless act 
that God causes to exist everything that has been and will be. And it 
is in knowing himself as so acting that God knows everything that is, 
has been, and will be. His knowledge of the world is a consequence 
of his self-knowledge.48
Understanding this is important not only so as to avoid misun­
derstandings of God’s nature, but also so as to avoid misunderstand­
ings of the world’s nature. Since God knows the past, present, and 
future of the world all in a single act, it might seem that past, present, 
and future must themselves all in some sense exist at once. That is 
to say, this might seem to entail what is sometimes called a “ four- 
dimensionalist” view on which time is interpreted as a fourth, space­
like dimension.49 But that simply does not follow. It would follow if 
God’s knowledge of the world was a kind of observational knowl­
edge, for in that case if God knew the world in a single observa­
tional act, then past, present, and future would all have to be there
48 See Davies, Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion, pp. 194-97.
49 See Katherin A. Rogers, Anselm on Freedom (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 
p p .i58f

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
2 1 3
at once in order for God to observe them all at once. But again, that 
is simply not how God knows the world.50 Nor does anything Hke 
four-dimensionalism follow from the fact that God knows himself as 
cause of the world in a single timeless act. He knows, from outside 
time, that he causes, from outside time, a world in which such-and- 
such things exist and occur. But it is simply a fallacy to infer from that 
that the world that he thereby knows is itself outside time, a world 
in which so-called past, present, and future events and objects are all 
somehow co-present. That would be like inferring, from the fact that 
a motionless hunter knows in a single instant that he has fired a bullet 
from his rifle, the conclusion that the bullet itself must be motionless 
and that it somehow is present at every point in its journey from rifle 
to target all at once.
It is also sometimes claimed that God’s knowledge of the future is 
incompatible with our having free will.51 If God infallibly knows that 
I will go to work tomorrow, how could I possibly not go to work 
tomorrow? For if I don’t go to work tomorrow, that would make it 
the case that God had been wrong in thinking I would, and he can­
not be wrong. But if it is not possible that I not go to work tomor­
row, how can I freely choose whether or not to go to work tomorrow? 
Hence, God’s knowledge of what I will do entails (so the objection 
goes) that I have no free choice about what I do.
But the conclusion doesn’t follow. Suppose I somehow know that 
you are sitting in the next room— via observation, or some other per­
son’s testimony, or telepathy, or whatever. Obviously, my knowing 
this isn’t incompatible with your having freely decided to sit there. 
And this is true no matter how certain I am that you are really sitting 
there. By the same token, if I somehow know with certainty that you 
will he sitting there tomonow—because you promise me that you will 
be, or because I look into the future in a crystal ball— how would 
that be incompatible with your freely deciding to do so? If know­
ing that you carry out some action isn’t incompatible with your freely 
choosing to carry it out when the action is in the present, why would
50 See Brian J. Shanley, “Eternal Knowledge o f the Temporal in Aquinas” , American Catho­
lic Philosophical Quarterly 71 (1997): 197—224; and Kevin M . Staley, “ Omniscience, Time, and 
Eternity: Is Aquinas Inconsistent?” , Saint Anselm Journal 3 (2006): 9 -16 .
51 See Nelson Pike, “ Divine Omniscience and Voluntary Action” , Philosophical Review 74 
(1965): 27-46.

214
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
it be incompatible with your freely choosing to carry it out when the 
action is in the future? And if there would be no incompatibility when 
I am the one who knows about your future actions, why would there 
be when God is the one who knows it?
O f course, the critic might respond that unlike me, God is also the 
cause of the future’s existing, and not just someone who happens to 
know about it. And he is also the cause of the present’s existing. And 
as I have said, he knows everything—including the present and the 
future— precisely by virtue of being its cause. So, wouldn’t this be 
incompatible with my actions being freely chosen (indeed, with my 
present actions being freely chosen, and not merely my future actions)?
But once again, this conclusion doesn’t follow. Consider once 
again the analogy with the author of a story. Suppose it is a crime 
novel and that one of the characters carefully plots the murder of 
another, for financial gain. We would naturally say that he commits 
the murder of his own free will, and is therefore justly punished 
after being caught at the end of the novel. It would be silly to say: 
“Well, he didn’t really commit the murder of his own free will. For 
he committed it only because the author wrote the story that way.” 
The author’s writing the story the way he did is not inconsistent with 
the character’s having freely committed the murder. It’s not com­
parable to (say) some further character in the story hypnotizing the 
murderer and thereby getting him to commit the crime— something 
which would be inconsistent with the murder having been committed 
freely. If we got to a point in the book where such hypnotism was 
revealed, we would say “Ah, so it wasn’t an act of free will after all.” 
But we don’t say that when we reflect on the fact that the story had 
an author. It is perfectly coherent to say that the author wrote a story 
in which someone freely chooses to commit a murder.
Similarly, it is perfectly coherent to say that God causes a world 
to exist in which someone freely chooses to commit a murder, or to 
carry out some other act. God’s causal action is no more inconsistent 
with our having free will than the author’s action is inconsistent with 
his characters’ having free will. God’s action would be inconsistent 
with our having free will if he was comparable to the hypnotist, who 
is one character alongside the others and interferes with them so as to 
get them to do what they would not otherwise be doing. But God is 
not like that at all, any more than an author is a character alongside

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
215
the others in the novel, or any more than the author “interferes” 
with his characters so as to get them to do what they would not 
otherwise do. The author’s causal relation to the story is radically 
unlike the relations the characters in the story have to each other, 
and God’s causal relation to the world is radically unlike the relation 
we and other elements of the world have to each other. God’s action 
seems inconsistent with free will only when we fail to keep this 
in mind— to keep in mind that we have to think of talk about God’s 
knowledge and action in analogical rather than univocal terms.
The analogical use of terms is crucial to understanding God’s 
knowledge properly in another respect. I have spoken of various 
concepts and propositions existing in the divine intellect, but they 
cannot exist there in exactly the same sense in which they exist in 
our intellects. For in our intellects they exist as distinct thoughts, 
and there cannot be any such distinctions in God consistent with 
his simplicity. To a first approximation, we might think instead in 
terms of a conjunction of all propositions, and say that there is in the 
divine intellect something Hke a single thought with this one gigan­
tic conjunctive proposition as its content. But even that cannot be 
quite right, because this single conjunctive proposition will itself 
have component parts.
A better, though still imperfect, way to understand the nature of 
God’s knowledge would be to think in terms of analogies like the 
following. From a beam of white fight, various beams of colored fight 
can be derived by passing it through a prism. Though the colors are 
not separated out until the beam reaches the prism, they are still in 
the white fight in a unified way. From a lump of dough, cookies of 
various shapes can be derived by means of cookie cutters. Though 
the various cookies with their particular shapes are not separated out 
until the cutters are applied to the dough, they are still in the uncut 
dough virtually. Now, God is pure actuality, whereas each kind of 
created thing represents a different way in which actuality might be 
limited by potentiality. That is to say, each created thing is compara­
ble to one of the different specific colors that might be derived from the 
white fight that contains all of them, or is like one of the many cookie 
shapes which might be derived from the dough which contains all of 
them. God’s creation of the world is thus like the passing of white 
fight through a prism or the application of the cutters to the dough.

216
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
The prism draws out, from the color spectrum which is contained in 
a unified way in the white light, a particular beam of this color and a 
particular beam of that color; and the cutters draw out, from the 
variety of possible cookies contained in a unified way in the lump of 
dough, a cookie of this particular shape and a cookie of that particu­
lar shape. Similarly, creation involves drawing out, from the unlim­
ited actuaHty that is God, various limited ways of being actual. To be 
a stone or a tree or a dog is to be actual, but it is to be actual only as a 
stone or tree or dog rather than some other kind of actuality—-just as 
to be green is to be a color but to be that specific color rather than (say) 
red or any of the other colors of the spectrum, and to be a cookie of a 
round shape is to be round rather than being (say) square or any of the 
other shapes which might have been taken from the dough. (Again, 
these analogies are not perfect but only meant to be suggestive. For 
one thing, created things are not made out of God in the way cookies 
are made out of dough, since God, being devoid of potentiality, is 
not a kind of material which might take on different patterns.)
Now, just as if you knew the white fight perfectly, you would 
know all the colors which could be derived from it, and if you knew 
the lump of dough perfectly, you would know all the shapes which 
might be carved out of it, so too, perfectly to know that which is 
pure actuality would entail knowing all the various limited ways of 
being actual which might be derived from it. And that is how God 
knows all the various kinds of finitely actual things which exist or 
might exist— by virtue of perfectly knowing himself as that which 
is pure or unlimited actuality. That is not to say that his knowledge is 
exactly like that of someone who grasps the nature of white fight or of 
dough, but it is analogous to that. And even if the analogy is imperfect, 
that is, as I have said, only to be expected given how very far beyond 
its ordinary sphere of operation reason has to push itself when seeking 
ultimate explanations. (More on this below.)
Perfect goodness
In order to see that God must be perfectly good, we need first to 
understand what goodness and badness are. Many people these days 
suppose that judgments to the effect that something is good or bad 
are ultimately mere expressions of subjective preference. But it is not

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
217
difficult to show that that is not the case. Consider a Euclidean trian­
gle, the nature or essence of which is to be a closed plane figure with 
three straight sides. Anything with this essence must have a number 
of properties, such as having angles that add up to 180 degrees. These 
are, as we saw in chapter 3, objective facts that we discover rather 
than invent. Nevertheless, there are obviously triangles that fail to five 
up to this definition. A triangle drawn hastily on the cracked plastic 
seat of a moving bus might fail to be completely closed or to have 
perfectly straight sides, and thus its angles will add up to something 
other than 180 degrees. Even a triangle drawn slowly and carefully 
on paper with an art pen and a ruler will contain subtle flaws. Still, 
the latter will far more closely approximate the essence of triangular­
ity than the former will. It will, accordingly, be a better triangle than 
the former. We would naturally describe the latter as a good triangle 
and the former as a bad one. This judgment would be completely 
objective; it would be silly to suggest that we were merely expressing 
a personal preference for straightness or for angles that add up to 180 
degrees. The judgment simply follows from the objective facts about 
the nature of triangles.
Or consider a living thing and its characteristic attributes and oper­
ations, such as a tree and the way in which it sinks roots into the 
ground, draws in water and nutrients through them, grows leaves 
which carry out photosynthesis, and so forth. These are potentialities 
that the tree has by virtue of being a tree, and which it must actu­
alize in order to flourish as a tree. That is to say, these potentialities 
and the need to actualize them follow from the nature of essence of 
being a tree. A tree which, due to damage or disease, fails to sink 
deep roots or grow healthy leaves is to that extent a bad tree, while a 
tree which actualizes these potentials is to that extent good. Again, it 
would be silly to pretend that this judgment reflects merely a personal 
subjective preference for healthy trees. Rather, it is grounded in the 
objective facts about what it is to be a tree.
The sense of “ good” and “bad” operative here is the one that 
is operative when we speak of a good or bad specimen, a good or 
bad instance of a kind of thing. It has to do with a thing’s success 
or failure in living up to the standard inherent in the kind of thing 
it is. And this notion of goodness and badness applies to everything, 
since everything is a thing of a certain kind. Goodness and badness

2 I 8
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
can be defined objectively, then, in terms of the natures or essences 
of things.52 O f course, the examples given so far do not involve moral 
goodness or badness, since a badly drawn triangle is not morally 
blameworthy and a healthy tree is not morally praiseworthy. But 
distinctively moral goodness and badness can be understood as spe­
cial cases of these more general notions. Moral goodness and bad­
ness enter the picture with creatures capable offreely choosing to act 
in a way that either facilitates or frustrates the actualization of the 
potentials which, given their nature or essence, they need to realize 
in order to flourish. Human beings are rational animals and for that 
reason capable of such free action. Moral goodness or badness in 
human beings involves the deliberate choice either to act in a way 
that facilitates the actualization of the potentials we need to realize in 
order to flourish as human beings, or to act in a way that frustrates the 
realization of those potentials.53
Now, note that goodness involves being actual in a certain way—  
again, in a way that involves realizing what is implicit in the nature 
or essence of a thing. A triangle is good to the extent that its sides 
are actually straight, a tree is good to the extent that it actually sinks 
roots into the ground and carries out photosynthesis, and so forth. 
Badness, meanwhile, involves a failure to be actual in some way—  
again, in a way that involves failure to realize what is implicit in the 
nature or essence of a thing. A triangle is bad to the extent that its 
sides are not perfectly straight, a tree is bad to the extent that its roots 
are weak or it fails to carry out photosynthesis, and so on. Badness 
is therefore a privation— that is, the absence of something that a fully 
actualized specimen of a kind of thing would possess, given its nature. 
Lacking a fourth side is not a privation in a triangle, because a fully
52 For more detailed discussion, see Edward Feser, “ Being, the Good, and the Guise of 
the Good” , in Neo-Aristotelian Perspectives in Metaphysics, ed. Daniel D. Novotny and Lukas 
Novak (London: Routledge, 2014), pp. 8 4-10 3, reprinted in Feser, Neo-Scholastic Essays, 
pp. 297-320. See also Eleonore Stump and Norman Kretzmann, “ Being and Goodness” , in 
Being and Goodness: The Concept of the Good in Metaphysics and Philosophical Theology, ed. Scott 
MacDonald (Ithaca, N .Y .: Cornell University Press, 1991), pp. 9 8 -128 ; Philippa Foot, Natural 
Goodness (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2001), chap. 2; and David E. Alexander, Goodness, God, 
and Evil (London: Bloomsbury, 2012).
53 Obviously much more could be said, but ethics is not the subject matter of this book. For 
further discussion, see Edward Feser, Aquinas (Oxford: Oneworld Publications, 2009), chap. 5, 
and the articles on topics in moral philosophy in Feser, Neo-Scholastic Essays.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
219
actualized specimen of the kind of thing we call a triangle would not 
have four sides in the first place. But having a crooked or wavy side 
is a privation in a triangle, because a fully actualized specimen of the 
kind of thing we call a triangle would have straight sides. Lacking 
wings is not a privation in a tree, because a fully actualized specimen 
of the kind of thing we call a tree would not have wings in the first 
place. But lacking strong roots is a privation in a tree, because a fully 
actualized specimen of the kind of thing we call a tree would have 
strong roots.
Goodness and badness, then, are not on a metaphysical par. Good­
ness is primary, since it is to be understood in terms of the presence 
of some feature. Badness is derivative, since it amounts to nothing 
more than the absence of some feature, and in particular the absence 
of goodness of some kind or other. Goodness is a kind of actuality, and 
badness a kind of unrealized potentiality. To be bad in some respect 
is, ultimately, to lack something rather than to have something, just 
as to be blind is simply to lack sight rather than to have some posi­
tive feature.
This “privation” account of badness, standard in classical philos­
ophy (whether Platonic, Aristotelian, or Scholastic), is rejected by 
many contemporary philosophers, but not for reasons that are ulti­
mately any good.54 For example, it is sometimes alleged that the pri­
vation account, since it regards all badness as the absence of good, 
thereby denies the reality of evil. But that is simply not the case. To 
point out that blindness is the absence of sight is not to deny the real­
ity of blindness. Similarly, to claim that evil, as a kind of badness, is 
the absence of good is not to deny the reality of evil. It is merely to 
give an account of the nature of that reality, just as pointing out that 
blindness involves a failure of the eyes, the optic nerves, or the Hke 
properly to function is to give an account of the nature of blindness.55
It is also sometimes claimed that pain is bad, but is not a kind 
of privation, not the absence of something but precisely the presence of 
something. But there are several problems with this objection.56
54See Alexander, Goodness, God, and Evil, pp. 9 5 -110 .
55 See Brian Davies, The Reality of God and the Problem of Evil (London: Continuum, 2006), 
pp. 147-48.
56 See Alexander, Goodness, God, and Evil, pp. 100—8.

2 2 0
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
First of all, it is not correct to say without qualification that pain is 
bad. For pain serves the functions of indicating to an organism that 
something is wrong, that there is danger that it needs to avoid, and 
so forth. In that sense, pain can sometimes be good, and its absence 
bad. For example, it would be bad for an organism if it did not feel 
pain when making contact with something liable to bum it, because 
in that case the organism would not act promptly so as to get itself 
away from that thing. Furthermore, there are cases where pain is 
not even experienced as bad. For example, the pain one feels after 
a strenuous workout can be experienced as satisfying. What is bad 
is not the pain itself, then, but something associated with it— for 
example, the bodily dysfunction or damage of which the pain is an 
indicator, or the loss of tranquility of mind that is its consequence. 
(Indeed, there is neurological evidence of this. Certain kinds of 
damage to the brain can result in a strange condition known as pain 
asymbolia, in which pain is experienced without the unpleasantness 
usually associated with it.)
Then there is the objection that certain kinds of moral evil 
cannot be analyzed in terms of privation. Murder, the privation 
account holds, involves the failure to respect the duty not to kill 
an innocent person. But this, it has been objected, is not the end 
of the story, since we must attribute to the murderer the intention 
unjustifiably to take an innocent person’s life, and his having that 
intention is a positive fact about him rather than a privation. And 
even if we analyze the unjustifiability of the killing in terms of some 
privation, we will still have to make reference to some other posi­
tive features of the murderer, such as the presence of certain beliefs 
and desires.57
But as David Alexander points out, this objection rests on a mis­
understanding of the privation theory.58 The theory does not claim 
that an analysis of a morally evil act will make no reference to any 
positive features. It says only that the badness of the act, specifically, 
will be analyzable in terms of privation, even if other aspects of the 
act are positive features rather than privations. Hence, a murderer
57 Todd C . Calder, “ Is the Privation Theory of Evil Dead?” , American Philosophical Quarterly 
44 (2007): 3 7 1-8 1.
58 Alexander, Goodness, God, and Evil, pp. 109—10.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
221
will indeed have certain beliefs and desires, and to have a belief or 
desire is per se really to have something rather than to lack something. 
The belief or desire may in itself even be good. For example, if the 
murder is motivated by the desire to acquire some money, that desire 
considered hy itself is good. What is bad is the absence of an intention 
to seek money only in a way consistent with respect for the rights of 
the innocent.
But isn’t sadism an example of moral evil which cannot be ana­
lyzed in terms of privation? For a sadistic killer does not merely fail 
to respect the rights of the innocent; he positively takes pleasure 
in inflicting harm on them. And isn’t this precisely the presence of 
something (namely, sadistic desire) rather than the absence of some­
thing? But sadistic desire is analyzable as desire that is misdirected, 
directed toward an end contrary to the concern for others which we 
need to cultivate in order to flourish as social animals. It involves a 
psychological deformity or defect, just as blindness involves a phys­
iological deformity or defect. O f course, fully to justify this analysis 
would require an excursus into ethics which is beyond the scope of 
this book. But it suffices for present purposes to show that sadism is 
no more resistant to a privation analysis than any other kind of bad­
ness or evil.
So, the objections to the privation account all fail.59 And so we 
have, again, an account on which to be good is to be actual in some 
way, whereas to be bad is to jail to actualize some potential. Now, 
we have seen that God is purely actual, with no potentiaHty. But if 
actuaHty corresponds to goodness and badness to unrealized potenti­
aHty, then we have to attribute to God pure goodness and the utter 
absence in him of any sort of badness or evil. So to argue is to draw 
out the impHcations of God’s nature as pure actuaHty taken together 
with the account of goodness we have been sketching, but we can 
arrive at a similar result by reasoning instead from what is true of the 
world to what must be true of its cause. For given the principle of 
proportionate causality, whatever good there is or could be in the 
world must in some way be in God. But if something is the source of
59 
For more on the nature o f privation, see David S. Oderberg, “ The Metaphysics of Pri­
vation” , in New Scholasticism Meets Analytic Philosophy, ed. Rafael Hüntelmann and Johannes 
Hattier (Heusenstamm: Editiones Scholasticae, 2014), pp. 63-88.

2 2 2
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
all possible goodness, then there is an obvious sense in which it is all 
good.
But if, as the principle of proportionate causality holds, whatever 
is in an effect must in some way be in its cause, wouldn’t it follow 
that all badness or evil too must be in God? That does not follow. 
The reason is that, as we have seen, badness of any sort is the absence 
of something, rather than a positive reality in its own right. Hence, 
while it is perfectly true to say that there is evil in the world, what 
this amounts to on analysis is simply that certain good things are 
absent from the world. Thus, making a world with evil in it is not 
a matter of making two kinds of thing, good things and bad things. 
Rather, it is only a matter of making good things, but also refraining 
from making some of the good things that could have been there. 
Suppose I begin to draw a triangle on a piece of paper, but after 
drawing two sides and starting to draw the third, I stop before the 
side is finished. The triangle, being defective, manifests a certain 
kind of badness. But the badness is not some extra thing I have put 
into it after drawing the triangle. Rather, the badness amounts to 
the absence of something I refrained from putting there. It is in 
that sense that God creates a world with evil in it. Evil is not some 
thing that God has put into the world alongside all the good things 
he has put there. Rather, evil is the absence of certain good things he 
refrained from putting there. Now, what the principle of propor­
tionate causality entails is that whatever things, whatever positive fea­
tures, are in an effect must in some way be in its total cause. But 
since that is not the sort of thing evil is, the principle does not entail 
that evil must in any way be in God.
Yet wouldn’t God’s failure to create all the good he could have 
created constitute a defect in him? No. Would my failure to finish 
drawing the triangle in my example indicate the presence of a defect 
in me? Not at all, since I might have a very good reason for not fin­
ishing it. For example, it may have occurred to me that there was no 
more effective way to make a certain philosophical point during the 
course of a lecture than by drawing an incomplete triangle and then 
going on to use it as an example. The good effect of generating phil­
osophical understanding in my listeners would outweigh the trivial 
instance of badness represented by the imperfect triangle. Considered 
in isolation, the incomplete triangle is bad, but the overall situation

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
223
consisting of the triangle together with the lecture, the audience 
members’ coming to understand a certain philosophical point, and 
so forth is good, and it is a good that would not have been possible 
without allowing into it this element of badness.
Similarly, God’s refraining from causing all the particular good 
things he could have caused is consistent with his being perfectly 
good insofar as the overall creation is good in ways it could not have 
been had certain localized instances of badness not been permitted 
to exist. To take just one example, courage could not exist unless 
people faced real danger of suffering harm and yet did the right thing 
anyway. But courage is good and suffering harm bad. Hence, a world 
with that particular good in it could not exist unless that particular 
sort of badness also existed in it. Hence, just as even God cannot 
cause a round square to exist, neither can he cause a world to exist in 
which there is courage but where no one faces any real danger of suf­
fering harm.60 Hence, God’s being perfectly good is consistent with 
the world he causes having badness in it as well as goodness. (More 
on this in the next chapter, when we get to the problem of evil.)
Will
Again, among the characteristic operations of a tree are the sinking 
of roots into the soil and the carrying out of photosynthesis. The 
tree of its nature tends or inclines toward these activities and will 
carry them out unless somehow prevented (by disease or damage, 
say). O f course, it does not pursue these activities consciously. The 
tending or inclination is completely unconscious and involves no 
mental life at all. Animals also have natural tendencies or inclina­
tions. A dog, for example, will naturally seek out food, water, and 
mating opportunities. Since animals are sentient, their pursuit of 
such activities is conscious. They possess what in the traditional 
jargon would be called sensory appetite. Then there are rational crea­
tures, like human beings. Like other animals, we can pursue our
60 
W ould it follow from this that there is no courage in Heaven, since the blessed in 
Heaven are safe from any danger? N o, because while still on earth the blessed were in dan­
ger and thereby developed the courage that they retain in Heaven. They don’t lose this 
virtue any more than an eighty-year-old war veteran loses the courage he acquired in battle 
decades earlier.

224
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
various characteristic activities consciously, but unlike other ani­
mals, we have intellects and can conceptualize the objects of such 
pursuit. We tend or incline toward something because we rationally 
apprehend it as worth pursuing, or incline away from something 
because we rationally apprehend it as not worth pursuing. We pos­
sess rational appetite or will.
Now, we have seen that there is in God something analogous 
to what we call intellect in us. And there must, accordingly, also 
be something in God analogous to what we call will in us. For one 
thing, just as a tree or a dog tends or inclines toward the realization of 
its nature (in a nonrational way), and a human being tends or inclines 
toward the realization of its nature (in a rational way), so too must 
God tend or incline toward the realization of his nature (in a rational 
way). To be sure, unlike these other things, God does not have to 
do anything to realize his nature, since he is always and already fully 
actual. But in this he is more Uke something which has completed the 
realization of its nature than he is like something which never tended 
or inclined toward such realization in the first place. We might say 
that there is in him something Hke the limit case of rational appetite.61 
For another thing, God apprehends all the things that could exist, and 
causes some of those things actually to exist while refraining from caus­
ing others of them to exist. Hence, there must exist in him something 
analogous to willing the former and not willing the latter.
God’s will must also be free. For one thing (and as we have seen), 
everything other than God depends on God for its existence and 
operation at every instant at which it exists or acts. So, there cannot 
be anything external to God which somehow compels him to act as he 
does. For another thing (and as we have also seen), all possibilities are 
grounded in the divine intellect, and what actually exists preexisted 
in God as an idea or concept of something which he might create.
61 
The idea that a divine attribute can be understood as a limit case is developed by Barry 
Miller in A  Most Unlikely God. As Miller notes (pp. 7-10 ), a limit case is not the same thing as 
a limit simpliciter, which differs only in degree from that o f which it is a limit. The speed of 
light is a limit simpliciter, which differs in degree from lower speeds. But a speed o f o km /s 
is not a lowest speed, because it is not a speed at all. It differs absolutely and not merely in 
degree from the speeds o f which it is a limit case. Nevertheless, the ways in which the differ­
ent degrees o f speed are ordered point to this limit case. Similarly, we might think o f the divine 
will as the limit case to which the appetites we see in plants, animals, and human beings point.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
225
For example, the concept of a lion and the concept of a unicorn 
both exist in the divine intellect, and God willed to create things that 
fall under the former concept but did not will to create things 
that fall under the latter concept. Now, there is nothing in the con­
cept of a Hon that makes it necessary that lions exist, nor is there 
anything in the concept of a unicorn that makes it necessary that uni­
corns do not exist. Nor is there anything about any other concept that 
necessitates that the former exist and the latter do not. Before cre­
ation, then, a world with unicorns in it was as possible as a world with 
Hons in it. Given his knowledge of the possible thing he might create, 
God could have created either one. So, there was nothing internal 
to him which compeHed him to create Hons and not unicorns. But if 
there is nothing either external to God or internal to him compeHing 
him to act as he does, then his wiU is free.62
It is sometimes claimed that God’s wiH could not be free given the 
doctrine of divine simpHcity. For to act freely entails (so the objection 
goes) that one has the potential to act one way rather than the other, 
and that one goes on to actuaHze one of these potentials rather than 
the other. But according to the doctrine of divine simpHcity, God is 
purely actual and lacks any potentiaHty. Hence, he must not be free. 
Or, if he is free, he must after aH have potentiaHties as weH as actuali­
ties and therefore not be absolutely simple or noncomposite.63
However, it is simply not the case that free action as such entails 
the having and actualization of potentials. It is true that when we 
freely wiU to do one thing rather than another, we actuaHze various 
potentials (for example, the potential to move a Hmb in this direction 
rather than that one). But to conclude that aH free action as such must 
involve the actuaHzation of potentials would be to commit a faHacy of
62 See Brian Davies, “ Simplicity” , in Taliaferro and Meister, Cambridge Companion to Chris­
tian Philosophical Theology, pp. 42-44.
63 See Norman Kretzmann, The Metaphysics of Theism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997), 
pp. 2 1 3 -1 7 , and Jay Wesley Richards, The Untamed God (Downers Grove, 111.: InterVarsity 
Press, 2003), pp. 234-40. Kretzmann and Richards both regard divine simplicity and divine 
freedom as in tension, but they resolve the tension in different ways. Kretzmann does so 
by maintaining that God is simple or noncomposite in a strong sense and free only in some 
weaker sense. Richards does so by maintaining that God is free in a strong sense and simple 
or noncomposite only in some weaker sense. See Dolezal’s comparison of their positions in 
James E. Dolezal, God without Parts: Divine Simplicity and the Metaphysics of God’s Absoluteness 
(Eugene, Ore.: Pickwick Publications, 2011), pp. 19 1-9 7 .

226
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
accident, just as (as we saw above) to suppose that all action involves 
changeability involves a fallacy of accident.
To be sure, it is difficult to get one’s mind around the idea of that 
which wills freely but which lacks potentialities, just as it is difficult 
to get one’s mind around the idea of that which acts but does not 
change. As Brian Davies notes, it is easier to understand the assertion 
that God’s will is free as a claim of negative theology— to the effect that 
God is not compelled to act by anything external or internal to him—  
than as a claim with positive content.64 But all of this is only to be 
expected given that, as I have emphasized already, when we arrive 
at the notion of an uncaused cause of all things we are moving as far 
beyond the world of everyday experience as is possible. We know, 
from the considerations adduced above, that God must be both abso­
lutely simple and free, and we know also that we should expect that 
his nature will be extremely difficult for us to grasp. That the freedom 
of the divine will is mysterious to us is hardly surprising, and hardly by 
itself a serious objection to the claim that God is both simple and free. 
(And after all, the freedom of our wills is famously mysterious too.)
Finally, it might be thought that there are reasons having nothing 
to do with mystery or with divine simpHcity for denying that the 
divine will is free. Leibniz famously held that, given his omnipotence, 
omniscience, and perfect goodness, God must create the best of all 
possible worlds. For him to do anything else would seem to entail 
either that he could not create the best possible world (which would 
conflict with his being omnipotent), or that he did not know what 
the best world would be (which would conflict with his being omni­
scient), or that he did not will to create the best world (which would 
conflict with his perfect goodness). Yet if he could not have done 
other than to create the best possible world, would that not entail that 
he was not free not to do so?65
But among the assumptions made by this argument are (a) that one 
is always obHged to bring about the best state of affairs that one can, 
and (b) that there is such a thing as the best possible world.66 And
64Davies, “ Simplicity” , p. 44.
65 For a recent presentation o f this objection to divine freedom, see William L. R ow e, Can 
God Be Free? (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2004).
66 See Gerard J. Hughes, The Nature of God (London: Routledge, 1995), p. 173.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
227
neither assumption is correct. Suppose, for the sake of argument, that 
a world with trees in it is a better world than a world that has only 
inorganic objects like stones and water. Is God obliged to create the 
former world rather than the latter? Why? Who will suffer a harm 
or injustice if he refrains from doing so? He cannot harm himself by 
so refraining. He is already perfectly good, fully actual, and so forth. 
There is nothing he needs, nothing he has to do, in order to flourish 
as the kind of thing he is. Hence, he need not create any world at 
all, let alone a world with trees in it. Would he somehow harm the 
trees themselves by not creating them? But how can you harm some­
thing that does not even exist? To be sure, if he created trees without 
also creating the things trees need in order to flourish— water, sun­
shine, and so forth— then he might be said to harm them. But that is 
because they would in that case exist. If he refrains from creating them 
at all, he does not thereby wrong them, whether or not he goes on 
to create water, sunshine, and so forth, because what does not exist 
in the first place cannot be wronged.67
Nor is there such a thing as the best possible world in any case.68 
Again, suppose a world with trees is better than a world without. A 
forest of trees would in that case surely be better than a single tree, 
and a world with multiple forests better than a world with merely one 
forest. But there is no upper limit to the number of forests that might 
exist, so that for any possible world with x forests in it, there will be a 
possible world with x + i forests that is thereby even better. Hence, 
there is no such thing as a best possible world, and thus God cannot 
be obliged to create such a world, any more than he can be obliged 
to create a round square.
An objection that has been raised against the claim that there is no 
such thing as a best possible world is that it conflicts with the idea 
that God is the most perfect being possible.69 Suppose God creates 
a world with one of the infinitely many degrees of goodness that a 
world might possibly have. For example, suppose God creates a world 
with x forests in it. Then it will be possible for there to be a still more 
perfect being— namely, one which creates a world with x + i forests.
67See Robert Adams, “ Must God Create the Best?” , Philosophical Review Si (1972): 3 17 -3 2 .
68See Aquinas, Summa Theologiae I.25.6.
69R ow e, Can God be Free?, pp. n o —11.

228
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
And a being which creates a world with x + 2 forests will be more 
perfect still, and so on ad infinitum. But then we cannot say that God 
is the most perfect being; or to be more precise, we cannot say that 
there is a perfect being at all, so that (if something must be perfect in 
order to be God) we also cannot say that there is a God.
But this objection presupposes that God’s perfection depends 
on what he does. And that is simply not the case. God’s perfec­
tion follows from what he is. In particular, it follows from his pure 
actuality and everything that that entails. He thus has it whatever 
he creates, or indeed whether he creates anything at all—just as a 
perfect diamond is a perfect diamond whether it cuts glass that is 
an eighth of an inch thick or glass that is a quarter of an inch thick, 
or indeed whether it ever cuts any glass at all. O f course, given that 
agere sequitur esse, we would expect that a perfect being would have 
the capacity to create any of the infinite number of possible worlds. 
But that doesn’t entail that it must in fact exercise that capacity in 
any particular way, or exercise it at all—just as a diamond will have 
the capacity to cut a large range of kinds of glass whether or not 
it cuts this particular kind of glass or that, or whether it actually ever 
cuts any glass at all. So, contrary to the objection under consider­
ation, whether God creates a world with x forests in it, or x + 1, or 
any other number of forests, is completely irrelevant to whether he 
is the most perfect possible being.
Love
It is sometimes claimed that if God is immutable, then he cannot 
be said to love his creation. For love (so the argument goes) entails 
the capacity to be affected by the beloved. Think of the way a parent 
becomes worried when a child is in distress, or a romantic lover is 
unable to stop thinking about the object of his affection. Now, to 
be affected in such ways is to be changed. Therefore (the argument 
concludes) if God is immutable, then he does not love his creatures.
But once again, what we have here is an argument that commits 
a fallacy of accident. It is true that when we love something, we tend 
also to be affected or changed by it in ways like the ones described. 
But it doesn’t follow that love as such entails changeability. For what 
is essential to love is that the lover will what is good for the beloved.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
229
That is why we regard love as superficial if it merely involves feelings 
which are generated by the presence or thought of the beloved, 
but which wax and wane. That the lover wills what is good for the 
beloved even at those times in which he is not feeling particularly 
affectionate is what makes his love a serious one. This is also why 
there is such a thing as “ tough love” , and love for one’s enemies. 
When one has to do something to the beloved, for his own good, 
that one’s feelings of affection would incline one not to do, or 
when one has to do some good for a person that one intensely 
dislikes, the will to do these things suffices to make the acts loving 
despite their conflict with one’s feelings. Again, love is essentially 
a matter of one’s will, which is active, rather than one’s emotions, 
which are passive.
Now, as we have seen, there is will in God, and his will is directed 
toward the creation of the world. We have also seen that to be good 
is to be actual in some way. But to create things is to actuaHze them, 
and thus to bring about all the goodness that follows from that actu­
aHty. For example, to create trees entails wiHing that trees exist, and 
thus wiHing that what is good for trees— their having roots that take 
in water and nutrients, their carrying out photosynthesis, and so 
forth— also exists. In that sense, that God creates things entails that he 
loves them. So, we must attribute love to God.7°
Incomprehensibility
Can we comprehend God? In a loose sense, we certainly can, and the 
arguments of this chapter and the eariier chapters show that we can. 
The first five chapters set out arguments for the existence of God, and 
the present chapter (along with the eariier chapters, in less detail) set 
out arguments to the effect that God must have various attributes. To 
understand such arguments and to see that they are correct just is 
to comprehend God, at least to some extent.
O f course, much of what we know of God’s nature is of a negative 
or apophatic sort. We know that he is not composite, not changeable, 
not material, and not in time or space. But that is real knowledge, and 70
70See Aquinas, Summa Theologiae I.20. For a recent book-length treatment, see Michael 
J. Dodds, The Unchanging God of Love, 2nd ed. (Washington, D .C .: Catholic University of 
America Press, 2008).

230
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
to have it really is to understand at least something of God’s nature. 
We have also seen that the terms we use to name God’s positive attri­
butes have to be understood analogically rather than univocally. But 
that too gives us real knowledge. The analogical language in question 
is not metaphorical but literal, and such analogical usage occurs in 
domains of knowledge other than theology.
In particular, the analogy of attribution and the analogy of proper 
proportionaHty give us ways to understand positive divine attributes 
Hke power, knowledge, goodness, wiH, and love. The analogy of 
attribution gives us at least a first approximation to understanding 
such attributes as omnipotence, given that, as we have seen, aH things 
other than God have whatever causal power they have only insofar 
as they derive it from God as their cause. When we say that God 
has power and that the sun has power (e.g., to melt ice), God is the 
“primary analogate” of such a predication insofar as he just is pure 
underived causal power, whereas the sun and other created things 
are “ secondary analogates” insofar as their causal power is dependent 
at every instant upon God. Other divine attributes (such as God’s 
goodness) can similarly be understood in terms of the ways in which 
we can predicate certain features of created things only insofar as they 
derive those features from a divine cause.
The analogy of proper proportionaHty provides a further means of 
grasping the positive attributes of God. RecaH that, despite the vast 
differences between the eyes and the inteHect, we can nevertheless 
speak both of seeing a tree and of seeing that the Pythagorean theorem is 
true because the inteHect is to the Pythagorean theorem as the eyes are 
to a tree. There is a “proportional simüarity” between the relation of 
the eyes to the tree and the relation of the inteHect to the theorem. 
SimHarly, we can speak of the goodness of a healthy specimen of a 
tree, the goodness of a moraUy virtuous human being, and the good­
ness of an angel Hke Saint Michael, because a tree is to its goodness as 
a human being is to his goodness as an angel is to his goodness. This 
is so even though the goodness involved in each case is very different. 
The goodness of a tree is realized graduaHy over time, via uncon­
scious natural growth processes. The goodness of a virtuous human 
being is also realized graduaHy over time, but as the result of deliber­
ate choices, sometimes made in the face of disordered bodily desires 
(such as excessive desire for alcohol). The goodness of an angel is also

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
2 3 1
the result of deliberate choice, but not over time and not in the face 
of contrary bodily desires.71
Now, by the same token, God is to his goodness as an angel is 
to his goodness, a human being to his goodness, and a tree to its 
goodness, even though God’s goodness is even more radically dif­
ferent. Unlike a good angel, who might have chosen evil instead, 
God cannot possibly not be good, since he is pure actuality with no 
unrealized potentiality at all. If the goodness of an angel is more 
perfect than that of a human being (since, lacking bodily desires 
even of a well-ordered sort, there is less that might “ go wrong” in 
the case of an angel), the goodness of God is more perfect still. We 
might think of it as the limit case of goodness.72 And God’s knowl­
edge, will, and so forth can in like manner be understood in terms 
of proportional similarity.
So, insofar as the position we have arrived at is rationalist as opposed 
to fideist, and by no means amounts to a purely negative theology, it 
clearly holds that we can, at least in a loose sense, comprehend God. 
But having said that, the position we have arrived at also implies that 
this can be true only in a loose sense. For it also entails that in the strict­
est sense, we cannot possibly comprehend God.73 Divine simpHcity 
guarantees that. Consider that when we come deeply to understand 
some material object or system, we do so in part by learning what 
components it has and how they are arranged. But we cannot do that 
in the case of God, since he is absolutely simple or noncomposite. 
Even with immaterial things, we understand them in terms of the 
genus they fall under and the specific difference that sets them off 
from other species in the same genus. But that too is impossible in the 
case of God, since there is in him no distinction to be made between 
genus and specific difference. In general, we comprehend things in 
the fullest sense when we are able to break them down into their 
parts and see how those parts are put together, and this method is 
inapplicable to that which is noncomposite. You might say that God
71 Let the skeptical reader note that whether angels actually exist is irrelevant to the present 
point, which is merely that if there is a rational but incorporeal sort o f creature intermediate 
between human beings and God, then it would provide a further instance o f something hav­
ing goodness in an analogous sense.
72 See the discussion o f Barry Miller’s notion o f a limit case in n. 61, p. 224, above.
73 See Aquinas, Summa theologiae 1.12.7.

232
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
is hard to understand precisely because he is simple. (That sounds par­
adoxical, but it is not, because by “simple” here I don’t mean “ easy 
to understand” but rather “ not composed of parts” .)
This is why, though the doctrine of analogy gives us a grip on the 
language we use to talk about God, the grip is somewhat tenuous. 
As we strip away from our conception of God all the limitations 
associated with creaturely goodness, knowledge, power, and so forth, 
the positive content of our predications about God thins out—by no 
means entirely, but enough that even a “rationalist” theology of the 
sort defended in this book leaves God’s nature mysterious.
This is by no means a resort to obscurantism. On the contrary, it 
is precisely what we should expect of any attempt at ultimate expla­
nation. As noted above, it is difficult to grasp what it can mean for 
something to exhibit properties both of waves and of particles, or 
for space itself (as opposed to the things that occupy space) to be 
curved. And yet physics tells us that there are such entities. To any­
one who is skeptical of such notions, the physicist can righdy respond 
that we can hardly be surprised if we end up saying very odd things 
when we investigate the microstructure of material reality or the large 
scale structure of time and space. For such investigation takes us very 
far from the everyday world of our experience, in which the lan­
guage we use has its origin and its natural home. In speaking of such 
odd entities, the physicist is not resorting to obscurantism, but rather 
merely following the evidence and rational argumentation based on it 
where they lead. Now, exactly the same thing is true of natural theol­
ogy of the kind defended in this book. Indeed, the arguments we have 
been examining take us to a level of reality deeper than those investi­
gated by physics, indeed the deepest possible level of reality. And it is 
the arguments themselves which tell us that we cannot have anything 
more than a somewhat feeble grasp of the nature of that reality.
God and the world
Conservation and concurrence
The Aristotelian, Neo-Platonic, Thomistic, and rationalist arguments 
for the existence of God defended in previous chapters all show that 
nothing that is distinct from God could continue in existence even

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
233
for an instant if God were not sustaining it in being. They thereby 
establish what is known as the doctrine of divine conservation, according 
to which the world would be instantly annihilated in the absence of 
divine causation. Creation is not a onetime event that occurred at 
some distant point in the past. It is occurring at every moment.
These arguments also thereby answer the rival thesis of “ existential 
inertia” , according to which at least some of the things that make 
up the world will, once they exist, tend to continue in existence on 
their own at least until something positively acts to destroy them.74 If 
something has this kind of “ existential inertia” , it is claimed, then it 
need not be conserved in being by God. One problem with this thesis 
is that its proponents never explain exactly what it is about a material 
object or any other contingent thing that could give it this remark­
able feature. It is merely suggested, without argument, that things 
might have “ existential inertia” , as if this were no less plausible than 
the claim that they are conserved in being by God. Another problem 
with the thesis is that no material thing, nor any other contingent 
thing, possibly could have such a feature. The reason is that, as we have 
seen, all such things are composite, and in particular are mixtures of 
actuality and potentiaHty and of essence and existence, and anything 
that is composite in such ways requires a sustaining cause. Anyone 
who claims otherwise has the burden of answering those arguments 
of the previous chapters. Merely suggesting that things might have 
“ existential inertia” is not to answer those arguments but simply to 
ignore the arguments.75
74 See John Beaudoin, “ The W orld’s Continuance: Divine Conservation or Existential 
Inertia?” , International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 61 (2007): 83-98; Mortimer Adler, How 
to Think about God (N ew  York: Collier/Macmillan, 1980), esp. chap. 13; and Bede Rundle, 
Why There Is Something Rather Than Nothing (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2004), pp. 93, 96-97. 
I respond to Beaudoin’s, Adler’s, and Rundle’s arguments at length in my article “ Existen­
tial Inertia and the Five W ays” , American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 85 (2011): 237-6 7, 
reprinted in Feser, Neo-Scholastic Essays, pp. 8 4 -117 .
75 It also simply ignores the arguments merely to suggest, as atheists sometimes do, that 
even if there must be a necessary being, it might be the world rather than God. Nothing that 
is a mixture o f actuaHty and potentiaHty, or has an essence distinct from its existence, or is 
composite in any way, can be necessary. So, since the world is all o f these things, it cannot be 
a necessary being. Or, as Aquinas argues in his Third W ay, even if something other than God 
did have necessity in some sense, it would nevertheless be only a derived sort o f necessity that 
presupposes God as its source. See Feser, Aquinas, pp. 90-99, and Feser, “ Existential Inertia 
and the Five W ays” .

234
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Now, though material things are at every moment dependent 
for their existence on God, they are distinct from God. This follows 
from the fact that they are composite whereas God is simple, are mix­
tures of actuality and potentiality whereas God is pure actuality, have 
essences distinct from their existence whereas God just is subsistent 
existence, and are contingent whereas God is necessary. The argu­
ments of this book thus rule out a pantheist conception of God, which 
would identify him with the world. (They also rule out a panentheist 
conception of God, on which God is not identical with the world but 
is still present in the world in such a way that he is changed by it. As I 
argued above, given that God is pure actuaHty and absolutely simple, 
he must be immutable or unchanging.)
Now, these two theses— that things are dependent for their exis­
tence on God but are distinct from God—when conjoined with 
the principle agere sequitur esse, yield a conception of divine causality 
known as the doctrine of divine concurrence. This “ concurrentist” posi­
tion is perhaps most easily understood by comparison with two rival 
views known as occasionalism and mere conservationism.76 Occasionalism 
holds that nothing in the created world has any causal efficacy at all, 
and that only God ever really causes anything to happen. For exam­
ple, when you leave a glass of iced tea outside and the ice cubes melt 
in the sun, it is not the sun that causes the ice to melt, according to 
occasionalism. Rather, it is God who causes them to melt. That he 
does so on the occasion that the sun is out is what makes it falsely 
seem that the sun is what is melting the ice. Similarly, it is not the cue 
ball which causes the eight ball to go into the comer pocket. Rather, 
it is God who causes the eight ball to go into the corner pocket on 
the occasion when the cue ball makes contact with it. And so on. 
The first cause, on this view, is the only cause, and nothing else has 
even any secondary or derivative causal power. Mere conservation­
ism, meanwhile, holds that although God keeps things in existence,
76 
For illuminating discussion o f these three approaches to understanding divine causality, 
see Alfred J. Freddoso’s articles “ Medieval Aristotelianism and the Case against Secondary 
Causation in Nature” , in Divine and Human Action: Essays in the Metaphysics of Theism, ed. 
Thomas V . Morris (Ithaca, N .Y .: Cornell University Press, 1988), pp. 74—118 ; “ God’s Gen­
eral Concurrence with Secondary Causes: W hy Conservation is N ot Enough” , Philosophical 
Perspectives 5 (1991): 553-8 5; and “ God’s General Concurrence with Secondary Causes: Pit- 
falls and Prospects” , American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 67 (1994): 13 1-5 6 .

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
235
they have their causal efficacy independently of him. God keeps the 
sun in existence, but the sun melts the ice cubes independently of 
God; God keeps the cue ball in existence, but the cue ball causes the 
eight ball to move independently of God; and so forth.
Concurrentism rejects these two views and takes a middle-ground 
position between them. Against occasionalism, it maintains that the 
sun, the cue ball, and all other created things have genuine causal 
power. Against mere conservationism, it maintains that created things 
nevertheless cannot exercise this causal power independently of God. 
For neither of these extreme positions can be correct given what has 
been argued above.
Consider first why occasionalism cannot be correct.77 Since agere 
sequitur esse—what a thing does necessarily reflects what it is— if some­
thing could not truly do anything, if it had no causal efficacy at all, 
then it would not truly exist. Occasionalism would thus entail that 
God alone truly exists, since only he truly does anything. And this 
cannot be right. For one thing, we know that things other than God 
do exist— tables, chairs, rocks, trees, and so on. Even if you were 
seriously to entertain the possibility that those things do not really 
exist after all but were somehow mere hallucinations you were hav­
ing, you would still know that you exist. And you are not identical 
to God. After all, the very fact that you are thinking through these 
various possibilities entails that you are changeable— you move from 
one thought to the next to the next— whereas God is immutable. 
The fact that you would not be certain whether tables, chairs, and so 
forth exist would show that you are not omniscient, whereas God is 
omniscient. The fact that you lack power in various ways— for exam­
ple, you could not make yourself stop experiencing tables, chairs, and 
so forth, even if you convinced yourself that they are not real— shows 
that you are not omnipotent, whereas God is omnipotent. And so 
forth. So, you know that at least one thing other than God exists, 
which would not be true if occasionalism were true.78
77 See Aquinas, Summa Contra Gentiles III.69.
78 This is, incidentally, w hy it is no use for someone to try to defend pantheism by claiming 
that the world of our experience is illusory. The idea would be that if the change, multiplicity, 
and contingency o f the world are illusions, then there would be no obstacle to identifying 
the world with the immutable, simple, and necessary God. The problem is that there would 
still in that case have to be someone or something that has these illusions, and that person or

236
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
For another thing, even if you could coherently deny the exis­
tence of yourself along with everything else, occasionalism would still 
leave us with an incoherent position in another way. For we arrived 
at the idea of God as First Cause only because we reasoned from the 
existence of things other than God which require him as a cause. For 
example, we started with the idea that certain things change, inferred 
that they must be mixtures of actuaHty and potentiality, and deduced 
in turn that there must be a purely actual cause which sustains them in 
existence. We started with the idea that certain things are composite, 
inferred that there must be something that causes their component 
parts to be combined, and deduced in turn that the ultimate cause 
must be simple or noncomposite. And so on. If we now say that God 
alone exists, we would be abandoning the very grounds that led us to 
affirm the existence of God as First Cause in the first place. It would 
be like someone who slowly and carefully cHmbs a ladder, then pulls 
out a ray gun and blasts it out from under him—he would fall to the 
ground, making his cautious ascent entirely pointless.79
Consider now why mere conservationism cannot be correct. Since 
agere sequitur esse— again, what a thing does necessarily reflects what 
it is— if something could do what it does independently of God, if it 
had causal efficacy apart from any divine assistance, then it could exist 
independently of God. We would be left with an essentially deist con­
ception of God on which, even if God is the Creator of things, they 
might carry on without him once created. And this cannot be right.
thing could not be God. For having the illusion that the world is changing involves having 
first this experience o f the world, then that one, then another, and this itself involves change. 
Hence, whatever has such experiences is not immutable. Since these experiences are different 
experiences, anything that has them has parts and is therefore not simple. Since whatever 
changes or has parts is contingent, nothing having these illusions could be necessary. Since 
having an illusion entails error and ignorance, nothing which has these illusions could be 
omniscient. And so on.
79 
Note that it would not help the occasionalist to appeal instead to the Augustinian proof 
of God’s existence, which, unlike the other proofs defended in this book, does not begin with 
the existence o f concrete objects and processes, but rather with the reality o f universals, nec­
essary truths, etc. The reason is that precisely because the Augustinian proof does not begin 
with considerations about causality, it does not get us to God qua the source of all causal 
power, and thus does not give the occasionalist the materials he needs in order to develop his 
distinctive account of divine causality. It is only the other proofs which give the occasionalist 
those materials, and yet, as just noted, those are precisely the proofs whose starting points 
occasionalism would end up undermining.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
237
For one thing, and as we have seen, nothing other than God possibly 
could exist even for an instant without God’s conserving action. This 
follows from a thing’s being composite rather than simple, from its 
being a mixture of actuaHty and potentiality, and from its having an 
essence distinct from its existence. For another thing, the resulting 
position would, again, be incoherent. For it was the idea that things 
cannot exist on their own even for an instant that led us to the idea 
of God as first cause in the first place. To say that these things might 
exist without God after all would once again be Hke cHmbing a ladder 
and then blasting it out from under one.
So, the correct view has to be the middle-ground concurrentist 
position according to which secondary causes are real That is to say, 
things other than God have real causal power even if they have it 
only in a secondary or derivative way insofar as they derive that 
power from God as first or underived cause. Occasionalism denies 
that secondary causes are real insofar as it says that only the first cause 
reaHy causes anything. Mere conservationism denies that secondary 
causes are real insofar as it says that causes other than God have their 
causal power independently of God and thus do not have it in merely 
a derivative or secondary way.
Secondary causes are true causes insofar as they make a real con­
tribution to the effect. The effect would not be of precisely the 
character it is if some other secondary cause were involved instead. 
Secondary causes are secondary insofar as they would be inert without 
divine assistance. God must cooperate or concur with everything they 
do if they are to do anything (hence the label “ concurrentism”). To 
borrow an example from Alfred Freddoso, if you draw a square on 
a chalkboard with blue chalk, both you as primary cause and the 
chalk as secondary cause are joint causes of the effect—you of there 
being any square there at aH, the chalk of the square’s being blue.80 
The chalk makes a real contribution to the effect insofar as the effect 
would have been very different if the chalk had been red, or if the 
writing instrument had been a pen or pencH instead of chalk, and so 
forth. But no effect at aU would have been produced had you not 
pressed the chalk against the board. Or consider the moon, which 
gives light only insofar as it receives it from the sun. The moon makes
80Freddoso, “ Pitfalls and Prospects” .

238
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
a real contribution to the effect insofar as its appearance in the night 
sky would be very different if the soil on its surface had a different 
color or it if were in other respects made of a different sort of mate­
rial. But it would give no light at all if there were no sunlight for it 
to reflect. God’s concurrence with the secondary causes he conserves 
in existence is analogous to your relationship to the chalk or the sun’s 
relationship to the moon.
Now, among the secondary causes with which God must concur if 
they are to have any efficacy are human beings. Does this entail that 
we lack free will? No. To borrow an example from David Oderberg, 
consider a father teaching his young son how to write letters by guid­
ing the child’s hand.81 The child, who does not yet know how to 
write an A  (for example), will not be able to do so unless he allows his 
father to guide his hand in the right direction. The child could resist 
his father’s guidance and move his hand in the wrong direction; or he 
could submit to that guidance and allow it to be moved in the right 
direction. There is nothing in the father’s guidance per se that rules 
out either possibility. Hence, the child’s free choice of whether to 
resist or submit makes a real contribution to the effect. All the same, 
the effect— the letter A appearing on the page— will not occur with­
out the father’s guidance. God’s concurrence with our free actions is 
analogous to that.
Miracles
Determining whether any purported miracle (such as the Resurrec­
tion of Jesus of Nazareth) has actually occurred is beyond the scope 
of a book on natural theology. But what it would be for a miracle to 
occur, and whether such a thing could occur, are questions to which 
the arguments of this book are highly relevant, so it is appropriate to 
address them here.
Since the time of David Hume, a “ miracle” has often been char­
acterized as a violation of a law of nature. The idea, roughly, is 
that when there is a regular or “law-like” correlation between, say, 
causes of kind A and effects of kind B, a failure of some particu­
lar instance of A to be followed by B would constitute a miracle.
81 
David S. Oderberg, “ Divine Premotion” , International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 79 
(2016): 207-22.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
239
This conception underlies skeptical arguments to the effect that the 
notion of a miracle is incoherent, insofar as evidence that some pur­
ported violation of a law occurred would really just be evidence that 
the purported law in question wasn’t really a law in the first place, so 
that there was no true violation and thus no miracle.
But from the point of view of Aristotelian-Thomistic metaphysics 
(which is the metaphysical position informing this book), this char­
acterization of miracles is problematic. On the standard AristoteHan 
account, a law of nature is a description of the tendencies or dispo­
sitions a thing will exhibit given its nature or essence. For example, 
if it is a law of nature that water freezes at 32 degrees Fahrenheit, 
then what this involves is just water’s having, by virtue of its essence 
or nature, a tendency or disposition to freeze at that temperature. 
As it happens, this example is oversimpHfied, since Hquid water can 
in unusual circumstances exist at cooler temperatures. But that only 
reinforces the point that when we talk about laws we are really talking 
about tendencies or dispositions, and a tendency or disposition can be 
blocked, or manifest only when certain conditions obtain. As Anselm 
Ramelow writes:
Laws of nature ... are really about the dispositional properties of 
things, based on the kinds of things they are: things of kind A have a 
disposition to manifest quality F in conditions C, in virtue of being of 
nature N. For Aquinas, laws of nature are not strictly universal gener­
alizations, but descriptive of what happens normally, i.e. according to 
the nature of things; exceptions are quite compatible with such laws.82
So, one problem with characterizations of miracles as violations of 
laws of nature is that they often reflect too crude an understanding 
of how laws work. If a law describes a thing’s natural dispositions, 
and a disposition can really be present yet still fail to manifest— either 
if the manifestation is blocked, or if the triggering conditions are not 
present— then such a failure to manifest will not as such constitute a 
violation of the law. Hence, it will not as such count either as evi­
dence of a miracle or, for that matter, as evidence that the purported 
law was not after all a true law.
82 
Anselm Ramelow, “ The God o f Miracles” , in God, Reason and Reality, ed. Anselm 
Ram elow (Munich: Philosophia Verlag, 2014), p. 314  (emphasis in the original).

240
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
There is another problem with characterizing miracles as viola­
tions of laws of nature. As David Oderberg sums up the Aristotelian- 
Thomistic view of laws:
The laws of nature are the laws of natures. For natures just are abstract 
essences in concrete operation. Nature is the collection of all the 
natures of things. So to say the laws are of nature is to say that they are 
of the natures of things.83
An implication of this, emphasized by Oderberg, is that the laws of 
nature are not, as Hume and his followers suppose, contingent, at least 
not without qualification. The Humean view is that something could 
be just the thing it is— water, or fire, or an acorn, or a dog—while 
governed by different laws and thus entering into entirely different 
causal relations. Hence, water might turn into chocolate mousse at 
32 degrees Fahrenheit, fire might cause water to freeze rather than 
boil, an acorn might grow into a dog, a dog might be able to fly by 
wagging its tail, and so forth, if only the laws of nature were different. 
But from an AristoteHan point of view this makes no sense. Since 
laws of nature are the laws of the natures of things, if the laws were 
different, the natures would be different and thus the things would 
be different. Anything that reliably turned to chocolate mousse at 32 
degrees Fahrenheit just wouldn’t be water in the first place, anything 
that reliably grew into a dog just wouldn’t be an acorn, and so on. 
Since laws of nature reflect the natures or essences of things, they are 
metaphysically necessary. To be sure, there could have been a world 
without water, fire, acorns, or dogs in it in the first place, but which 
did have entities which in certain superficial ways resembled these 
things. In that sense the laws of nature that actually obtain need not 
have obtained, and are therefore to that extent contingent. But there 
couldn’t have been a world which really had water, fire, acorns, and 
dogs in it but where these things did not naturally behave in the ways 
they in fact do behave.
Now if laws of nature are metaphysically necessary (given that the 
contingent things whose natures they reflect in fact exist), then vio­
lations are impossible. O f course, the manifestation of a disposition
83 Oderberg, Real Essentialism, p. 144 (emphasis in the original).

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
2 4 1
might still either be blocked or lack the requisite triggers, but if the 
triggers are present and no blocks are present, the manifestation 
will follow.
What, then, is a miracle if not a violation of the laws of nature, 
and how could miracles occur if laws are metaphysically necessary? 
Ramelow sums up the Thomistic answer as follows:
What defines a miracle is not merely that it is an exception to what 
is natural (which would be true for defects as well), but that it ele­
vates the nature of a thing to a power that cannot be accounted for 
by this nature. Unlike said defects, miracles are exceptions that are 
super-natural rather than sw£>-natural. As such, then, miracles are not 
violations of the laws of nature. Even though they would have to 
be called “physically impossible,,’ yet they are not contrary to nature; 
rather, they are beyond nature ... in the sense of elevating it to a 
higher power.84
As Ramelow goes on to note, qua supernatural— that is to say, hav­
ing as their cause something which is outside the natural order 
altogether—miracles can only have a divine cause and must not be 
confused with the extraordinary but still merely preternatural effects 
that an angel (for example) might produce. Such finite spirits would 
still be part of the natural order broadly construed. They too would be 
created things each of which has its own nature or essence and each 
of which can remain in existence and operate only insofar as God 
conserves it in being and concurs with its actions.85
Properly understood, then, miracles are in no way comparable to 
magic, nor to a kind of advanced technology. For God is not merely 
an especially powerful cause alongside other natural and preternatu­
ral causes. Rather, he is altogether outside the order of natural and 
preternatural causes, as the metaphysical precondition of there being
84Ramelow, “ God o f Miracles” , pp. 3 1 4 -1 5  (emphasis in the original); see pp. 348-49. 
See also C. S. Lewis’ remark in Miracles (N ew  York: Touchstone/Simon and Schuster, 1996), 
that it is “ inaccurate to define a miracle as something that breaks the laws of Nature” (p. 80). 
Rather, for Lewis it involves God introducing something into nature: “ If God creates a mirac­
ulous spermatozoon in the body o f a virgin, it does not proceed to break any laws. The laws 
at once take it over. Nature is ready. Pregnancy follows, according to all the normal laws, and 
nine months later a child is bom ” (p. 81).
85 Ramelow, “ God of Miracles” , pp. 3 16 -17 .

242
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
any causal power at all. That is the manner in which he is the First 
Cause— “first” in the sense of primary or fundamental, that from 
which all other, merely secondary causes derive their causal power.
Hence, it would be a sheer mistake to think that the difference 
between ordinary events and miracles is that whereas the former hap­
pen on their own, God causes the latter. The world is not Hke an 
airplane on autopilot, with God interfering from time to time to 
perform a course correction. God is the ultimate cause of all things, 
the natural and preternatural as much as the miraculous. Indeed, 
as the arguments of this book show, it is the ordinary, natural course of 
things, and not miracles, which is the most direct evidence of God’s 
existence and action as First Cause. As Brian Davies writes:
Some people would say that God can intervene so as to bring it about 
that changes occur in the world. On the classical theist’s account, 
however, such changes cannot be literally thought of as divine inter­
ventions since they and what preceded them are equally the creative 
work of God.86
Davies goes on to quote Herbert McCabe, who says:
It is clear that God cannot interfere in the universe, not because he has 
not the power but because, so to speak, he has too much. To interfere 
you have to be an alternative to, or alongside, what you are interfer­
ing with. If God is the cause of everything, there is nothing that he 
is alongside.87
Davies adds: “You cannot intervene in what you are doing yourself. 
And, say classical theists, God cannot Hterally intervene in his own 
created order.” 88
Like the term “violation” , the term “intervention” wrongly sug­
gests that a miracle is a kind of violent motion, as if God has to force 
things to go in a certain direction. That would be a fitting charac­
terization if the world were a machine and God a machinist who
86 Davies, Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion, p. 4.
87 Herbert M cCabe, “ Creation” , in Philosophy of Religion: A  Guide and Anthology, ed. Brian 
Davies (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 199 (emphasis in the original).
88 Davies, Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion, p. 4.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
243
occasionally steps in to fine-tune it, but it is highly misleading given 
the conception of God and his relationship to the world argued for in 
this book. A better analogy might be to think of the world as music and 
God as the musician who is playing the music. Divine conservation of 
the ordinary, natural course of things is comparable to the musician’s 
playing the music according to the written score as he has it before his 
mind. God’s causing a miracle is comparable to the musician temporar­
ily departing from the score, as in the sort of improvisation character­
istic of jazz. The musician hardly has to force the music to go in some 
way it wasn’t already going; every note, including the written ones that 
precede and follow the improvised ones, is produced by him. Still, the 
improvisation definitely adds to the score something that wasn’t already 
there, just as, in Ramelow’s words, a miracle goes “ beyond nature” and 
“ elevat[es] it to a higher power” .
Or we might think of the world as a movie and God as the direc­
tor. The natural order of things, considered just by itself, is Uke the 
movie in the version originally released to theaters. The natural 
order of things together with miracles is Uke the “ director’s cut” of 
the movie later released on DVD. Both versions are the work of the 
director, just Uke the natural order and miracles are both the work 
of God. But the “ director’s cut” includes new material, perhaps even 
subplots and other scenes that dramaticaUy alter the film, just as mira­
cles dramaticaUy alter the natural order of things. Or, to appeal to an 
analogy used previously, the world might be compared to a story and 
God to the author of the story. The ordinary, natural course of things 
is Uke the story as it originaUy appeared, and miracles are Uke addi­
tions to the story made when it is republished in a second edition.
Now, in aU of these examples— a musical score as originaUy writ­
ten, a movie in its original theatrical release version, a story as origi­
naUy pubUshed—we have artistic productions that are complete and 
perfect as far as they go. Just as adding an improvisation, a new scene, 
or a new chapter is not necessarily a matter of correcting a defect in 
a piece of music, a film, or a novel, neither is a miracle essentiaUy a 
matter of correcting some defect in nature. It is rather a matter of 
taking something that is already good and complete as far as it goes 
and raising it to an even higher level, just as a jazz improvisation, a 
director’s cut, or a second edition of a book might take something 
that was already good and complete and make it even better. Again,

244
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
this dovetails with Ramelow’s description of a miracle as something 
that is “ not contrary to nature [but] rather ... beyond nature ... in the 
sense of elevating it to a higher power” .89
However, Ramelow’s characterization of what a miracle amounts 
to should, I think, be supplemented. When speaking of a miracle 
as something which is “not contrary to ... [but] beyond” nature and 
“ elevat[es]” it, Ramelow gives the impression that a miracle is always 
a matter of God’s adding something to nature, and never a matter of 
taking something away. But that need not be the case. A miracle could 
involve a subtraction rather than an addition. Hence, while a resur­
rection from the dead would certainly add something to the natural 
course of things, as do miracles Hke Jesus’ multiplication of the loaves 
and fishes, a miracle Hke the one involving Daniel’s friends in the 
fiery furnace seems to involve a mere subtraction from the natural 
order. It is what does not happen to Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
nego that is significant. They are not burnt, as they would have been 
had nature taken its course.90
Now, how can this be if, as both Ramelow and I emphasize, a 
miracle is not a violation of a law of nature— and indeed if, as I have 
said, such violations are metaphysicaHy impossible? Doesn’t the fail­
ure of the fire to burn Daniel’s friends constitute just such a violation? 
It does not. As Oderberg argues, a miracle is properly construed not 
as a “breach” or violation of a law of nature, but rather as a “ sus­
pension” of such a law.91 He draws an analogy with human positive 
law. God’s bringing about a breach or violation of a law of nature 
would be comparable to a government leaving a law on the books 
but refraining from investigating or punishing violations of that law. 
A miracle is not Hke that. It is rather Hke a government’s temporarily 
revoking a law, taking it off the books so that actions that would oth­
erwise count as violations no longer so count.
89 See Lewis, Miracles, p. 84: “ If Nature brings forth miracles then doubtless it is as ‘natural’ 
for her to do so when impregnated by the masculine force beyond her as it is for a woman to 
bear children to a man. In calling them miracles we do not mean that they are contradictions 
or outrages; we mean that, left to her own resources, she could never produce them.”
90 O f course, any claim to the effect that these particular miracles actually occurred would 
require defense, and again, such a defense is beyond the scope of this book. But that is irrel­
evant to the present point, because they are being used here merely as illustrations o f the 
different sorts of miracle which could occur if God willed it.
91 Oderberg, Real Essentialism, pp. 148-49.

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
245
To put the point in terms of the analogies proposed earlier, we 
might say that while a miracle Hke the Resurrection of Jesus is like a 
musician adding something to the written score in an improvisation, 
a miracle Hke Daniel’s friends’ failure to be burned by the fire is Hke the 
musician refraining from playing certain notes that were originally in 
the score. Or we might say it is like a director leaving out a key scene 
from the theatrical release from a movie, or a novelist leaving out a 
key passage that was originally intended for the book. Keep in mind 
that as we have seen, a thing can operate at any instant only insofar as 
God conserves it in being at that instant and also concurs with its causal 
activity at that instant, imparting to it the causal power by which it acts 
according to its nature. The sort of miracle that involves subtracting 
something from the natural order rather than adding something to it 
involves, not God acting in a special way, but rather his refraining from 
acting as a conserving and concurring cause. In the case at hand, it is not 
that God conserves fire in being together with its preconditions (e.g., 
oxygen) and concurs with their causal activity, yet somehow causes 
this collection of factors to act in a way that is contrary to their natures. 
That would be a violation of a law of nature. Rather, he refrains from 
conserving in being and in concurring in the activity of some or all of 
the factors, so that the normal effect does not follow. That is a suspen­
sion rather than a violation of the natural order. It is not a case of God 
violently interfering with what he has brought about, but rather a case 
of his not bringing certain things about in the first place.
Now, since God could add to or subtract from the ordinary, natural 
order of things in the ways described, miracles are certainly possible. 
But why would he ever do so? One answer is that he would do so 
if he willed to reveal to us something we could not come to know 
through natural means. Suppose, for example, that he sent a prophet 
to teach some doctrine the truth of which we could not possibly arrive 
at via philosophical argument or scientific investigation. How would 
we know that such a prophet really was sent by God and that his pur­
ported revelation is not merely something he made up? We would 
know it if the prophet performed miracles, since only God himself 
could cause miracles to occur. Miracles would function as a divine 
“ seal of approval” of the prophet’s teaching. Hence, if we could estab­
lish that such miracles really did occur, then we would have rational 
grounds for accepting the teaching of the prophet as divinely revealed.

246
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Miracles, then, are the bridge between natural theology and 
revealed theology. They would provide a rational basis for faith—  
which, contrary to a very common misconception, is not a matter of 
believing something without evidence or even in the face of contrary 
evidence. Rather, faith, as understood by theologians such as Aquinas 
is a matter of believing something because it has been revealed by 
God. But that it really has in fact been revealed by God is something 
for which evidence must be given, and the evidence has to involve a 
miracle in the sense described above, for nothing less than that could 
justify the claim that the purportedly revealed doctrine really has a 
divine source. Faith is in that way by no means contrary to reason, 
but rather is grounded in reason.
Now, determining whether any particular alleged miracle really 
has occurred is, again, beyond the scope of a book on natural theol­
ogy. In general, natural theology does not by itself establish the truth 
of any particular religion, revealed or otherwise. However, the argu­
ments of natural theology do have a great deal to tell us about how 
to evaluate the claims of the various religions. If a religion says things 
about the nature of God or his relationship to the world which are 
incompatible with the results of natural theology, then we have posi­
tive reason to think that that religion is false. For example, if a religion 
denies that there is one ultimate divine cause of things, or iden­
tifies God with the world, or claims that God is impersonal, or that 
he is a material thing, or that he is finite in power or knowledge, 
then we know that that religion is false, since it can be established 
via philosophical argument that God is one, that he is distinct from 
the world, that he has intellect and will, and that he is immaterial, 
omnipotent, and omniscient. Furthermore, if a religion claims to be 
divinely revealed, but cannot support that claim to revelation with 
a miracle in the strict sense described above, then we know that we 
have no reason to take that religion’s claims seriously.
Appendix: Is God male?
Being immaterial and incorporeal, God is not an animal, and thus 
he is not a rational animal or human being. And since he is not a 
human being, he is not literally either a man or a woman. He is

THE NATURE OF GOD AND OF HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WORLD 
247
sexless. Nevertheless, the traditional practice has been to characterize 
God in masculine terms, and I have followed that practice in this 
book. Some contemporary writers object to such usage, dismissing 
it as “ sexist” and lacking in rational justification. Hence they often 
adopt the “politically correct” and clumsy practice of referring to 
God as “ he/she/it” . But in fact there are good philosophical reasons 
for the traditional usage.
Consider first of all that as we have seen, there is in God intellect 
and will, and these attributes are definitive of personality. Accordingly, 
God cannot appropriately be characterized in impersonal terms, as an 
“it” . But then, why “he” and “him” , rather than “she” and “her” ?
The reason is that God’s relationship to the world is much more 
Hke a paternal relationship than it is Uke a maternal relationship. Bio­
logically speaking, a father’s role in procreation is active insofar as he 
impregnates, and a mother’s role is passive insofar as she is impreg­
nated. There is no change to a father’s physiology as a consequence 
of impregnation, whereas there is a radical change in the mother’s 
physiology.92 The mother becomes more physically dependent on 
the father, who must provide for his mate and for their unborn 
child— even if, unfortunately, some fathers do not do their duty 
in this regard. As that sad fact indicates, the father is in no way phys­
ically dependent on his mate or their child, which is why he can 
(even if he shouldn’t) leave the scene. There is also a literal physio­
logical connection between the child and its mother that doesn’t exist 
between the child and its father, who is literally more distant during 
the whole process of gestation.
Now, there are obvious analogies here to God’s relationship to 
the world. God is active insofar as he creates the world, whereas the 
world is passive insofar as it is created by God. As pure actuality, God 
is entirely unchangeable, whereas the world is a mixture of actuality 
and potentiaHty that is continuously changing. The world depends 
entirely on God at every instant, whereas God in no way depends on 
the world. The world could not exist without God even though he 
could exist without it. God is also utterly distinct from the world 
rather than being identical to it (as in pantheism) or even continuous 
with it (as in panentheism).
92 See the passage from p. 84 of Lewis’ Miracles quoted earlier in n. 89, p. 244.

248
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
So, given the key elements of classical theism, which is the posi­
tion defended in this book, the most natural and least misleading way 
of characterizing God is in paternal and thus masculine terms. Mater­
nal imagery would suggest that God is changeable or continuous with 
the world, which would in turn suggest a panentheist conception of 
God, or a pantheist conception, or a conception which in some other 
way is at odds with God’s immutability, immateriality, eternity, and 
pure actuaHty.

7
Com m on Objections to Natural Theology
In the course of this book I have already responded in some detail 
to most of the objections that have been raised against arguments of 
the sorts I have been defending. But a separate chapter on the subject 
is in order. For one thing, there are several further objections which 
need to be addressed. For another, certain objections, though on 
close inspection they turn out to be extremely feeble, are so common 
and reflect such pervasive misunderstandings of the arguments that it 
is worthwhile revisiting them. This is especially true in light of the 
renewed publicity “New Atheist” writers have recently given these 
bad objections.1 There will, then, be a little bit of overlap between 
some of what I have to say in this chapter and what I have said in 
earlier chapters. But I will try to avoid too much repetition, and 
will instead address from a different angle and in greater depth those 
objections which have already been discussed.
“I f everything has a cause, then what caused God?”
This may be the single most common objection against arguments 
for a divine cause of the world. It is routinely raised by amateurs and 
by professional philosophers alike. And it is a staple of New Atheist
1 See Sam Harris, The End of Faith (N ew  York: Norton, 2004); Sam Harris, Letter to a Chris­
tian Nation (New  York: Alfred A . Knopf, 2006); Richard Dawkins, The God Delusion (New 
York: Houghton Mifflin, 2006); Daniel C . Dennett, Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural 
Phenomenon (N ew  York: Viking, 2006); Christopher Hitchens, God Is Not Great (N ew  York: 
Twelve, 2007); Victor J. Stenger, God: The Failed Hypothesis (Amherst, N .Y .: Prometheus 
Books, 2008); Stephen Hawking and Leonard Mlodinow, The Grand Design (N ew  York: 
Bantam Books, 2010); Victor J. Stenger, God and the Folly of Faith (Amherst, N .Y .: Pro­
metheus Books, 2012); Lawrence M . Krauss, A  Universe from Nothing (N ew  York: Free Press, 
2012); Alex Rosenberg, The Atheist's Guide to Reality (N ew  York: W . W . Norton, 2011); and 
A. C . Grayling, The God Argument (N ew  York: Bloomsbury, 2013).
249

250
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
literature.2 We have already seen why the objection has absolutely 
no force against any of the arguments defended in this book. None 
of the arguments rests in the first place on the premise that “ every­
thing has a cause.” For that reason alone, any suggestion that the 
proponent of such arguments is contradicting himself or making an 
arbitrary exception to his own rule would simply be directed at a 
straw man.
But rhetorically to ask “What caused God?” is a bad objection 
even apart from the fact that the arguments do not rest on the prem­
ise in question. For it is not as if the arguments give no reason why 
God does not need a cause even if other things do. On the contrary, 
part of the point of the arguments is to establish that there must be 
something that not only lacks a cause but could not even in principle 
have had one, precisely because it lacks the very feature that makes 
other things in need of a cause.
Hence, the Aristotelian proof holds that other things require a 
cause because they are mixtures of actuality and potentiaHty, and 
any potential, precisely because it is merely potential, cannot actu­
alize itself. By contrast, what is purely actual, precisely because it 
lacks any potentiality, not only need not have a cause but could 
not have had one. The Neo-Platonic proof holds that composite 
things require a cause because there must be some principle outside 
them that accounts for the composition of their parts. But what is 
utterly simple or noncomposite has no parts to be put together in 
the first place. Hence, it not only need not have been caused but 
could not have been caused. The Thomistic proof makes the same 
point insofar as it emphasizes that for a thing to be kept in existence 
is for its essence to be conjoined with existence, which requires a 
cause, whereas something whose essen ce just is existence need not 
and could not have existence conjoined to its essence and thus need 
not and could not have a cause. The rationalist proof entails that 
contingent things require a cause precisely because they are contin­
gent and could have been otherwise, whereas what is necessary, and
2 See Dawkins, God Delusion, p. 77; Dennett, Breaking the Spell, p. 242; Harris, Letter to a 
Christian Nation, pp. 72 -7 3 ; Hawking and Mlodinow, Grand Design, p. 172; Hitchens, God 
Is Not Great, p. 71; Krauss, Universe from Nothing, p. xii; Stenger, God and the Folly of Faith, 
pp. 215, 323-24.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
25I
thus could not have been otherwise, neither need have nor could 
have had a cause.3
So, to ask “What caused God?” , far from being the devastating 
retort New Atheist writers suppose it to be, is in fact painfully inept. 
When interpreted in light of what the various arguments actually 
mean by “ cause” and “ God” , it really amounts to asking “What 
caused the thing that cannot in principle have had a cause?” In par­
ticular, it amounts to asking “What actualized the potentials in that 
thing which is pure actuaHty and thus never had any potentials of any 
sort needing to be actuaHzed in the first place?” ; or “What principle 
accounts for the composition of the parts in that which has no parts 
but is absolutely simple or noncomposite?” ; or “What unites the dis­
tinct essence and existence in that which has no essence distinct from 
its existence?” ; or “What imparted a sufficient reason for existence 
to that thing which has its sufficient reason for existence within itself 
and did not derive it from something else?” And none of these ques­
tions makes any sense.
O f course, the atheist might say that he isn’t convinced that these 
arguments succeed in showing that there really is something that 
could not in principle have had a cause— something that is purely 
actual, or absolutely simple, or in which essence and existence are 
identical, or which has a sufficient reason for its existence within 
itself. He might even try to argue that there is some sort of hid­
den incoherence in these notions. But merely to ask “What caused 
God?”— as if any defender of such arguments has overlooked the 
most obvious of objections— simply misses the whole point. A seri­
ous critic has to grapple with the details of the arguments. He cannot 
short-circuit them with a single smug question.
Since I have developed and defended these points at length in 
earlier chapters, I won’t belabor them here, but direct the interested 
reader to those eariier discussions. However, it is important to empha­
size that the objection under consideration also has no force whatso­
ever against any of the other versions of the First Cause argument (also 
known as the “ cosmological argument”), which have been defended
31 do not mention the Augustinian proof here because, unlike the others, it is not a causal 
argnment for the existence o f God. Hence, the objection currently under consideration is not 
even prima facie relevant to it.

252
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
by philosophers over the centuries— mostly for the same reason it has 
no force against the arguments defended in this book. Why, then, is 
this lame objection so commonly raised, and presented as if it were 
devastating? That is a question worth examining in some depth.
Part of the answer is that criticism of First Cause arguments is 
almost always directed at a nearly omnipresent straw man— an argu­
ment that is widely regarded as representing the basic thrust of the 
cosmological argument, but which in fact bears no interesting rela­
tionship to what any of the defenders of such arguments have ever 
actually said. For example, New Atheist Daniel Dennett begins his 
brief discussion of the cosmological argument as follows:
The Cosmological Argument ... in its simplest form states that since 
everything must have a cause the universe must have a cause—namely, 
God.4
The assumption that this is the basic thrust of the cosmological argu­
ment is, as I say, by no means confined to New Atheist polemical 
literature. It can be found in purportedly neutral works of pop phi­
losophy. Hence, Nigel Warburton maintains that
the First Cause Argument states that absolutely everything has been 
caused by something else prior to it: nothing has just sprung into 
existence without a cause. Because we know that the universe exists, 
we can safely assume that a whole series of causes and effects led to 
its being as it is. If we follow this series back we will find an original 
cause, the very first cause.5
The assumption is widespread also in the work of more rigorous 
academic philosophers who do not specialize in the philosophy of 
religion. For example, Graham Priest writes:
It’s a natural assumption that nothing happens without an explanation: 
people don’t get ill for no reason; cars don’t break down without 
a fault. Everything, then, has a cause. But what could the cause of 
everything be? Obviously, it can’t be anything physical, like a person; 
or even something like the Big Bang of cosmology. Such things must
4Dennett, Breaking the Spell, p. 242.
5 Nigel Warburton, Philosophy: The Basics, 4th ed. (London: Roudedge, 2004), p. 17.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
253
themselves have causes. So it must be something metaphysical. God 
is the obvious candidate.
This is one version of an argument for the existence of God, often 
called the Cosmological Argument.6
There is even at least one case where the idea appears in the work 
of someone who does specialize in the philosophy of religion. Robin 
Le Poidevin summarizes what he calls “ the basic cosmological argu­
ment” , of which at least some other versions are “ modifications” , 
this way:
1. Anything that exists has a cause of its existence.
2. Nothing can be the cause of its own existence.
3. The universe exists.
Therefore: The universe has a cause of its existence which lies outside 
the universe.7
Examples of similar summaries of the argument could easily be 
multiplied.8 The standard next move of those presenting these sum­
maries is, of course, to suggest that the argument founders on the 
obvious retort: If everything has a cause, then what caused God? If 
the response is that nothing caused God, then, the critic maintains, 
we might as well say that nothing caused the universe. The critics also 
sometimes suggest that the argument gratuitously assumes that the 
universe had a beginning, whereas if we suppose instead that it did 
not, the pressure to look for a first cause of any sort disappears. More 
complex versions of the cosmological argument are then sometimes 
treated as if they were desperate and doomed attempts to patch up the 
glaring holes in this “basic cosmological argument” .
6 Graham Priest, Logic: A  Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 
pp. 2 1-2 2 .
7 Robin Le Poidevin, Arguing for Atheism: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion (Lon­
don: Roudedge, 1996), p. 4.
8 Further examples taken just from books lying around m y study would be Michael Martin, 
Atheism: A  Philosophical Justification (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1990), p. 96; Ber­
trand Russell, Why I Am Not a Christian (N ew  York: Simon and Schuster, 1957), p. 6; Jenny 
Teichman and Katherine C . Evans, Philosophy: A  Beginner's Guide, 2nd ed. (Blackwell, 1995), 
p. 22; and Rebecca Newberger Goldstein, 36 Arguments for the Existence of God: A  Work of 
Fiction (N ew  York: Pantheon, 2010), p. 348.

254
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
The problem is this: Not one of the many prominent defenders of the cosmo­
logical argument in the history of Western philosophy ever actually put forward 
anything like this so-called “basic cosmological argument” . In particular— and 
to hammer the point home— you will not find such an argument in 
Plato, Aristotle, Plotinus, Al-GhazaH, Avicenna, Averroes, Maimon- 
ides, Anselm, Bonaventure, Aquinas, Scotus, Suarez, Leibniz, Clarke, 
Locke, Berkeley, Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange, Jacques Maritain, Eti­
enne Gilson, Mortimer Adler, Bruce Reichenbach, Richard Taylor, 
Richard Swinburne, Robert Koons, Richard Gale, Alexander Pruss, 
John Haldane, Christopher Martin, David Oderberg, William Lane 
Craig, or, as far as I know, in the work of any other philosopher who 
has defended the cosmological argument. Indeed, Le Poidevin (who, 
as a philosopher of religion, is better informed about the subject than 
the other critics quoted above) admits as much, writing that “no-one 
has defended a cosmological argument of precisely this form.”9 He 
just thinks it “provides a useful stepping-stone to the other, more 
sophisticated, versions” of the argument.
This is, when you think about it, extremely odd. Suppose “ Intel­
ligent Design” theorists routinely characterized “ the basic Darwinian 
thesis” as the claim that at some point in the distant past a monkey 
gave birth to a human baby. Suppose they never cited any sources 
for this claim (which, of course, they couldn’t do, since no Dar­
winian has ever said such a thing) and even admitted that no one 
has ever defended it. But suppose that they nevertheless suggested 
that it “provides a useful stepping-stone to the other, more sophis­
ticated, versions” of Darwinism. Darwinians would rightly be out­
raged, objecting that such a procedure gets the whole discussion off 
on the wrong foot, and in particular conveys the false impression 
that anything Darwinians have to say about human origins is really 
just a desperate exercise in patching up a manifestly absurd position. 
Yet it is precisely that sort of false impression that is conveyed by 
the insinuation that the thinkers cited above, however complex their 
arguments, are all ultimately in the business of trying to salvage or 
“modify” something that at bottom amounts to what Le Poidevin 
characterizes as “ the basic cosmological argument” .
Nor could it honestly be suggested by anyone familiar with the 
work of defenders of the argument that they are at least implicitly
9 Le Poidevin, Arguing for Atheism, p. 4.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
255
committed to the so-called “basic cosmological argument” . For one 
thing, none of the thinkers in question actually appeals to the prem­
ise that “ everything has a cause.” Indeed, some of them explicitly or 
implicitly deny that everything has a cause. For another thing, none of 
the defenders of the argument cited above assumes that the universe 
had a beginning, and only one version of the argument (the kaläm 
cosmological argument) is even concerned to try to show that it did. 
Indeed, most versions do not even require as a premise any claim 
about the universe as a whole in the first place.
But if defenders of the cosmological argument not only do not 
assume, but in fact often deny, that everything has a cause; if most 
of them not only do not assume that the universe had a beginning 
but are not even interested in the question of whether it did; and if 
most of them are not even arguing in the first place from any premise 
about the universe considered as a whole; then it is, to say the least, 
highly misleading to begin a discussion of the cosmological argu­
ment the way Dennett, Warburton, Priest, Le Poidevin, and so many 
others do.
In any event, if the prevalence of the “ If everything has a cause, 
then what caused God?” objection is explained by the prevalence 
of the straw man First Cause argument against which it is directed, 
that just raises the further question: Why do the critics keep attacking 
this straw man? Part of the answer is surely that the critics rely too 
much on what other critics say, rather than seriously engaging with 
the writings of defenders of the cosmological argument themselves. 
In particular, Dennett and other New Atheist writers, pop philoso­
phy writers like Warburton, and academic philosophers like Priest 
who do not specialize in the philosophy of religion, seem to have 
“learned” about the cosmological argument by reading other crit­
ics who falsely claim that the argument says that “ everything has a 
cause, so the universe has a cause, etc.” Such writers either don’t 
bother reading what Aquinas, Leibniz, and others actually wrote, or 
read into what Aquinas, Leibniz, and others wrote the “Everything 
has a cause, so the universe has a cause, etc.” argument that isn’t 
actually there. As generation after generation of writers has repeated 
this intellectually sloppy procedure, it has become the conventional 
wisdom that what First Cause arguments say is that “ everything has 
a cause, so the universe has a cause, etc.” The straw man is by now 
so common that even a specialist in philosophy of religion like Le

256
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Poidevin, who knows better, feels justified in treating the straw 
man as if it were a legitimate starting point for a treatment of the 
cosmological argument.
But that raises yet another question: How did this straw man ever 
enter the literature in the first place? A plausible answer was proposed 
by the Thomist philosopher W. Norris Clarke in his 1970 article “A 
Curious Blind Spot in the Anglo-American Tradition of Antithe- 
istic Argument” .10 1 Clarke provides several examples of philosophy 
textbooks of the mid-twentieth century which present variations of 
the caricature of First Cause arguments that we’ve been discussing, 
including John Hospers’ widely used An Introduction to Philosophical 
Analysis. As Clarke indicates, Bertrand Russell’s famous 1957 book 
Why I Am Not a Christian (the title of which derives from a 1927 lec­
ture of Russell’s that is printed in the book) may be the source from 
which many subsequent writers learned this caricature and the stock 
reply to it.
Clarke also notes that Russell in turn seems to have gotten the 
idea from John Stuart Mill, who in turn got it from his father, James 
Mill. Clarke suggests that David Hume, who in the Dialogues Con­
cerning Natural Religion attacks something like the stock straw man 
First Cause argument, may be the first well-known writer to do so. 
Clarke writes:
Let it first be agreed without qualification that if one does admit the 
principle “Every being has a cause”, then the refutation is inescap­
able and devastating. But the very ease of this refutation, if nothing 
else, should have aroused some suspicions in the minds of its users, 
one would have thought, as to whether their supposed opponents 
were actually using this principle. And it is in itself a highly suspicious fact 
that no one among the many in this Hume-Russell tradition whom I have read 
ever quotes any specific theistic philosopher who does make use of it. So con­
stant is this pattem, in fact, that I am willing to wager that this family 
trait is found also in those I have not yet run across.11
10 W . Norris Clarke, Monist 54 (1970): 181-20 0 , reprinted in W . Norris Clarke, The Cre­
ative Retrieval of St. Thomas Aquinas: Essays in Thomistic Philosophy, New and Old (New York: 
Fordham University Press, 2009), pp. 48-65.
11 Clarke, Creative Retrieval of St. Thomas Aquinas, p. 55 (emphasis added).

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
257
As the examples from Dennett, Warburton, Priest, Le Poidevin, 
and others indicate, the pattern in question certainly has continued 
in the more than forty years since Clarke wrote. Critics regularly 
attack the straw man without citing anyone who has ever defended 
it— as did Hospers, who, after falsely accusing proponents of the First 
Cause argument of contradicting themselves by denying that God has 
a cause, smugly writes:
Many people do not at once see this because they use the argument to 
get to God, and then, having arrived at where they want to go, they 
forget all about the argument.12
But who exactly are these “many people” ? We are not told. It’s 
tempting to conclude (paraphrasing Hospers) that the critics do not 
see that no one has ever really defended the straw man they attack 
because, having arrived at where they want to go— a way of dismiss­
ing Aristotle, Aquinas, Leibniz, and others tout court and thereby 
avoiding commitment to a divine First Cause— they forget all about 
what these writers actually said. Says Clarke:
We can only conclude, then, that the Hume-Russell tradition of anti- 
theistic argument, on this point at least, somehow got off to a bad start 
by completely misunderstanding and misrepresenting the very argu­
ment it was trying to refute, and that it has continued to repeat itself 
ever since, talking only to itself, and without ever bothering to inquire 
whether the supposed other party to the debate was still there at all, or 
had ever been there. In a word, it has become a tradition in the worse 
sense of the word, truly in a rut and apparently unaware of it.13
But how did the Hume-Russell straw man tradition itself ever 
get started? As Clarke suggests, the answer seems to be that Hume 
was reacting to what he mistakenly took the early modem rationalist 
philosophers Descartes and Spinoza to be saying. In the third of his 
Meditations on First Philosophy, Descartes had put forward an eccen­
tric and now little-known variation on the First Cause argument (a 
variation sometimes labeled by commentators the “preservation”
12 Quoted in ibid., p. 52.
13 Ibid., p. 59·

258
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
argument), which implies that there is a sense in which everything has 
a cause. Now, even Descartes’ argument was not the straw man argu­
ment “Everything has a cause, so the universe has a cause.” For one 
thing, he is not in his argument addressing the question of what is the 
cause of the universe. Rather, he begins by asking what it is that pre­
serves him in existence from moment to moment. For another thing, 
the premise “ everything has a cause” does not explicitly appear as a 
premise in his argument. Furthermore, the argument does not make 
an exception in the case of God, since it regards him as self-caused. In 
other words, Descartes was implicitly committed to the premise that 
everything has a cause, including God. So, even he is not subject to 
the objection “ If everything has a cause, what caused God?” , in part 
because he does not deny in the first place that God has a cause.
There is another reason this is not a good objection even to Des­
cartes’ argument. Clarke discusses the argument in some detail and 
shows that while Descartes’ development and defense of it in his replies 
to critics of the Meditations is complicated and confusing, at the end of 
the day even he does not appear to be saying quite the sort of thing 
that the Hume-Russell straw man attributes to First Cause arguments. 
Rather, what Descartes is saying is something closer to a version of the 
principle of sufficient reason (PSR)— which I discussed and defended 
in chapter 5— according to which everything has an explanation. This 
is not the same thing as saying that everything has a cause (in the sense 
of “ that which actualizes some potential”), for whereas all causes are 
explanations, not all explanations are causes. And as we saw in chap­
ter 5, in the case of First Cause arguments that appeal to PSR, the 
Hume-Russell style objection cannot get off the ground, because these 
arguments do not and need not make any exception in the case of God. 
They hold that absolutely everything has an explanation. In the case of 
contingent things, the explanation lies outside the thing, and in the 
case of a necessary being, the explanation lies in the thing’s own nature. 
Whatever one thinks of such arguments, there is no inconsistency in 
them, nor any ad hoc exception to a general principle.
Clarke suggests that Descartes blurred the distinction between a 
cause and a sufficient reason, and that Spinoza (who also thought of 
God as self-caused) did the same. What they really meant was some­
thing Hke “Everything has an explanation” , where, again, they make 
no exception in the case of God. But since they use the language of

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
259
“ cause” , it sounds as if they are saying that “ everything has a cause” 
in the usual sense of an efficient cause, which is distinct from its effect. 
And of course that is the sort of cause that God is traditionally said not 
to have, and which Descartes and Spinoza themselves would deny 
that he has (even if they think he does have a “ cause” in the sense of 
a sufficient reason).
Clarke suggests that what Hume did was essentially to confuse these 
two senses of “ cause” , taking the rationalist claim that “ everything has 
a ‘causey-in-the-sense-of-a-sufficient-reason9 to be identical to the claim 
that “ everything has a ‘cause’-in-the-sense-of-an-efficient-cause-distinct-from- 
it s e ljIn fact no defender of the cosmological argument ever made the 
latter claim, but since Descartes and Spinoza made the former claim 
it seemed to Hume as if someone had made it. Hume then essentially 
made the further step of attributing this thesis to proponents of the 
cosmological argument in general. And then, since proponents of 
the cosmological argument in general do deny that God has a “cause”- 
in-the-sense-of-an-efficient-cause-distinct-from-himself the claim that propo­
nents of the argument were contradicting themselves seemed to have 
force. But as Clarke says:
Thus the First Cause argument for the existence of God which the 
Hume-Russell tradition so devastatingly attacks is indeed an inviable 
metaphysical monster. But it is a monster of their own fabrication, not 
that of any reputable theistic philosopher. It is actually a kind of hybrid 
of both the traditional Scholastic and Cartesian rationalist traditions, 
which would make sense in neither and be repudiated by both.14
Clarke goes on to note that while Hume may have had some 
excuse for this error given the confusing nature of Descartes’ termi­
nology, “it is much harder to excuse his successors in this tradition, 
with all the resources of historical scholarship and linguistic analysis 
at their disposal, for perpetuating this confusion.” 15 In my view, a 
willingness to assent to the following judgment of Clarke’s provides 
a useful test of the competence and intellectual honesty of any atheist 
and any professional philosopher who deigns to comment on the 
subject of First Cause arguments: 14 15
14Ibid., p. 62.
15 Ibid.

200
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
We are here in the presence of a philosophical tradition that is truly 
in a self-repetitive rut, a tradition that has long since ceased to look 
outside of itself to check with reality and see whether the adversary
it so triumphantly and effortlessly demolishes really exists at all__ It
would seem to be high time that those who still follow this particular 
tradition of antitheistic argument should have the grace and humility 
to acknowledge that their argument is dead, and let us get on with 
more substantive problems with regard to philosophical argument for 
and against the existence of God.16
Unfortunately, the straw man in question seems immortal. More 
than eighty years before Norris Clarke published his paper, another 
Thomist, Richard Clarke, complained:
The reader will observe that the Law of Causation does not state 
(as some modem writers most unfairly would have us believe) that 
Everything that exists has a cause. In this form it is quite untrue, since 
God is uncreated and uncaused. If it were worded thus, the objection, 
that we first formulate our universal law and then exclude from it 
Him on Whom all existence depends, would be perfectly valid. But 
this is entirely to misrepresent our position. It is one of the unworthy 
devices of the enemies of a priori philosophy.17
No doubt defenders of First Cause arguments will have to make the 
complaint again in another eighty years. Indeed, I am confident that 
even some atheists who read the present book will before long still 
find themselves trotting out the tired “ If everything has a cause, then 
what caused God?” objection. Habits are hard to break, especially if 
breaking them entails having to admit that one’s fellow atheists have 
for centuries been resting their main objection to First Cause arguments 
on an extremely elementary mistake.
“Maybe the universe itself (or the Big Bang, or the multiverse, or 
indeterministic quantum events, or the laws of physics) is the 
uncaused, self-explanatory, or necessary being. ”
This objection, which also goes back at least to Hume, is raised in 
various forms by New Atheist writers Dawkins, Dennett, Grayling,
16Ibid., pp. 62-63.
I7Richard F. Clarke, Logic (New York: Benziger Brothers, 1889), pp. 78 -79  (emphasis in 
the original).

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
201
Krauss, Rosenberg, and Stenger.18 And like the first objection, it 
completely misses the point of each of the arguments defended in 
this book. As we have seen, whatever one thinks of those arguments, 
there is no arbitrariness or special pleading in their denying that God 
requires a cause while insisting that everything other than God does. 
The difference is in each case a principled one. And the principle 
in each case gives an answer to the question why the universe, for 
example, cannot be the terminus of explanation.
According to the Aristotelian proof, any actualization of a poten­
tial requires a cause, whereas what is pure actuaHty, and only what 
is pure actuality, does not. But the universe is a mixture of actuality 
and potentiality, and the Big Bang involved the actualization of a 
potential, as would each stage in the evolution of a multiverse and 
each quantum event (indeterminism being irrelevant). The laws of 
physics are also by themselves merely potential insofar as they could 
have been other than they are. Hence, none of these could be self- 
explanatory, necessary, or “ uncaused” in the relevant sense of being 
the sort of thing that need not and could not have a cause.
Similarly, according to the Neo-Platonic proof, neither the 
universe nor a multiverse could be uncaused, necessary, or self- 
explanatory, precisely because they are composite. Quantum events 
and laws of physics also lack the metaphysical simpHcity that the 
Neo-Platonic proof argues we must attribute to the first principle of 
aH things. Their contingency is one indication of this, insofar as the 
fact that they could have been other than they are entails a distinction 
between essence and existence. The Thomistic proof would for the 
same reason deny that the universe, the Big Bang, quantum events, 
or laws of nature could be an uncaused cause; only something whose 
essen ce just is existence itself could be that. The defender of the ratio- 
naHst proof would point out that aH of these nondivine beings are 
contingent rather than necessary and thus could not provide an ulti­
mate explanation.
Much more could be said. In particular, the metaphysical status of 
laws of nature is itself so vexed an issue that it is amazing that any­
one could think a glib reference to the laws of physics might settle
18 
See Dawkins, God Delusion, p. 78; Dennett, Breaking the Spell, p. 242; Grayling, God 
Argument, pp. 96-97; Krauss, Universe from Nothing, p. xii; Rosenberg, Atheist’s Guide to Real­
ity, pp. 36 -39; Stenger, God and the Folly of Faith, p. 215.

202
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
anything in this context. What is a law of nature? How does it have 
any efficacy? Is a law of nature merely a statement to the effect that 
such-and-such a regularity exists? In that case it isn’t an explanation 
of anything but merely a description of the very thing that needs to be 
explained. Is a law of nature a kind of Platonic entity? In that case we 
need an account of how the world comes to participate in such a law, 
and why it participates in the specific laws it does rather than others. 
And in that case too, laws cannot be ultimate explanations. Is a law 
of nature a shorthand description of the way a natural substance will 
tend to behave given its nature or essence? In that case the existence 
of laws is parasitic on the existence of the substances themselves, and 
again cannot then be an ultimate explanation.19
Naturally the atheist might reject any of these views of laws of 
nature, along with the AristoteHan, Neo-Platonic, Thomistic, or ratio- 
naHst accounts of why the universe cannot be an uncaused cause or 
self-explanatory or necessary being. The point, however, is that merely 
to suggest that the universe, Big Bang, and so forth might be the ter­
minus of explanation is to not to give any reason for rejecting the argu­
ments. It is simply to ignore the arguments, not to answer them.
It is also worth pointing out that even if this objection succeeded, 
it would not vindicate atheism. For if the universe really were a self- 
explanatory, uncaused, necessary being, then it would have distinc­
tively divine attributes. The resulting view would be pantheism, not 
atheism. The objection would not show that God does not exist, but 
rather that God does exist and is identical with the world. Many Hin­
dus would happily accept this, even if Jews, Christians, and Muslims 
could not. And of course, neither could atheists.
“It is false to suppose in the first place that everything 
has a cause or an explanation. ”
In putting forward this objection, Stenger attributes some events 
to “ chance” rather than causation.20 Dennett and Rosenberg sug­
gest that quantum mechanics shows that events can occur without a
19 For a useful account o f recent debate over this issue, see Stephen Mumford, Laws in 
Nature (London: Routledge, 2004). For a defense o f the Aristotelian view that laws o f nature 
are summaries o f the ways substances tend to operate given their natures, see David S. Oder­
berg, Real Essentialism (London: Routledge, 2007), pp. 14 3 -5 1.
20 Stenger, God and the Folly of Faith, p. 97.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
263
cause.21 Grayling reiterates Hume’s point that “we can conceive of 
effects independently of causes.”22
Leave aside the point that the arguments defended in this book do 
not actually rest on the premise that everything has a cause. None of 
the objections just cited has force even against the causal principles to 
which the arguments are committed. Take Stenger’s objection, which 
is directed at a straw man. Naturally, no proponent of cosmological 
arguments denies that chance events occur. But there is simply noth­
ing about chance that rules out causality. On the contrary, chance 
presupposes nonchance causal regularities. To take a stock example, 
when a farmer plowing a field comes across buried treasure, that is a 
chance event. But it occurs only because of the convergence of two 
nonchance lines of causality: the farmer’s decision to plow in a certain 
direction that day, and someone else’s decision to bury treasure at 
precisely that spot. Similarly, that following an earthquake, tumbling 
boulder A shattered boulder B, specifically, is a chance event. But it 
occurs only because of causal regularities Hke the ones involved in 
plate tectonics, gravitational attraction, the solidity of boulders, and 
so forth.
Quantum physics shows at most that some events do not have a 
deterministic cause or explanation, but there is nothing in either the 
principle of causality or PSR per se that requires that sort of cause or 
explanation, specifically. Furthermore, quantum events occur even 
in a nondeterministic way only given the laws of quantum mechan­
ics, which are contingent and by themselves merely potential until 
a universe that follows them is actuaHzed. So, it either misses the 
point or begs the question to appeal to quantum mechanics, since 
that is itself part of what cosmological arguments claim stands in need 
of explanation.
Hoary though the Humean objection is, there are at least three 
reasons why it simply will not do to pretend, as Grayling does, that 
the mere mention of it constitutes a “ definitive” response to cosmo­
logical arguments. First, no working physicist, chemist, biologist, or 
neuroscientist would for a moment take seriously the suggestion that 
perhaps there simply is no cause or explanation when investigating
21 Dennett, Breaking the Spell, p. 242; Rosenberg, Atheist's Guide to Reality, pp. 38-39.
22 Grayling, God Argument, p. 97.

204
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
some specific physical, chemical, biological, or neurological phe­
nomenon. The critic of cosmological arguments thus owes us an 
explanation of how his appeal to such a suggestion in the current 
context is anything less than special pleading. And as Lloyd Ger- 
son has pointed out, the fact that the cosmological argument is itself 
a proposed explanation suffices to show that it is no good to say 
“Maybe there’s no explanation in this case.” The argument has given 
one. Therefore if the critic wants to avoid accepting it, he has to find 
some reason other than the bare suggestion that there might not be 
an explanation.23
A second problem with the Humean move is that it is simply 
fallacious to infer from the premise that “we can conceive of effects 
independently of causes” to the conclusion that some event might in 
fact not have a cause. We can conceive of what it is to be a triangle 
without at the same time conceiving what it is to be a trilateral, but 
it doesn’t follow that there could be a triangle which was not a trilat­
eral. We can conceive of a man without conceiving of how tall he is, 
but it doesn’t follow that any man could exist without having some 
specific height or other. And so forth.
A third problem is one identified by Elizabeth Anscombe.24 Hume 
claims that it is conceivable that something could come into being 
without a cause, and he evidently has in mind something Hke con­
ceiving of an object suddenly appearing, out of the blue as it were, 
where nothing had been a moment before. But what is it about this 
exercise in conception that makes it a case of conceiving something 
coming into being without a cause—as opposed, say, to coming into 
being with an unseen cause, or being transported from somewhere else 
in an unknown or unusual manner (by teleportation, perhaps)? The 
trouble is that the Humean scenario is underdescribed. We need to 
add something to our exercise in conception in order to make it what 
Hume needs it to be in order to make his point. Yet it is hard to see 
what we can add to it that wouldn’t involve bringing causation back 
into the picture and therefore undermining the whole point of the
23Lloyd P. Gerson, Plotinus (London: Routledge, 1994), p. 13.
24 See G .E .M . Anscombe, “ ‘Whatever Has a Beginning o f Existence Must Have a Cause’: 
Hume’s Argument Exposed” , in Collected Philosophical Papers, vol. 1 (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1981). Cf. the discussion in Brian Davies, An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion, 3rd ed. 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), pp. 50 -51.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
265
example. For instance, it is hard to see how to distinguish something’s 
coming into being as opposed to being transported unless it is by ref­
erence to its having a generating rather than a transporting cause.
I have responded to the Humean objection and the objection from 
quantum mechanics at greater length in earlier chapters, so I won’t 
belabor these issues here. The interested reader is directed to those 
earlier discussions.
“ Why assume that the universe had a beginning or that 
a regress of causes must terminate?”
Rosenberg and Krauss put forward something Uke this sort of objec­
tion when they propose that the multiverse hypothesis— according 
to which the Big Bang that gave rise to our universe involved a 
branching off from a preexisting universe, which in turn is part of 
a beginningless series of universes— eliminates the need for a divine 
cause. Krauss, citing Bichard Feynman, also suggests that for all we 
know there might always be deeper and deeper layers of laws of phys­
ics which we can probe until we get bored.25
One problem with this is that as I have emphasized many times, 
First Cause arguments Hke those defended in this book are not con­
cerned in the first place with the question of whether the universe 
had a beginning. They are concerned instead to argue that even if the 
universe (or multiverse for that matter) had no beginning, it would 
require a divine cause to sustain it in existence perpetually and to 
explain why it exists at all, even beginninglessly.
I have already explained (above and at greater length in earlier 
chapters) why it is no good gHbly to appeal to laws of nature as if they 
could be the ultimate explanation of things, and the point holds true 
however many layers of laws of nature there are. Note also that level 
upon level of laws of nature would constitute a hierarchical series of 
the sort described in chapter 1— laws at one level would hold only 
as a special case of laws at a deeper level, which would in turn hold 
only as a special case of yet deeper laws— and we have seen why such 
a series cannot fail to have a first member in the sense of something 
which can impart causal power without deriving it. Nothing Krauss
25 Krauss, Universe from Nothing, p. 177.

266
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
or any other of the New Atheists have to say even addresses this sort 
of argument, much less undermines it.
“First Cause arguments commit a fallacy of composition ”
I have noted already that arguments of the sort defended in this book 
do not, or at least need not, presuppose any claim about the universe 
as a whole. Hence, there is no part-to-whole reasoning that could 
be accused of committing a fallacy of composition. We also saw in 
chapter 5 that the kind of part-to-whole reasoning that might, on one 
possible construal of the rationalist proof, underlie the claim that the 
universe as a whole is contingent, does not in fact involve a fallacy of 
composition.
However, Grayling, once again citing Hume, claims that an argu­
ment of the latter sort commits a fallacy of composition insofar as it 
supposes that when each member of a collection is explained individ­
ually, there is something left over— the collection as a whole— which 
is yet to be explained.26 But such an objection simply misses the 
point. Recall that even an infinite series of moving sticks would still 
require a cause outside the series precisely because none of the sticks 
has either individually or collectively the power by themselves to 
move, and that even an infinite series of mirrors reflecting the image 
of a face would still require an actual face outside the series since 
none of the mirrors either individually or collectively has the power 
by themselves to generate such an image. Points Hke these were made 
in the context of illustrating the notion of a hierarchical causal series. 
But Leibniz makes a similar point in putting forward his own version 
of the rationalist cosmological argument, when he notes that if we 
were told that a certain geometry textbook had been copied from an 
earHer copy, that earlier copy from an eariier one still, that one from 
a yet earlier copy, and so on infinitely into the past, we would hardly 
have a sufficient explanation of the book we started out with.27 For 
why does the series of books as a whole exist with precisely the con­
tent they have rather than some other content? Tracing the series of 
causes backward forever into the past seems to leave the most import­
ant fact about the phenomenon to be explained untouched.
26 Grayling, God Argument, p. 97.
27 See G. W . Leibniz, “ On the Ultimate Origination o f Things” (essay, 1697).

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
267
These examples show that if anyone is committing a fallacy of 
composition, it is actually Grayling and Hume themselves who are doing 
so. For from the fact that I can explain the motion of stick A by ref­
erence to stick B, the motion of stick B by reference to stick C, and 
so on ad infinitum, it simply doesn’t follow that I have explained why 
there is any motion in the series of sticks as a whole. From the fact 
that I can explain the image in mirror A by reference to mirror B, the 
image in mirror B by reference to mirror C, and so on ad infinitum, 
it simply doesn’t follow that I have explained how the image got to 
be in any of the mirrors at all. From the fact that I can explain the 
geometrical content of book A by reference to book B, the content 
of book B by reference to book C, and so on ad infinitum, it simply 
doesn’t follow that I have explained why it is that any of the books 
have any geometrical content at all.
“Even if there were a first cause, there is no reason to think it would 
be omnipotent, omniscient, perfectly good, and so forth. ”
Like “What caused God?” , this is commonly put forward as a dev­
astating objection to First Cause arguments. And Hke “What caused 
God?” , it is in fact embarrassingly inept. Grayling refers matter-of- 
factly to “ the usual big jump” from a first cause to “ the god of tradi­
tional religion” .28 Dawkins assures his readers that there is “absolutely 
no reason” to attribute omnipotence, omniscience, and so forth to a 
first cause.29 Krauss makes a similar claim.30
In fact, historically, proponents of each version of the cosmolog­
ical argument have put forward a great many arguments claiming to 
show that the cause of the world whose existence they’ve argued 
for must have the key divine attributes. Aquinas devotes around a 
hundred double-column pages of dense argumentation in part I of 
the Summa Theologiae alone—just after presenting the Five Ways— to 
showing that to the cause of the world we must attribute simplic­
ity, goodness, infinity, immutability, unity, knowledge, life, will, 
power, and the like. About two hundred pages of argumentation in 
book i of his Summa Contra Gentiles are devoted to this topic. Much
28 Grayling, God Argument, p. 96.
29Dawkins, God Delusion, p. 77.
30 Krauss, Universe from Nothing, p. 173.

268
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
argumentation along these lines can also be found in Aquinas’ other 
works, such as De potentia and De ventate. Much of Samuel Clarke’s 
book A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God is, as anyone 
who has readjust the title will discover, devoted to arguing for vari­
ous divine attributes— infinity, omnipresence, unity, intelligence, free 
choice, power, wisdom, and goodness. Aristotle, Plotinus, Avicenna, 
Scotus, Leibniz, and other major philosophers of the past argue for 
various divine attributes, as do more recent proponents of First Cause 
arguments like the ones cited earlier in this chapter.
Dawkins, Grayling, Krauss, and the other New Atheist writers 
offer no response at all to these arguments. In fact it seems that they 
are entirely unaware that the arguments even exist. In any case, in 
each of the first five chapters of this book, and at even greater length 
in chapter 6, I have offered many detailed arguments for the conclu­
sion that the first cause of things must be one, simple, immutable, 
eternal, immaterial, omnipotent, omniscient, perfectly good, and so 
forth. Though very common, the claim that even a successful proof 
of a first cause wouldn’t get you to the God of traditional theism is 
simply groundless.
“Even if it is proved that there is a First Cause, which is omnipotent, 
omniscient, perfectly good, and so forth, this would not by itself show 
that God sent prophets to ancient Israel, inspired the Bible, is a 
Trinity, and so forth."
This is true, but completely irrelevant. Arguments Hke the ones 
defended in this book are not claiming in the first place to establish 
every tenet of any particular religion, but rather merely one central 
tenet that is common to many of them— namely, that there is a cause 
of the world which is one, simple, immaterial, eternal, immutable, 
omnipotent, omniscient, perfectly good, and so forth. If they succeed 
in doing that, then they show that atheism is false, and that the only 
remaining question is what kind of theism one ought to adopt— a 
purely philosophical theism, or Judaism, or Christianity, or Islam, 
or some other more specific brand of theism. Deciding that would 
require further investigation and argumentation. It would be silly to 
pretend that since the arguments of this book don’t answer every ques­
tion about God, it follows that they don’t answer any question about

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
269
God. That is like saying that special relativity theory must be false, 
because it doesn’t tell us whether and how living things evolved, or 
that quantum mechanics must be wrong, because it doesn’t answer 
all the questions we might have about engineering.
“ The cosmological argument presupposes the ontological argument, 
which is unsound
This objection was famously raised by Kant, and has more recently 
been repeated by Grayling.31 The version of the ontological argu­
ment that Kant had in mind was the one put forward by Descartes, 
according to which the notion of a nonexistent but supremely per­
fect being is self-contradictory, given that existence is a perfection. 
Therefore, Descartes’ argument concludes, a supremely perfect being 
must exist. Now, if this argument works, then God’s existence would 
be necessary because he would exist by definition, just as a bachelor is 
unmarried by definition. Hence, the cosmological argument, which 
claims that the existence of contingent things is to be explained 
by reference to a necessary being, presupposes that the ontological 
argument is sound. But, Kant argues, the ontological argument is 
unsound (because, he claims, existence is not really a perfection). 
Hence, the cosmological argument, which presupposes the ontolog­
ical argument, must be unsound as well.
Now, that one needs to do more than merely claim that the cos­
mological argument presupposes the ontological argument should 
be obvious enough from the fact that Aquinas, and most Thom- 
ists following him, explicitly reject the ontological argument while 
endorsing the cosmological. And that there is (contrary to what Kant 
and Grayling suppose) no inconsistency in their doing so should be 
clear from what was said about divine necessity in chapter 6. For 
as we saw there, when arguments like those defended in this book 
claim that God exists of necessity, they are not claiming that he 
exists by definition. That is not the only notion of necessity there 
is, and it is not the notion to which they are appealing. But Kant’s 
claim would have merit only if it were the notion of necessity to 
which they were appealing.
31 Grayling, God Argument, p. 98.

270
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
To be sure, Grayling does allow that in arguing for the existence 
of a necessary being, a defender of the cosmological argument might 
distinguish between a logically necessary being— the sort of necessary 
being the ontological argument is commonly understood to be argu­
ing for, and which Grayling takes to be philosophically dubious—  
and a metaphysically necessary being, which Grayling characterizes as 
“ one that must exist in order for the universe to have a stopping-point for 
the regress of causes, that is, as a ground on which contingent existence 
can rest” .32 However, this latter conception of necessity doesn’t 
help, Grayling says, because it is merely a relative conception. It 
amounts to saying merely that God is a necessary condition for the 
existence of the contingent world, which doesn’t entail that he is 
necessary in the sense of being something which could not have 
failed to exist. And it is the existence of a being that is necessary in 
this latter, nonconditional sense that the cosmological argument was 
supposed to be establishing.
But this is a false dichotomy, for as we have seen, there are ways 
to spell out the notion of metaphysical necessity without either 
collapsing back into logical necessity or opting for merely condi­
tional necessity. For the Aristotelian, a thing’s contingency derives 
from the fact that it is a mixture of actuality and potentiality; what 
is pure actuaHty and has no potentialities that need to be actuaHzed 
or could be actuaHzed therefore exists necessarily. For the Neo- 
Platonist, a thing’s contingency derives from the fact that it is com­
posite; what is absolutely noncomposite or simple has no parts that 
need to be or could be combined, and is for that reason necessary. 
The Thomist would make a similar point, arguing that the first 
cause is necessary precisely because its essence just is existence, and 
thus need not have, and could not have, existence conjoined to it 
(which need is what makes contingent things contingent in the first 
place).33 Ail of these notions attribute to God a more than merely 
conditional necessity, but it is not the logical sort of necessity that 
we attribute to propositions.
32Ibid, (emphasis in the original).
33 Note that the Thomist is saying that God’s essence is existence, not that it “ includes” 
existence. The latter, common modem way o f speaking smacks o f just the sort o f composi­
tion which the Thomist, like the Neo-Platonist, would say cannot exist in God.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
27I
“ The cosmological argument proposes a ‘god of the gaps9 in order 
to explain something which in fact either is, or eventually will be, 
better explained via a naturalistic scientific theory.”
This is, I think it is fair to say, the central conceit of the entire New 
Atheist project. In the view of the New Atheists, if something is 
going to be explained at all, it is going to be explained via the meth­
ods of science. Therefore (so the argument goes) the appeal to God 
can at best be a kind of quasi-scientific hypothesis, and the problem is 
that it is not a good one. For Hitchens, it violates Ockham’s razor.34 
Similarly, Dawkins suggests that “ it is more parsimonious to con­
jure up, say, a ‘big bang singularity’, or some other physical concept 
as yet unknown.” 35 Harris thinks that at least at the moment we 
can’t say much more than this, opining that “ the truth is that no one 
knows how or why the universe came into being.” 36 Krauss, Hawk­
ing, and Mlodinow, by contrast, think that science has already given 
us a complete nontheistic explanation of the existence of the world, 
or near enough. “Because there is a law Hke gravity” , Hawking and 
Mlodinow write, “the universe can and will create itself from noth­
ing.” 37 Krauss’ A Universe from Nothing is a book-length attempt to 
make this sort of view plausible.
There are two basic problems with all of this. The first is that the 
characterization of the question of how to explain the existence of 
the universe as a matter for empirical science rather than natural the­
ology to settle either completely misses the point or simply begs the 
question. For one thing, whether or not one thinks any of them 
succeeds, the versions of the cosmological argument defended in this 
book are simply not “ god of the gaps” explanations. A “ god of the 
gaps” explanation is one on which it is at least possible in principle 
that some nondivine explanation might be correct, and the claim is at 
most that the theistic explanation is more probable than these alterna­
tives. The versions of the cosmological argument I’ve been defend­
ing, by contrast, are all attempts at strict metaphysical demonstration. 
They claim to show that there is no way in principle to account for
34Hitchens, God Is Not Great, pp. 70 -71.
35Dawkins, God Delusion, p. 78.
36Hams, Letter to a Christian Nation, p. 73.
37 Hawking and Mlodinow, Grand Design, p. 180.

272
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
what they set out to explain other than by reference to a purely actual 
cause, or an absolutely simple or noncomposite cause, or a cause 
whose essence just is existence, or a necessary being. Whether or not 
these claims are correct, the arguments do not stand or fall by the 
standards by which empirical hypotheses are evaluated—parsimony, 
fit with existing well-confirmed empirical theories, and so forth.
For another thing, the starting points of these attempts at meta­
physical demonstration are not matters about which empirical scien­
tific theory has anything to say in the first place. Rather, they have 
to do with what any possible empirical theory must itself take for 
granted. That is to say, their starting points are metaphysical rather 
than physical. Whatever the empirical facts turn out to be, they will 
at some level involve the actualization of potential, or so the Aristote­
lian proof argues; they will involve composite beings, or so the Neo- 
Platonic proof argues; they will require that the essence of a thing be 
conjoined with its existence, or so the Thomistic proof argues; and 
they will all be contingent, or so the rationalist proof argues. Simply 
to assert that any explanation worth taking seriously will have to be 
an empirical scientific theory rather than an exercise in natural the­
ology is merely to assume that all of this is mistaken. It is not to show 
that it is mistaken.
The second problem is that the nontheistic scientific explanation 
of the existence of the universe proposed by Krauss, Hawking, and 
Mlodinow is manifestly a nonstarter. “A law Hke gravity” is not noth­
ing; hence, an explanation of the existence of the universe that makes 
reference to such a law is rather obviously not, contrary to what 
Hawking and Mlodinow suggest, an account of how the universe 
might arise from nothing. Krauss’ book is notoriously shameless in 
committing the same basic fallacy.38 In 185 pages purporting boldly 
to show how the universe can arise from nothing, Krauss spends the 
first 152 arguing that the universe arose from empty space endowed 
with energy and governed by physical law, all of which he admits 
does not count as “ nothing” . By page 170 he tries to take all of this
381 say “ notoriously” because Krauss’ position lias been widely and harshly criticized even 
by philosophers with no theological ax to grind. Probably the best-known critique is that of 
philosopher o f physics David Albert, who reviewed Krauss’ book in the March 23, 2012, New 
York Times book review section.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
273
down to just the laws of quantum gravity, but admits that this does 
not really count as “ nothing” either. At page 177 he finally resorts to 
suggesting that perhaps there is just layer upon layer of laws.
What is never explained is how any of this counts as showing 
how the universe arose from nothing. There is some obfuscatory 
chin-pulling about “possible candidates for nothingness” , and “what 
‘nothing’ might actually comprise” , along with an insistence that any 
“ definition” of nothingness must ultimately be “based on empiri­
cal evidence” and that “ ‘nothing’ is every bit as physical as ‘some­
thing’ ”— as if “ nothingness” were a highly unusual kind of stuff that 
is more difficult to observe or measure than other things are. But of 
course “ nothing” is not a kind of stuff (physical or otherwise), nor 
anything that is terribly difficult to define (empirically or otherwise), 
nor something that “ comprises” anything, nor anything particularly 
mysterious or worth puffing one’s chin over. It is just the absence of 
anything. Moreover, Krauss himself seems well aware of this insofar 
as he ends up acknowledging that his main “ candidates for nothing­
ness” are not really nothing after all. And what he’s left with— a basic 
level of physical laws or layers of laws— is not only not nothing, 
but cannot be the ultimate explanation of the world, for the reasons 
given earlier.
“Science is the only genuine source of knowledge, and our best 
scientific theories make no reference to God.99
The view that science alone gives us genuine knowledge, so that any 
philosophy or metaphysics worthy of consideration can only be that 
which is implicit in science, is known as scientism. It is a key ingredi­
ent of the New Atheism. But despite the self-confidence of its advo­
cates, there are in fact no good arguments whatsoever for scientism, 
and decisive arguments against it. It is worthwhile addressing this 
issue at some length.
There are four general problems with scientism. First, scientism 
is self-defeating and can avoid being self-defeating only at the cost 
of becoming trivial and uninteresting. Second, the scientific method 
cannot even in principle provide us with a complete description 
of reality. Third, the “laws of nature” in terms of which science 
explains phenomena cannot in principle provide us with a complete

274
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
explanation of reality. Fourth, what is probably the main argument in 
favor of scientism— the argument from the predictive and technolog­
ical successes of modem physics and the other sciences— has no force. 
Let us examine each of these points in order.
First, as I have said, scientism faces a dilemma: it is either self- 
refuting or trivial. Take the first hom of this dilemma. The claim that 
“ the methods of science are the only reliable ways to secure knowl­
edge of anything” 39 is not itself a scientific claim, not something that 
can be established using scientific methods. Indeed, that science is 
even a rational form of inquiry (let alone the only rational form of 
inquiry) is not a claim that can be established scientifically. For sci­
entific inquiry rests on a number of philosophical assumptions: the 
assumption that there is an objective world external to the minds of 
scientists; the assumption that this world is governed by regularities of 
the sort that might be captured in scientific laws; the assumption that 
the human intellect and perceptual apparatus can uncover and accu­
rately describe these regularities; and so forth. Since scientific method 
presupposes these things, it cannot attempt to justify them without 
arguing in a circle. To break out of this circle requires “ getting out­
side” of science altogether and discovering from that extrascientific 
vantage point that science conveys an accurate picture of reality—  
and, if scientism is to be justified, that only science does so. But then 
the very existence of that extrascientific vantage point would falsify 
the claim that science alone gives us a rational means of investigating 
objective reality.
The rational investigation of the philosophical presuppositions 
of science has, naturally, traditionally been regarded as the province of 
philosophy. Nor is it these presuppositions alone that philosophy 
examines. There is also the question of how to interpret what sci­
ence tells us. For example, is the world fundamentally comprised of 
substances or events? What is it to be a “ cause” ? What is the nature 
of the universals referred to in scientific laws— concepts Hke quark, 
electron, atom, and so on? Do they exist over and above the particular 
things that instantiate them? Do scientific theories really give us a 
description of objective reality in the first place, or are they just use­
ful tools for predicting the course of experience? Scientific findings
39Rosenberg, Atheist’s Guide to Reality, p. 6.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
275
can shed light on such metaphysical questions, but can never fully 
answer them. Yet if science depends upon philosophy both to justify 
its presuppositions and to interpret its results, the falsity of scientism 
is doubly assured. As John Kekes concludes: “ Hence philosophy, 
and not science, is a stronger candidate for being the very paradigm 
of rationality.”40
Here we come to the second horn of the dilemma facing scientism. 
Its advocate may now insist that if philosophy has this status, then it 
must really be a part of science, since (he continues to maintain, dig­
ging in his heels) all rational inquiry is scientific inquiry. The trouble 
now is that scientism becomes completely trivial, arbitrarily redefin­
ing “science” so that it includes anything that could be put forward as 
evidence against scientism. Worse, this move makes scientism consis­
tent with views that are supposed to be incompatible with it.
For example, the arguments of this book claim to demonstrate 
that no world of physical things— things of the sort which form the 
subject matter of scientific inquiry— could exist even in principle 
unless there is a divine uncaused cause, which at every moment con­
serves them in being and imparts to them their causal power. But if 
these arguments are correct, then God’s existence follows from the 
very assumptions that underlie science. Indeed, philosophers Hke 
Aristotle and Aquinas took the view that since we can know a fair 
amount about the existence and nature of God through reason alone, 
natural theology itself constitutes a kind of science. They would not 
agree with the narrow conception of “ science” according to which 
a discipHne is only “ scientific” to the extent that it approximates the 
mathematical modeHng techniques and predictive methods of phys­
ics. For Aristotle and Aquinas, the truths of natural theology may not 
be expressible in mathematical language and are not based on specific 
predictions or experiments, but that does not make them less certain 
than the claims of physics. On the contrary, they are more certain, 
because they rest on strict demonstrations which begin from premises 
that any possible physical science must take for granted.
Obviously the atheist would not agree with that, but the specific 
point I am making here does not ride on whether the arguments 
of the previous chapters are correct. The point is rather that if the
4°John Kekes, The Nature of Philosophy (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1980), p. 158.

27 6
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
advocate of scientism defines “ science” so broadly that anything for 
which we might give a philosophical argument would count as “sci­
entific” , then he has no nonarbitrary reason for denying that natural 
theology could in principle count as a science. Yet the whole point of 
the appeal to scientism in this context was supposed to be to provide 
a justification for dismissing natural theology out of hand as unscien­
tific. Hence, if the advocate of scientism can avoid making his doc­
trine self-defeating only by defining “ science” this broadly, then the 
view becomes completely vacuous. Certainly it is no longer available 
as a magic bullet by which to take down the rational credentials of 
natural theology. The advocate of scientism will have to face the 
arguments of natural theology head-on rather than putting his fingers 
in his ears and saying: “ I needn’t even listen to them, since they’re 
not scientific arguments.”
The second problem facing scientism, I have said, is that sci­
ence cannot in principle provide a complete description of reality. 
Indeed, it cannot in principle provide a complete description even 
of physical reality. The reason, paradoxical as it sounds, has to do 
precisely with the method that has made the predictive and techno­
logical achievements of modem physics possible. Physics insists upon 
a purely quantitative description of the world, regarding mathematics 
as the language in which the “Book of Nature” is written (as Galileo 
famously put it). Hence, it is hardly surprising that physics, more than 
other disciplines, has discovered those aspects of reality susceptible of 
the prediction and control characteristic of quantifiable phenomena. 
Those are the only aspects to which the physicist will allow himself 
to pay any attention in the first place. Everything else necessarily falls 
through his methodological net.
Now our ordinary experience of nature is of course qualitative 
through and through. We perceive colors, sounds, flavors, odors, 
warmth and coolness, pains and itches, thoughts and choices, pur­
poses and meanings. Physics abstracts from these rich concrete details, 
ignoring whatever cannot be expressed in terms of equations and 
the Uke and thereby radically simplifying the natural order. There is 
nothing wrong with such an abstractive procedure as long as we keep 
in mind what we are doing and why we are doing it. Indeed, what 
the physicist does is just an extension of the sort ofthing we do every 
day when solving practical problems.

For example, when figuring out how many people of average 
weight can be carried on an airplane, engineers deal with abstrac­
tions. For one thing, they ignore every aspect of actual, concrete 
human beings except their weight; for another, they ignore even 
their actual weight, since it could turn out that there is no specific 
human being who has exactly whatever the average weight turns out 
to be. This is extremely useful for the specific purposes at hand. But 
of course it would be ludicrous for those responsible for planning the 
flight entertainment or meals to rely solely on the considerations 
the engineers are concerned with. It would be even more ludicrous 
for them to insist that unless evidence of meal and movie preferences 
can be gleaned from the engineers’ data, there just is no fact of the 
matter about what meals and movies actual human beings would pre­
fer. Such evidence is missing precisely because the engineers’ abstrac­
tive method guarantees that it will be missing.
The description of the world physics gives us is no less abstract 
than the one the engineers make use of. Physics simply does not give 
us material systems in all their concrete reality, any more than the 
aircraft engineers’ description gives us human beings in all their con­
crete reality. It focuses, as I have said, only on those aspects that are 
susceptible of prediction and control, and thus on those aspects which 
can be modeled mathematically. Hence, it would be no less ludicrous 
to suggest that if the description physics gives us of the world does 
not make reference to some feature familiar to us in ordinary expe­
rience, then it follows that the feature in question doesn’t exist. The 
success of the aircraft engineers’ methods doesn’t show that human 
beings have no features other than weight. And the success of physics 
doesn’t show that the natural world has no features other than those 
described in a physics textbook. The reason qualitative features don’t 
show up is not that the method has allowed us to discover that they 
aren’t there but rather that the method has essentially stipulated that 
they be left out of the description whether they are there or not.
As I noted in chapter i, Bertrand Russell—who, as we saw above, 
was by no means sympathetic to natural theology— emphasized how 
limited is the knowledge of nature afforded us by physics:
COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY 
277
It is not always realised how exceedingly abstract is the information 
that theoretical physics has to give. It lays down certain fundamental

278
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
equations which enable it to deal with the logical structure of events, 
while leaving it completely unknown what is the intrinsic character
of the events that have the structure__ All that physics gives us is
certain equations giving abstract properties of their changes. But as to 
what it is that changes, and what it changes from and to—as to this, 
physics is silent.41
Now if, as Russell emphasized, physics gives us the abstract struc­
ture of the material world but does not tell us the intrinsic nature of 
that which has that structure, then not only does physics not tell us 
everything about physical reality, but it tells us that there must be 
something more to physical reality than what it has to say. For there is 
no such thing as a structure all by itself; there must be something that 
has the structure. By the very fact that physics tells us that an abstract 
structure of such-and-such a mathematically describable character 
exists, then, physics implies that there is more to reality than that 
structure itself, and thus more to reality than what physics can reveal.
If there are limits to what science can describe, there are also limits 
to what science can explain. This brings us to the third problem fac­
ing scientism— namely, that the “laws of nature” in terms of which 
science explains phenomena cannot in principle provide an ultimate 
explanation of reality. The reason why should be obvious from what 
was said above about Krauss. Any appeal to laws of nature (or a series 
of “layers” of such laws, such as that proposed by Krauss) simply raises 
questions about what a law of nature is in the first place, how it has 
any efficacy, and where it (or the series of “layers”) comes from. And 
these are questions which the scientific mode of explanation, which 
presupposes such laws, cannot in principle answer.
Now, as noted earlier, there are various philosophical theories 
about the status of laws of nature on offer, but none of them gives 
any aid or comfort to scientism. We might hold, for example, that 
to speak of the “laws of nature” that govern some material thing or 
system is simply a shorthand way of describing the manner in which 
that thing or system will operate given its nature or essence. This is 
the Aristotelian approach to understanding physical laws. But on this 
view the “laws of nature” presuppose the existence and operations
41 Bertrand Russell, M y Philosophical Development (London: Unwin Paperbacks, 1985), 
p. 13.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
279
of the physical things that follow the laws. And in that case the laws 
cannot possibly explain the existence or operations of the material 
things themselves. In particular, and contrary to writers like Krauss, 
since the ultimate laws of nature presuppose the existence of the 
physical universe, they cannot intelligibly be appealed to as a way of 
explaining the existence of the universe.
A second view of what “laws of nature” are and how they oper­
ate is the one endorsed by early modem thinkers Hke Descartes and 
Newton, who sought to overthrow the AristoteHan philosophy that 
dominated the Middle Ages. On their view, the notion of a “law of 
nature” is irreducibly theological, a shorthand for the idea that God 
has set the world up so as to behave in the regular way described 
by the laws. On this view it is reaHy God’s action that strictly does 
the explaining, and neither material things nor the laws they foHow 
reaHy explain anything. But for obvious reasons, this too is not a view 
that gives any help to scientism, certainly not if it is intended as a 
weapon for use against natural theology.
A third possibility is to hold that “laws of nature” are reaHy noth­
ing more than a description or summary of the regular patterns we 
happen to find in the natural world. They don’t teU us anything 
about the natures of material things, and they don’t reflect the wiU 
of God. To say that it is a law of nature that A is foUowed by B is on 
this view simply to say that A ’s tend to be foUowed by B ’s in a regular 
way, and that’s that. This is the sort of view defended by foUowers of 
David Hume. But on this view, laws teU us only that such-and-such 
a regularity exists, but not why it exists. That is to say, on this view a 
law of nature (or at least the ultimate laws of nature) don’t explain 
a regularity, but merely re-describe it in a different jargon. Needless to 
say, then, this sort of view hardly supports the claim that science can 
provide an ultimate explanation of the world.
A further possibiHty would be to interpret “laws of nature” as 
abstract objects comparable to Plato’s Forms, existing in a realm 
beyond the material world, and where physical things somehow 
“participate in” the laws in something Hke the way Plato thought that 
every tree participates in the Form of Tree or every triangle partici­
pates in the Form of Triangle. Here too an appeal to laws of nature 
doesn’t reaHy provide an ultimate explanation of anything. For given 
this view we would stiU need to know how it comes to be that there 
is a physical world that “participates in” the laws in the first place,

28ο
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
why it participates in these laws rather than others, and so on. And 
that requires an appeal to something other than the laws.
So, once again we have questions which of their nature cannot 
be answered by science but only by philosophy, because they deal 
precisely with what any possible scientific explanation must take for 
granted. Nor will it do to suggest that ultimate explanation is not to 
be had anyway, so that science cannot be faulted for failing to pro­
vide it. For one thing, this is itself a philosophical claim rather than 
a scientific one. For another, the claim is false, since it violates the 
principle of sufficient reason (which I defended in chapter 5).
Now if scientism faces such grave difficulties, why are so many 
intelligent people drawn to it? The answer, to paraphrase a remark 
made by philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein in another context, is 
that “ a picture holds them captive.” Hypnotized by the unparalleled 
predictive and technological successes of modern science, they infer 
that scientism must be true. Consider the argument for scientism 
given by Alex Rosenberg in his book The Atheist’s Guide to Reality. 
He writes:
The technological success of physics is by itself enough to convince 
anyone with anxiety about scientism that if physics isn’t “finished,” it
certainly has the broad outlines of reality well understood__
And it’s not just the correctness of the predictions and the reliabil­
ity of technology that requires us to place our confidence in physics’ 
description of reality. Because physics’ predictions are so accurate, the 
methods that produced the description must be equally reliable. Other­
wise, our technological powers would be a miracle. We have the 
best of reasons to believe that the methods of physics—combining 
controlled experiment and careful observation with mainly mathe­
matical requirements on the shape theories can take—are the right 
ones for acquiring all knowledge. Carving out some area of “inquiry” 
or “belief” as exempt from exploration by the methods of physics is
special pleading or self-deception__
The phenomenal accuracy of its prediction, the unimaginable 
power of its technological application, and the breathtaking extent 
and detail of its explanations are powerful reasons to believe that phys­
ics is the whole truth about reality.42
42Rosenberg, Atheist’s Guide to Reality, pp. 2 3-2 5 .

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
281
O f course, many proponents of scientism would regard Rosen­
berg’s physics-only version as too restrictive. They would regard 
sciences Hke chemistry, biology, and the Hke as genuine sources of 
knowledge even if it turned out that they are irreducible to physics. 
But they would agree with Rosenberg’s main point that the “ suc­
cess” of science, broadly construed, supports scientism. Rosenberg’s 
argument, suitably modified in a way that would make it acceptable 
to other defenders of scientism, is essentially this:
1. The predictive power and technological applications of sci­
ence are unparalleled by those of any other purported source of 
knowledge.
2. Therefore, what science reveals to us is probably all that is real.
Now this, I maintain, is a bad argument. How bad is it? About as bad 
as this one:
1 . Metal detectors have had far greater success in finding coins and 
other metalHc objects in more places than any other method has.
2. Therefore, what metal detectors reveal to us (coins and other 
metallic objects) is probably all that is real.
Metal detectors are keyed to those aspects of the natural world sus­
ceptible of detection via electromagnetic means (or whatever). But 
however well they perform this task— indeed, even if they succeeded 
on every single occasion they were deployed— that simply wouldn’t 
make it even probable that there are no aspects of the natural world 
other than the ones they are sensitive to. Similarly, what physics does 
(and there is no doubt that it does it brilliantly) is to capture those 
aspects of the natural world susceptible of the mathematical modeling 
that makes precise prediction and technological application possible. 
But here too, it simply doesn’t follow that there are no other aspects 
of the natural world.
Rosenberg adds to his argument the suggestion that those who 
reject scientism do not do so consistently. He writes:
“Scientism” is the pejorative label given to our positive view by those
who really want to have their theistic cake and dine at the table of

282
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
science’s bounties, too. Opponents of scientism would never charge 
their cardiologists or auto mechanics or software engineers with “sci­
entism” when their health, travel plans, or Web surfing are in danger. 
But just try subjecting their nonscientific mores and norms, their music 
or metaphysics, their literary theories or politics to scientific scrutiny. 
The immediate response of outraged humane letters is “scientism.”43
So, according to Rosenberg, unless you agree that science is the only 
genuine source of knowledge, you cannot consistently believe that 
it gives us any genuine knowledge. But this is about as plausible as 
saying that unless you think metal detectors alone can detect physical 
objects, then you cannot consistently believe that they detect any 
physical objects at all. Those beholden to scientism are bound to 
protest that the analogy is no good, on the grounds that metal detec­
tors detect only part of reality while science detects the whole of it. 
But such a reply would simply beg the question, for whether science 
really does describe the whole of reality is precisely what is at issue.
The non sequitur is very common but it is a non sequitur all the 
same. It is implicit every time a defender of scientism demands to 
know the predictive successes and technological applications of meta­
physics or theology, and supposes he has won a great victory when 
his critic is unable to list any. This is about as impressive as demand­
ing a list of the metal-detecting successes of gardening, cooking, 
and painting, and then concluding from the fact that no such list is 
forthcoming that spades, spatulas, and paintbrushes are all useless and 
ought to be discarded and replaced with metal detectors. The fallacy 
is the same in both cases. That a method is especially useful for certain 
purposes simply does not entail that there are no other purposes 
worth pursuing nor other methods more suitable to those other 
purposes. In particular, if a certain method affords us a high degree 
of predictive and technological power, what that shows is that the 
method is useful for dealing with those aspects of the world that 
are predictable and controllable. But it does not show us that those 
aspects exhaust nature, that there is nothing more to the natural world 
than what the method reveals. Those who suppose otherwise are like 
the proverbial drunk who assumes that, because the area under the
43 Ibid., p. 6.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
283
street lamp is the only place he would be able to see the keys he has 
lost, there must be no other place worth searching for them and no 
other method by which they might be found.
At this point some advocates of scientism might admit that there 
are questions science cannot answer and even that there are other 
methods for dealing with those questions, such as those provided 
by philosophy. But they might still insist that there is little point in 
pursuing these questions or methods, on the grounds that the ques­
tions are not susceptible of the crisp and definitive answers that sci­
ence affords and that the methods do not generate the technologies 
that science provides us with. On this view, the superiority of sci­
ence is evidenced by its practical value and by the fact that it achieves 
consensus, or at least something approaching consensus. Philosophy, 
by contrast, is notoriously controversial and impractical. So, even 
if science can’t tell us everything, it does tell us everything worth 
knowing about.
But a moment’s reflection shows that this fallback position will 
not work. For one thing, to take this sort of position is Hke avoiding 
classes you know you won’t do well in and then appealing to your 
high grade point average as evidence of your superior intelligence. 
If you will allow to count as “ scientific” only what is predictable and 
controllable and thus susceptible of consensus answers and techno­
logical application, then naturally—but trivially— science is going to 
be one long success story. But this no more shows that the questions 
that fall through science’s methodological net are not worthy of 
attention than the fact that you’ve only taken courses you knew you 
would excel in shows that the other classes aren’t worth taking. For 
another thing, the claim that only questions susceptible of scientific 
investigation, consensus answers, and technological application are 
worth investigating is itself not a scientific claim, but a philosophical 
claim, and thus one that requires a philosophical defense. Once again 
the very attempt to avoid going beyond science implicates one in 
doing so.
Now, contemporary philosophers who advocate scientism will in­
sist that unless philosophy is “naturalized” by making of it nothing 
more than an extension of science, then the only thing left for it 
to be is a kind of “ conceptual analysis” . And the trouble with this, 
they will say, is that we have no guarantee that the “intuitions” or

284
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
“folk notions” the conceptual analyst appeals to really track reality.44 
“ Conceptual analysis” can tell us at most only how we happen to 
think about or conceptualize the world, and not about how the world 
itself really is. But this argument rests on a false alternative. The 
supposition that if you are not doing natural science, then the only 
other thing you could be doing is “ conceptual analysis” , is essen­
tially a variation on Hume’s Fork, the thesis that “ all the objects of 
human reason or enquiry may naturally be divided into two kinds, 
to wit, Relations of Ideas, and Matters of Fact.”4S Now Hume’s Fork 
is notoriously self-refuting, since it is not itself either a conceptual 
truth (a matter of the “ relations of ideas”) or empirically testable (a 
“ matter of fact”). And the supposition made by the contemporary 
advocate of scientism is no better. The claim that “ all the objects 
of human reason or enquiry” are or ought to be either matters of 
“ conceptual analysis” or matters of natural science is itself neither a 
conceptual truth nor a proposition for which you will find, or could 
find, the slightest evidence in natural science.46 Like Hume’s Fork, 
then, it is self-refuting.
That fact alone suffices to show that it is possible to take a cogni­
tive stance toward the world that is neither that of natural science, 
nor merely a matter of tracing out conceptual relations in a network 
of ideas that might float entirely free of mind-independent reality 
(as “ conceptual analysts” are accused of doing). The advocate of sci­
entism takes this third stance in the very act of denying that it can 
be taken. But more can be said. Famously, there are truths— namely,
44 See James Ladyman and Don Ross, with David Spurrett and John Collier, Every Thing 
Must Go: Metaphysics Naturalized (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), chap. 1.
45 David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, ed. Antony Flew (LaSalle, 
111.: Open Court, 1988), p. 71.
46 The advocate of scientism might claim that neuroscience and cognitive science support 
the conclusion that if some form of inquiry is not a kind o f natural science, then the only 
other thing it could be is a kind o f conceptual analysis. Leave aside the obvious rejoinder 
that before we can take such a claim seriously, we would need to see the specific evidence 
from neuroscience or cognitive science that purportedly shows this. The deeper problem is 
that neuroscience and cognitive science could show this even in principle only if they are the 
only genuine sources o f knowledge about human cognitive faculties, i.e., only if epistemology 
and other branches o f philosophy don’t give us genuine knowledge about our cognitive fac­
ulties that is not a kind o f scientific knowledge or a kind o f conceptual analysis. But whether 
they are the only genuine sources o f such knowledge is itself part o f what is at issue in the 
dispute between scientism and its critics. Hence, for the advocate o f scientism to appeal to 
neuroscience and cognitive science in this way would be to beg the question.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
285
those of logic and mathematics— that do not plausibly fit into either 
of the two categories Hume and his successors would, in Procrustean 
fashion, try to fit all knowledge into. Truths of logic and mathematics 
have a necessity that propositions of natural science lack and an objec­
tivity that mere “ conceptual analysis” is unable to guarantee. Some 
advocates of scientism would try to find ways of showing that logical 
and mathematical truths are not really necessary or objective after all, 
but as we saw in chapter 3, there are notorious difficulties with such 
proposals. Nor can the advocate of scientism give any non-question­
begging reason for taking them seriously in the first place. The only 
motivation he has for denying the necessity or objectivity of logic and 
mathematics is to try to save scientism from embarrassment.
Now, the arguments defended in this book show that there are 
truths of natural theology which (like the truths of logic and mathe­
matics) are necessary and objective, but which also (like the truths of 
logic and mathematics) are not propositions either of natural science 
or of mere “ conceptual analysis” . Like logic and mathematics, and 
Hke scientism’s own basic epistemological assumption, they simply 
fall between the tines of Hume’s Fork. The advocate of scientism 
might not understand how such knowledge is possible, but that is 
his problem, not the natural theologian’s. The advocate of scientism 
already has oceans of knowledge for which he cannot account—  
again, the truths of logic and mathematics, and his own metaphysi­
cal variation on Hume’s Fork— and thus has no business questioning 
the epistemological credentials of natural theology. He is Hke a thief 
caught red-handed with the loot, who demands that the police who 
have apprehended him produce the pink slip for their cruiser.
“ The fundamental laws of nature are best regarded as an 
unexplained ‘brute fact’ rather than as something in need 
of any explanation, theological or otherwise. ”
Suppose the atheist concedes that the preceding objections all fail. 
In particular, suppose he concedes that neither Hume nor quantum 
mechanics has undermined the claim that everything has an explana­
tion. Suppose he concedes that science cannot provide the ultimate 
explanation of the fundamental laws of nature. Suppose he concedes 
that there are genuine sources of explanation other than science, such 
as philosophy. He might still claim that there just happens to be no

286
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
explanation, not even one provided by any philosophical argument, 
for the specific fact that the fundamental laws of nature are as they 
are. We can explain everything else, on this view, by tracing them 
down to these fundamental laws. But those laws themselves have 
no explanation whatsoever—neither a theological explanation, nor a 
philosophical explanation, nor a scientific explanation, nor an atheis­
tic explanation, nor any other sort of explanation. They are just there, 
as an inexplicable “brute fact” , and that’s all that can be said. J.L . 
Mackie and Bertrand Russell essentially take this position.47
One problem with this view is that it is incompatible with the 
principle of sufficient reason, and as I argued in chapter 5, the princi­
ple of sufficient reason is true. Hence, there must be an explanation of 
the fundamental laws of nature, and this objection is just a nonstarter.
Another problem with this view is that it is entirely ad hoc. There 
seems to be no motivation at all for adopting it other than as a way 
to avoid having to accept arguments Uke the ones defended in this 
book— an ironic result given that atheists often Uke to accuse theists of 
tailoring their philosophical premises to fit a desired conclusion! One 
would have an independent motivation for taking it if objections to 
the principle of sufficient reason grounded in Hume’s philosophy or 
quantum mechanics succeeded, but as we have seen, those objections 
do not succeed. Moreover, as Gerson notes (as we saw above), it is 
no good for the atheist to respond to arguments Uke those defended 
in this book by saying: “Maybe things ultimately just have no expla­
nation.” The defender of the arguments can respond: “What are you 
talking about? I just gave you an explanation. If you don’t want to 
accept it, then you have to show me specificaUy what is wrong with 
it, not pretend that it doesn’t exist!”
A third problem, though, as we saw in chapter 5, is that if the fun­
damental laws of nature have no explanation, then none of the higher- 
level laws of nature can explain anything. In particular, to “ explain” 
some phenomenon P in terms of a law of nature A, and law of nature 
A in terms of law of nature B, but then to say that law of nature B 
itself has no explanation but is just a “brute fact” , is Uke placing a
47See J.L . Mackie, The Miracle of Theism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982), pp. 84-87; 
Bertrand Russell and F. C . Copleston, “ A  Debate on the Existence o f God” , in The Existence 
of God, ed. John Hick (N ew  York: Macmillan, 1964), pp. 168—78.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
287
book on a shelf, and the shelf on two brackets, but then letting go 
of the brackets in midair and expecting the book and shelf to stay 
aloft. A regress of laws is like a hierarchical series of causes of the sort 
discussed in chapter 1. It must terminate in something that is self- 
explanatory and can thus impart explanatory power without having 
to derive it. Something that is ««explained cannot do that. Some­
thing that is explained only by reference to something else also 
cannot do that, for it will be just one more thing that has to derive 
whatever explanatory power it has. Only what is purely actual, with­
out parts, has existence as its very essence, and is thus absolutely nec­
essary can do that, because only such a thing is self-explanatory.
“A  designer of the universe would be even more complex than 
the universe itself and thus require a cause of its own. ”
This objection goes back at least to Hume, and is given special empha­
sis by Dawkins.48 It should be obvious by now what is wrong with it. 
One problem is that the objection is directed at “ design arguments” Hke 
those associated with William Paley and “ Intelligent Design” theory. 
Such arguments begin with the premise that many natural objects—  
the eye, the bacterial flagellum, and other examples drawn from biol­
ogy as stock examples— are very complex insofar as they have many 
parts that have to be put together in just the right way if the object is to 
function properly. It then notes that human artifacts are also complex 
in just the same way, and have as their cause intelligent designers—  
namely, us. They conclude that it is, by analogy, highly probable that 
the natural objects in question also have an intelligent designer. This 
prompts the objection that if the designer is Hke us, then he too will 
be complex in just the way described. Hence, if other complex things 
require a cause, so too will the designer require a cause. Since the 
hypothesis of a designer would thereby merely add to the number of 
things for which we need to find an explanation, it is probable (the 
critic of the “ design argument” concludes) that a more parsimonious 
explanation than the design hypothesis is the correct one.
The arguments defended in this book simply have nothing at all 
to do with “ design arguments” of this sort. For one thing, none of
48Dawkins, God Delusion, pp. 157 -58 .

288
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
them appeals to “ complexity” in the relevant sense. It is true that the 
Neo-Platonic proof begins with the observation that the things of 
our experience are composite or have parts, but it is not at all con­
cerned with whether these things have many parts, with whether the 
parts have to be put together in exactly such-and-such a way in order 
for the thing to function, with whether the things are interestingly 
similar to human artifacts, and so forth. A pebble or a drop of water 
or any other relatively simple object which in the normal course of 
things obviously comes about through natural, unintelligent causes 
would for the Neo-Platonist do as well as any other example as a 
starting point for the proof—something which Paley or an “ Intelli­
gent Design” theorist would never take as an example of the kind of 
“ complexity” they are interested in.
Secondly, none of the arguments in this book is at all concerned, 
as the “ design argument” is, with questions about the “probability” 
of this or that object coming about through natural processes. For 
one thing, the arguments are not concerned in the first place with 
any “linearly” ordered series of causes that traces back to a temporal 
beginning point, such as the origin of this or that species. They are 
concerned instead with “ hierarchically” ordered series of causes of 
the sort described in chapter i, operating here and now and at any 
moment at which the things being explained exist. For another thing, 
the arguments claim that the existence of God follows of necessity 
from the premises from which they begin. The arguments are attempts 
at strict metaphysical demonstration, not (as “ design arguments” are) 
mere exercises in inductive or abductive reasoning. Hence, it misses 
the point to evaluate any of the arguments defended in this book the 
way one would evaluate an inductive or abductive argument—for 
example, by proposing that some explanation other than God might 
be more probable, more parsimonious, and so forth. To refute any 
of the arguments defended in this book, one has to show that it fails 
as a demonstration— that one or more of its premises is false, or that 
its conclusion does not follow logically from the premises, or that it 
somehow begs the question.
But third, and most importantly, all of the arguments defended in 
this book would agree with Hume and Dawkins that a cause of the 
world which was itself complex would require a cause of its own. 
That is why they conclude that the ultimate explanation of things

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
289
must be something absolutely simple or noncomposite rather than 
complex. That is true of the God arrived at by the arguments I’ve 
been defending, and it is not true of anything Hume, Dawkins, or any 
other atheist would posit as an alternative terminus of explanation. 
Considered as an objection to the kind of natural theology defended 
in this book, Hume’s and Dawkins’ objection completely misses 
the point.
“Anyone who rejects Zeus, Venus, Thor, Quetzalcoatl, and the 
other pagan gods— as Jews, Christians, and Muslims no less 
than atheists do— should, to be consistent, go one god further 
and reject also the God of Western monotheism. ”
This “ one god further” objection has been raised by various atheists, 
including Richard Dawkins and Colin McGinn.49 The first thing 
to say in response is that we have seen in this book that there are 
at least five arguments which demonstrate that the God of Western 
monotheism exists, whereas no one claims there are any arguments 
showing that Zeus, Venus, Thor, Quetzalcoatl, and so forth exist. 
Hence, there is no inconsistency in affirming the existence of the 
former while denying the existence of the latter. In any event, if 
the atheist claims otherwise, he will have to answer those five argu­
ments rather than merely glibly compare the God of Western mono­
theism to these various pagan gods.
A deeper problem with the objection, though, is that it very 
badly misunderstands what the debate between atheism on the one 
hand, and the classical theism of Aristotle, Plotinus, Augustine, Mai- 
monides, Avicenna, Aquinas, Leibniz, and others on the other, is 
all about. Proponents of the “ one god further” objection implic­
itly suppose that it is a question of whether there exist one or more 
instances of an unusual class of entities called “ gods” , understood as 
“ supernatural beings” comparable to werewolves, ghosts, and Santa 
Claus. And they think of the God of classical theism as merely one
49 The expression “ go one god further” is widely attributed to Dawkins, though he seems 
to have used it only in a public lecture rather than in print. M cGinn presented a version o f 
this objection in “ W hy I Am  an Atheist” , Theoretical and Applied Ethics 1 (2012): 6—10. I 
rephed to M cGinn in “ W hy M cGinn is a Pre-Theist” , which originally appeared in the same 
issue o f Theoretical and Applied Ethics (pp. 1 1 —14) and is reprinted in my Neo-Scholastic Essays 
(South Bend, Ind.: St. Augustine’s Press, 2015), pp. 193-99.

290
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
of these gods or beings alongside the others, such as Zeus, Venus, 
Thor, Quetzalcoatl, and so forth. But as we have seen in the course 
of this book, that is simply not the case. The God of classical theism 
is not a member of any species or genus— including the species or 
genus “ gods”— because if he were, he would be composed of parts 
(such as genus and specific difference), and he is instead absolutely 
simple or noncomposite. He does not share an essence with other 
members of some class of things called “gods” , because if he did, 
then there would be a distinction in him between his essence and 
his existence, and in fact he just is existence itself. He is not merely 
one unusual cause among others but rather the purely actual actual­
izer and thus the source of the causal power of all things other than 
himself (including gods like Zeus, Venus, Thor, Quetzalcoatl, if they 
existed). According to the stories we read about them, these other 
“ gods” are in various respects limited— they exhibit fluctuating emo­
tional states, have physical bodies, come into existence, have parents 
or other causes, can have their efforts frustrated, are ignorant of cer­
tain things, exhibit various moral vices, and so forth—whereas the 
God of classical theism is immutable, immaterial, eternal, uncaused, 
omnipotent, omniscient, perfectly good, and so forth. Each of these 
various gods is “ a being” alongside other beings, whereas the God 
of classical theism is not “ a being”— that is to say, something which 
merely has being and derives being from some source— but is rather 
underived or subsistent being itself, that from which anything else 
that exists or could exist derives its being.
In order to see how inept the “ one god further” objection is, it 
will be useful to consider a couple of analogies. Suppose someone 
skeptical about Euclidean geometry said:
Euclideans already agree that the particular triangles we see drawn on 
chalkboards, in books, in the sand at the beach, and so forth all have 
sides that are less than perfectly straight. But I maintain that Euclidean 
plane triangles as such have sides that are less than perfectly straight. All 
I am doing is extending the doubt that Euclideans share with me to 
their favored triangles too. I find their disbelief in the perfect straight­
ness of the sides of the triangles we see drawn in books thoroughly 
sensible. I would merely urge them to push it one stage further, to 
triangularity itself. I favor total disbelief in the straightness of the sides 
of triangles, whereas they are selective in their disbelief.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
291
Or suppose a critic of Plato’s Theory of Forms said:
Platonists already agree with me that the things we come across in 
everyday experience are all in various ways imperfect or less than fully 
good instances of their kinds. But I maintain that the Form of the 
Good is also imperfect or less than a fully good instance of goodness.
All I am doing is extending the doubt Platonists share with me to their 
own favored entity. I find their disbelief in the perfect goodness of the 
things of our experience thoroughly sensible. I would merely urge 
them to push it one stage further, to the Form of the Good itself. I 
favor total disbelief in the idea that things are ever perfect instances of 
their kinds, whereas they are selective in their disbelief.
Now, obviously such remarks would hardly constitute devastating 
objections to Euclidean geometry and Platonic metaphysics. Rather, 
our imagined anti-Euclidean and anti-Platonist would be making 
serious category mistakes, and demonstrating that they have badly 
misunderstood the views they are dismissing. In particular, the anti- 
Euclidean in question would be supposing that the concept of a tri­
angle as defined in textbooks of Euclidean geometry is merely one 
triangle alongside all the others that one comes across in traffic signs, 
dinner bells, and the Hke, only invisible and better drawn. But of 
course, that is not what it is at all. What the textbooks describe is not 
a triangle, not even an especially well-drawn one, but rather (Euclid­
ean) triangularity itself, and the triangles one comes across in everyday 
experience are defective precisely because they fail to conform to the 
standard it represents. Similarly, the anti-Platonist in question sup­
poses that the Form of the Good is merely one more or less perfect 
or imperfect instance of some class or category alongside the other 
instances, albeit an especially impressive one. But of course, that is 
not at all what the Form of the Good is supposed to be. The Form 
of the Good doesn’t have goodness in some more or less incomplete 
way; rather, it just is goodness, participation in which determines the 
degree of goodness had by things which do have goodness only in 
some more or less incomplete way.
Notice that the point has nothing to do with whether either 
Euclidean geometry or Platonism is true, or with whether there are 
good arguments for or against either view. Even if the material world 
actually conforms to some non-Eucfidean geometry, on which the

292
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
sides of triangles are curved rather than straight, the remarks of our 
hypothetical anti-Euclidean would still be confused. For the Euclid­
ean would even in that case not be making the kind of mistake our 
hypothetical anti-Euclidean supposes. It would not be that there are 
Euclidean triangles but that they too have, after all, sides that are 
imperfectly straight; that claim doesn’t even make sense. It would 
rather be that Euclidean triangles, which of course always have per­
fectly straight sides, just aren’t instantiated after all. Similarly, even 
if objections to Platonism Hke the “ Third Man” Argument are cor­
rect, the remarks of our hypothetical anti-Platonist would also still be 
confused. For it would not in that case be that there is a Form of the 
Good but that it too is, after all, less than perfectly good; that claim 
also makes no sense. It would rather be that there is no Form of the 
Good in the first place.
The “ one god further” objection commits a similar blunder. To 
suppose that the God of classical theism is “ a god” or “ a being” along­
side Zeus, Venus, Thor, Quetzalcoatl, and so forth is like supposing 
that triangularly in the abstract is one triangle alongside the others one 
finds on chalkboards, in books, and so forth, or that Plato’s Form of 
the Good is merely one more or less good object alongside others, 
such as good people, good food, and good books. It is to commit a 
crude category mistake. And here too, the point has nothing to do 
with whether or not classical theism is true, or with whether the 
arguments for it are ultimately any good. Even if the atheist were 
correct, that would not be because it turned out that the God of clas­
sical theism really was after all another nonexistent member of a class 
of “ gods” which includes Zeus, Venus, Thor, Quetzalcoatl, and so 
forth. That sort of suggestion doesn’t even make sense, any more than 
the suggestions of our hypothetical anti-Eudidean or anti-Platonist 
make sense.
“ The God of philosophical theism is not the God most ordinary 
religious believers believe in. ”
There are two problems with this objection. First, it would be irrel­
evant even if it were true. If the arguments defended in this book 
succeed, then the God of philosophical theism exists and atheism 
is therefore false. The only question that remains is whether some

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
293
religion such as Judaism, Christianity, and Islam gives us further, 
divinely revealed knowledge about this God. The serious remaining 
debate will be between theists of various stripes, not between athe­
ism and theism.
But the objection in question is not true. For one thing, some 
religions to which ordinary religious believers adhere embrace the 
God of philosophical theism. For example, it is standard Catholic 
teaching that the God of the Bible and the God which can be known 
by means of philosophical arguments are one and the same. Accord­
ing to the Catholic position, some of what we know about this God 
(such as that he is omnipotent and omniscient) can be known both by 
philosophical argumentation and by divine revelation, and some of 
what we know about him (such as that he is a Trinity) can be known 
only by divine revelation. But it is, Catholicism teaches, the same 
one God about which we know via these different sources. Other 
religions make similar claims.
The critic might object that what theologians and official Church 
documents say is one thing, but what the ordinary man in the pew 
thinks is another thing entirely. But that is also false. True, the aver­
age, uneducated religious believer knows little or nothing about the 
doctrine of divine simpHcity, the distinction between essence and 
existence, the theory of actuaHty and potentiaHty, and other techni­
cal philosophical concepts that enter into the articulation and defense 
of classical theism. But then, the average, uneducated person also 
has a very crude understanding of what scientists mean when they 
talk about molecules, atoms, fields of force, and so forth. He might 
wrongly suppose that particles Hke the ones in question are HteraHy 
Hke little baUs connected by sticks. It doesn’t foHow that he does not 
after aU beHeve in atoms, molecules, and the Hke, but only that he has 
a much less sophisticated understanding of these things than experts 
do. Similarly, the average religious beHever beHeves, just as the phil­
osophical theologian does, that God is the cause of the world, that he 
is unique, that he is uncaused and never came into existence, that he 
is aU-powerful, aU-knowing, and aH-good, and so forth. He does not 
articulate or defend these beliefs the way the philosopher would, but 
that doesn’t entail that he doesn’t beHeve in the same God that the 
philosopher does. Rather, he just has a less sophisticated understand­
ing of that God.

294
“ The reality of suffering and of other kinds of evil shows 
that God does not exist ”
The appeal to the “problem of evil” is, of course, one of the classic 
objections to theism. Contemporary philosophers of religion com­
monly distinguish between two aspects of the problem. First, is the 
existence of suffering and other kinds of evil logically consistent with 
the existence of God? Second, if it is consistent, what is the reason 
why God allows suffering and other kinds of evil to exist? To justify 
an affirmative answer to the first question is to give a defense of the­
ism against the atheistic objection from evil. To answer the second 
question is to put forward a theodicy.50 The two issues are obviously 
related, but still distinct. One could argue that the existence of evil 
is compatible with God’s existence without claiming to be able to 
explain exactly why God allows the evils that actually exist.
Since providing a defense is sufficient to rebut the present objec­
tion whether or not one goes on to develop a theodicy, that is the 
aspect of the issue I will focus on here. And it is not difficult to give 
such a defense. More ambitious versions of the atheistic argument 
from evil allege that the existence of evil is strictly inconsistent with 
the existence of God. For example, J. L. Mackie once argued as fol­
lows: God is supposed to be omnipotent and perfectly good. But 
there are no limits to what an omnipotent thing can do, and a good 
thing will eliminate evil as far as it can. So, if God exists, then he 
would be able to eliminate all evil and would want to do so. But evil 
exists. So, either God is not really omnipotent or not perfectly good, 
or he does not exist at all.51
Now, what I said about omnipotence and perfect goodness in 
chapter 6 should make it clear what is wrong with this argument. The 
problem is with Mackie’s second premise. First of all, it is not true 
to say without qualification that there are no limits to what an omnip­
otent thing can do. Even God cannot make a round square, or cause 
two and two to equal five. Making self-contradictory statements true
50 Contrasting a “ theodicy” in this narrow sense with a “ defense” has become common in 
contemporary philosophy o f religion. Older Thomistic works use the term “ theodicy” in a 
broader sense, as a synonym for “ natural theology” in general rather than merely a treatment 
of the problem o f evil specifically.
5IJ.L . Mackie, “Evil and Omnipotence” , Mind 64 (1955): 20 0 -12, reprinted in The Problem 
of Evil, ed. Marilyn M cCord Adams and Robert Merrihew Adams (Oxford: Oxford Univer­
sity Press, 1990), pp. 25-3 7.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
295
is not the sort of thing which it makes sense to talk about doing; 
hence, even God cannot do them. Now, if it turns out that there are 
some goods which logically cannot be had without tolerating certain 
evils, then even God could not create those goods without tolerating 
the evils in question, any more than he could make a round square. 
And that brings us to the second problem with Mackie’s second 
premise. It is not true to say that a good thing will eliminate all evil 
as far as it can. For to get rid of some evils may entail also getting 
rid of the goods that presuppose those evils. Hence, even if a good 
thing could get rid of those evils, it might refrain from doing so so 
as to ensure that the goods in question are preserved. The basic idea 
is familiar from everyday life. If a child finds it extremely unpleasant 
to do his homework, a parent could easily remedy this unpleasant­
ness by telling the child that he needn’t bother doing it. But a good 
parent will not do so, because to eliminate the unpleasantness of 
doing homework would also be to prevent the child from learning 
and to lead him to disobey the reasonable instructions of his teacher. 
And it is good for a child to learn and to obey his teacher’s reason­
able instructions.
What sorts of goods would be eliminated if God were to get rid 
of all evil? The main examples are familiar from the literature on 
the problem of evil. For instance, it is good for there to be creatures 
which act of their own free will rather than being mere automata. 
But creatures with free will might abuse it and carry out evil actions. 
So, to eliminate the possibility of such evil actions, God would have 
to eliminate free will as well. Now, Mackie considers this example 
and has a response to it. While it is possible for a creature with free 
will to choose to do evil, it is of course also possible for such a crea­
ture to choose not to do evil. Indeed, it is possible in principle for a 
free creature never to choose to do evil, but always freely to choose to 
do only what is good. So, Mackie says, to say that God could create 
a world without evil in it only by creating a world without free will 
is to assume a false alternative. There is another possibility he could 
have chosen— namely, to create a world in which there are creatures 
with free will but where they only ever freely choose to do good and 
never choose evil. And if God is perfectly good, Mackie says, then 
that is the sort of world he should have created.
Now, some theists have claimed that Mackie is wrong to assume 
that God could have created a world with free creatures who never

296
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
choose evil. They claim that it is possible that in any world with free 
creatures that God could have created, at least some of them would 
sometimes go wrong.52 53 But the theist need not take this route. We 
can agree with Mackie that God could have created a world with 
free will and no evil. We can even agree that in such a world there 
would be many morally significant choices made, such as the choice 
not to murder or steal from others. That is to say, a world in which 
free creatures never choose to do evil need not be a world where 
only morally trivial choices are freely made (e.g., choices about 
what to eat for dinner, where to buy a house, etc.). It doesn’t follow 
from that, though, that God could have created a world with free 
will, no evil, and all the moral good that actually exists in the world. 
For there are still certain kinds of exercise of free will that presup­
pose the existence of people who choose evil. For example, acts of 
forgiveness and mercy are not possible unless there are people who 
actually do evil things for which they can be forgiven, and therefore 
deserve punishments which we might mercifully refrain from inflict­
ing. For people freely to choose to act in a forgiving or merciful way, 
then, is possible only in a world in which other people have actually 
chosen to do evil. Then there are moral virtues which do not presup­
pose that some people choose to carry out evil actions, but which still 
presuppose that there exists evil of other sorts. For example, you can­
not have courage unless there is danger in the face of which you are 
tempted to avoid doing your duty, but choose to do it anyway. You 
cannot show compassion unless there are people who have suffered 
misfortunes of some sort (whether it be illness, the death of a loved 
one, unemployment, or whatever) and toward whom you can act 
compassionately. You cannot choose to sacrifice something for the 
sake of either your own moral improvement or the good of another 
person without thereby losing the good thing that you are sacrificing. 
And so forth.53
So, it is not merely the goodness of free will in the abstract which 
we need to take into consideration. It is not even merely morally
52 Alvin Plantinga is the best-known advocate o f this position. See Plantinga’s The Nature of 
Necessary (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1974) and God, Freedom, and Evil (Grand Rapids, 
Mich.: Eerdmans, 1977).
53 John Hick famously emphasizes what he calls the “ soul-making” function o f having to 
deal with suffering and other kinds o f evil in Evil and the God of Love, rev. ed. (San Francisco: 
Harper and R ow , 1977).

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
297
significant free choices that we need to consider. We also need to 
consider morally significant choices of the sort which manifest or con­
tribute to the development of virtues like forgiveness, mercy, cour­
age, compassion, and so on. And even though some free actions, and 
even some morally significant free actions, could exist in a world in 
which there is no evil, the latter sorts of free actions could not.54
So, Mackie’s argument fails. Indeed, Mackie in later years con­
ceded that “ the problem of evil does not, after all, show that the cen­
tral doctrines of theism are logically inconsistent with one another” 
and that “we cannot, indeed, take the problem of evil as a conclusive 
disproof of traditional theism.” 55 Still, the later Mackie claimed that 
not all the evil that exists could be accounted for in the manner sug­
gested. Other atheists too have suggested that, even if the existence of 
evil does not strictly disprove theism, it still makes it probable that there 
is no God. This position has come to be known as the “ evidential 
argument from evil” , and an influential version of it is presented by 
William Row e.56 Row e argues that an omnipotent, omniscient, and 
wholly good being would prevent any suffering that could be pre­
vented without losing a greater good or bringing about some equally 
bad or worse evil. But it is probable, claims Rowe, that at least some 
of the suffering that actually exists in the world could have been pre­
vented without losing a greater good or bringing about some equally 
bad or worse evil. Therefore, he concludes, it is probable that there is 
no omnipotent, omniscient, and wholly good being.
By way of example, Row e asks us to imagine a case where “in 
some distant forest lightning strikes a dead tree, resulting in a forest 
fire ... [in which] a fawn is trapped, horribly burned, and lies in 
terrible agony for several days before death relieves its suffering.” 57
54 This is not to say, with Leibniz, that the actual world is the best o f all possible worlds 
or that God had to create the best o f all possible worlds. God could have refrained from cre­
ating this or any other world, and could have created a world that is better in various respects 
than the actual world. The point is just that, given that he has created this world, he allows the 
evils in it to exist because he draws out o f them certain goods that would not have been pos­
sible without them (even if other goods, and other worlds that are better in certain respects, 
would still have been possible without them).
55 Mackie, Miracle of Theism, pp. 154, 176.
56William R ow e, “ The Problem o f Evil and Some Varieties o f Atheism” , American 
Philosophical Quarterly 16 (1979): 3 3 5 -4 1, reprinted in Adams and Adams, Problem of Evil, 
pp. 12 6 -37. Subsequent page references are to the reprint.
57Ibid., pp. 129-30.

The idea is that, even if an omnipotent, omniscient, and perfectly 
good God allows human beings to suffer so that they might develop 
virtues like courage, compassion, mercy, and the like, suffering like 
that of the fawn seems clearly pointless, unredeemed by any greater 
good drawn out of it. To be sure, Rowe concedes that “we are not 
in a position to prove ’ that there is no greater good drawn out of such 
examples of suffering and “ cannot know with certainty” that there is 
not.58 There could in principle be such a greater good that we simply 
don’t know about. But he thinks it is rational to beHeve that there is 
not, and thus rational to believe that there is no God.
The problem with Row e’s argument is that it can be rational to 
beHeve this only if we donyt already have independent reason to think 
that God exists, and thus independent reason to think that there must 
be some greater good that God wiH draw out of instances of suffering 
Hke the one cited by Rowe. And we do have such independent rea­
sons. For as we have seen in this book, there are at least five ways of 
demonstrating that God exists, and further arguments showing that 
he is omnipotent, omniscient, and perfectly good. Hence, we know, 
on the basis of these very arguments, that there must in fact be some 
greater good that God wiU draw out of instances of suffering Hke 
the ones Rowe has in mind, whether or not we can know what 
that greater good is. Now, by Row e’s own admission, there could in 
principle be such a greater good, and thus he would have to admit 
also that if we really do have independent arguments which show 
that there is an omnipotent, omniscient, and perfectly good God, 
then we have independent reason to think that there is in fact such a 
greater good. And in that case his “ evidential argument from evil” 
fails. Certainly it is no chaHenge at aH to the arguments defended in 
this book. For the “ evidential argument” to succeed as a chaHenge to 
those arguments, its defenders would first have to provide an indepen­
dent refutation of the arguments of this book. And if they could do 
that, they wouldn’t need the “ evidential argument” in the first place.
It is worth adding that it is not just that we happen not to know, 
of every instance of evü that exists, what the reasons are why God 
aUows it. That we don’t know is precisely what we should expect, though 
some of the grounds for this judgment require argumentation that
2 9 8 
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
58Ibid., p. 130 (emphasis added).

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
299
would take us well beyond the scope of this book. In particular, they 
require a defense of the claim that we have immortal souls, so that 
the sufferings of this life can be balanced out by greater goods to be 
enjoyed in the hereafter.59 Suppose there is such an afterlife. Then the 
evils that exist in this life could be unredeemable only if there could 
not be in the afterlife a good great enough to outweigh the evils of 
this life. But it would be quite absurd to claim that there could not 
be such an outweighing good. For one thing, this afterlife would be 
endless, given the immortality of the soul, whereas even the worst 
sufferings of this life do not last. For another thing, we are no more 
in a position to understand what the afterlife is Hke than a small child 
is in a position to understand what adulthood is Hke. And of course, 
children often cannot understand what good could possibly come 
from certain things they find unpleasant— doing their homework, 
eating their spinach, doing chores, being punished for misbehavior, 
and so forth— until they are older. Once they reach adulthood, they 
understand matters they could not have understood while still chil­
dren, including the reasons why it was worthwhile for them to have 
undergone these unpleasant things. Now, God is, needless to say, 
infinitely more knowledgeable and powerful than any parent, and an 
afterlife would be vastly more unlike the present life than adulthood 
is unlike childhood. Hence, if there is an afterlife, we should expect 
both that God will be able in that afterlife to produce a good that will 
outweigh all the evils of this fife, but also that we will not yet be able 
in our current circumstances completely to understand how he will 
do so.
Fully to develop and defend such an idea would be to provide 
a theodicy, and again, that is beyond the scope of this book. And 
it is unnecessary for the present purpose, which is merely to pro­
vide a defense of theism against the objection from evil. What mat­
ters for that purpose is that an afterlife with outweighing goods is at 
least possible, for that suffices to reinforce the point that there is no
59 For exposition and defense o f Aquinas’ argument for the immortality o f the soul, see 
Edward Feser, Aquinas (Oxford: Oneworld Publications, 2009), chap. 4. For detailed defense 
o f the thesis that the human intellect is incorporeal, which plays a crucial part in Aqui­
nas’ argument for immortality, see m y essay “ Kripke, Ross, and the Immaterial Aspects o f 
Thought” , American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 87 (2013): 1-3 2 , reprinted in Neo-Scholastic 
Essays, pp. 2 17 -5 3 .

300
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
inconsistency between the existence of God and the existence of suf­
fering and other kinds of evil.
I have dealt with other aspects of the problem of evil, such as the 
analysis of evil as a privation and the question whether God must 
create the best possible world, in earlier chapters, especially chapter 6.
“I f God really existed, then he would not be ‘hidden’ from us, 
but his existence would be obvious to everyone. ”
This objection, which has gained some popularity in recent years, is 
sometimes called the argument from “ divine hiddenness” .60 It rests on 
two crucial assumptions: first, that if God really existed, then his exis­
tence would be obvious to most people; and second, that his existence 
is not in fact obvious to most people. But why should we accept either 
of these assumptions?
Let’s consider them in order. J.L . Schellenberg, a prominent 
proponent of this objection, grounds the first assumption in the 
idea that if God existed, then he would intend between himself and 
human beings “ a personal and positively meaningful and explicit 
relationship of the sort that logically presupposes each party’s belief 
in the other’s existence” .61 The claim is that since God would 
intend such a relationship with us, he would make sure that every­
one knew he exists. Since (the objection claims) he has not done 
so, he must not exist at all. But why suppose that God would intend 
such a relationship? Not all theists have supposed that. For example, 
Aristotle famously thought that the divine Unmoved Mover of the 
world contemplated himself eternally, but took no cognizance of 
us. So, Schellenberg’s argument is just a nonstarter against a theistic 
view of that sort.
O f course, many theists, such as Jews and Christians, do think 
that God intends a personal relationship with human beings— and 
correctly so, in my view. The point, though, is that Schellenberg’s 
objection fails even prima facie as a completely general argument for 
atheism. It has no force against versions of theism which are happy 
to allow that God is or might be uninterested in human beings.
60J. L. Schellenberg, Divine Hiddenness and Human Reason, with a N ew  Preface (Ithaca, 
N .Y .: Cornell University Press, 2006).
61 Ibid., p. viii.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
3OI
Moreover, it has no force even against much of what is claimed by 
theists who do think that God intends a personal relationship with 
human beings. Consider that the arguments defended in this book 
purport to show that there is an uncaused cause of the world who 
is one, simple or noncomposite, purely actual, immutable, immate­
rial, eternal, omnipotent, omniscient, and so forth. Those attributes 
are, of course, all part of the traditional theistic package for Jews and 
Christians no less than for purely philosophical theists. How does 
Schellenbergs argument in any way cast doubt on those particular 
claims? Yet if those claims are true, then that suffices to show that 
theism (of a sort) is true and atheism is false.
O f course, I have also argued that God is perfectly good and that 
he loves his creation, and Schellenberg might claim that his argument 
casts doubt on at least those aspects of the position defended in this 
book. However, it does not in fact do so, any more than the problem 
of evil casts doubt on it. For as with the problem of evil, the correct 
thing to say is that since the arguments of this book establish that 
there is a God who is perfectly good and loves his creation (and also 
has the other attributes mentioned), it follows that to the extent that 
he has not made his existence more obvious, there must be some 
greater good he is drawing out of this circumstance. Schellenberg 
would have to suppose that there could not possibly be such a greater 
good, but there is no better reason to suppose that than there is rea­
son to suppose that there could not possibly be a greater good that God 
draws out of the suffering of the fawn and similar examples (a suppo­
sition which, as we saw, even Rowe doesn’t make).
What reason might God have for not making his existence more 
obvious? John Hick proposes that God created us at an “ epistemic 
distance” from him precisely so that we would be free to choose 
whether or not to enter into a personal relationship with him.62 Now, 
I think that Hick massively overstates the extent of this “ epistemic 
distance” . He thinks the universe is “ religiously ambiguous” in that it 
could with equal plausibility be interpreted in either a theistic or athe­
istic way.63 By contrast, and as is evident from this book, I think there
62 Hick, Evil and the God of Love, p. 281.
63 See esp. John Hick, An Interpretation of Religion (N ew  Haven, Conn.: Yale University 
Press, 1989).

302
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
are decisive arguments for the existence of God. I also think Hick 
overstates the extent to which the free choice concerning whether or 
not to enter into a personal relationship with God depends on doubt 
about whether he really exists. The history of ancient Israel, of the 
Church, and of Islam and other religions is rife with theistic believers 
who have done all kinds of evil things, and they didn’t do these things 
because they decided that atheism might be true after all.
But there is arguably a kernel of truth in Hick’s position. Just as 
God allows us a very long leash with respect to errors in what we do—  
even to the extent of moral breakdown at the level of entire societies, 
genocide and other atrocities, and so forth— so too does he allow us a 
very long leash with respect to errors in what we think. As the cliche 
has it, there is nothing so absurd but that some philosopher has said 
it. The human mind is capable of coming up with, and getting itself 
to believe, all sorts of bizarre things. Philosophers and other intellec­
tuals have denied the existence of change, time, the material world, 
causality, free will, and the self. Some have even denied the existence 
of consciousness and of beliefs, desires, and meaningful thoughts in 
general. It is hardly surprising that some people have also denied the 
existence of God. Because our minds are finite, they are capable of 
error, and because we have free will, we are capable of turning our 
attention away from evidence and fines of argument which point in 
the direction of God’s existence and focusing it instead on evidence 
and fines of argument that seem to point away from it. And people 
can have various motives for wanting to do so (about which I’ll say 
more in a moment). To the extent that there is “ epistemic distance” 
between us and God, that is an inevitable result of the fact that we 
have finite minds and free will.
But in fact this “ epistemic distance” is not great, which brings us 
to the second assumption behind the “ divine hiddenness” objection—  
namely, that God’s existence is not obvious to most people. It is 
true that relatively few people have endorsed or even been familiar 
with philosophical theism of the sort defended in this book. But it 
hardly follows from that that most people are atheists or even doubt­
ful about God’s existence. On the contrary, historically speaking, the 
vast majority of human beings have been theists of some sort, and 
most human beings today are theists of some sort. It is true that peo­
ple have often disagreed over the details, with some people endorsing

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
303
a theism on which God is distinct from the world, others endorsing 
some kind of pantheism, yet others believing some form of polythe­
ism, and yet others having a more inchoate conception of the divine. 
But that there is some divine reality is something most people have 
not only affirmed, but affirmed with some confidence, despite their 
not having fancy philosophical arguments for their belief. Indeed, 
atheists often complain of the confidence ordinary people have in 
their religious beliefs despite their not having fancy arguments for it. 
Evidently, if God is “ hidden” from most people, most people seem 
to be unaware of the fact.
O f course, the atheist might respond that the trouble is that the 
average person’s reasons for religious belief are (so the atheist thinks) 
weak, and if they realized how weak these reasons are, then they 
would see that God really is hidden from them. But this is Hke say­
ing that the fact that the average person’s understanding of modem 
science and the evidence in its favor is often weak (think again of the 
layman who thinks that atoms are literally little balls connected by 
sticks) shows that scientific truths are all “ hidden” from the average 
person. And that is clearly not the case. Many nonexperts really do 
have some knowledge of science even if their degree of understand­
ing of it is much lower than that of the expert, and even if what 
they know is mixed in with errors. And as I suggested above, the 
same thing is tme of the average religious believer. His reasons for 
regarding God as the cause of the world (for example) may not be 
sophisticated and may be mixed in with various errors, but his belief 
is nevertheless correct and often reflects at least a greatly oversimpli­
fied approximation of the arguments of natural theology.
And indeed, most of the experts on this subject— philosophers, 
scientists, and theologians— have, historically, not only believed that 
there is a divine cause of the world, but held that this can be known 
via philosophical arguments. This is true in Western thought from 
the beginning until fairly recently, with the list including Xeno­
phanes, Anaximander, Plato, Aristotle, Plotinus, Augustine, Mai- 
monides, Anselm, Avicenna, Averroes, Al-Ghazali, Aquinas, Scotus, 
Descartes, Leibniz, Newton, Boyle, Locke, Berkeley, Clarke, Paley, 
and many others. As the list of recent defenders of the cosmological 
argument given earlier in this chapter indicates, there are still many 
philosophers who think this. O f course, the atheist might retort that

304
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
this is now a minority view and that the arguments for theism that 
earlier generations of philosophers endorsed have been shown to 
be no good. But this would be to beg the question, because as I 
have tried to show in this book, the arguments associated with the 
Aristotelian, Neo-Platonic, Augustinian, Thomistic, and rationalist 
traditions have not been refuted.
Moreover, we have also seen that many of the objections rou­
tinely flung at the arguments of natural theology, and on the basis of 
which many contemporary intellectuals suppose that the arguments 
have been decisively refuted— objections Uke “ If everything has a 
cause, then what caused God?”— are demonstrably incompetent. Now, 
if most contemporary intellectuals who reject theism do so on the 
basis of such clueless objections, then they hardly have any right to 
accuse ordinary religious believers of believing what they do on the 
basis of inadequate evidence. That many of such intellectuals regard it 
as obvious that God is “ hidden” says less about natural theology than 
it does about their understanding of natural theology.
“Arguments for God’s existence are just rationalizations of 
preordained conclusions, and thus need not be taken seriously. ”
One problem with this objection is that it is a textbook example of an 
ad hominem fallacy of “poisoning the well”— rejecting an argument 
merely because of some alleged vested interest or suspect motive on 
the part of the person giving it. In fact, as all logicians know, whether 
an argument is good or bad is completely independent of the moti­
vation or character of the person giving it.
Another problem is that this accusation can be flung with no less 
justice at some critics of arguments for God’s existence. For just as 
a person can, of course, want to beHeve in God and therefore be 
incHned to look for reasons for this belief and to avoid examining 
the arguments for atheism too carefully, so too can a person have a 
bias in the opposite direction. That is to say, a person might want not 
to beHeve in God, and wiU therefore be incHned to look for reasons to 
justify atheism and to avoid examining too carefuUy the arguments 
for theism. Philosopher Thomas Nagel once acknowledged that a 
“fear of reHgion” seems to influence the work of many of his feHow 
secularist inteUectuals. He writes:

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
305
I speak from experience, being strongly subject to this fear myself: I 
want atheism to be true and am made uneasy by the fact that some 
of the most intelligent and well-informed people I know are religious 
believers. It isn’t just that I don’t beHeve in God and, naturally, hope 
that I’m right in my belief. It’s that I hope there is no God! I don’t 
want there to be a God; I don’t want the universe to be like that. My 
guess is that this cosmic authority problem is not a rare condition and 
that it is responsible for much of the scientism and reductionism of 
our time.64
That is not to say that all atheists are intellectually dishonest. But 
neither are all theists intellectually dishonest. In any event, and again, 
whether either side is intellectually honest or not really doesn’t matter 
for present purposes. What matters is whether the arguments either 
side gives are good arguments, and that is something which can be 
determined only by actually examining the arguments, not by wast­
ing time looking for excuses not to do so.
“No one can claim to have a proof or demonstration that God 
exists, since so many people doubt or deny his existence even 
after hearing the alleged proofs. ”
One problem with this objection is that, as we have seen, many of the 
criticisms commonly raised against arguments of the sort defended in 
this book are woefully incompetent, directed at crude caricatures and 
reflecting ignorance of what defenders of the arguments actually said. 
That many patently ill-informed people reject an alleged demonstra­
tion hardly gives us a good reason to think it fails as a demonstration.
A second problem is that those who dismiss the very idea that the 
existence of God might be demonstrable typically hold arguments 
for God’s existence to a standard to which they do not hold other 
arguments. For instance, the mere fact that someone somewhere has 
raised an objection against an argument for God’s existence is com­
monly treated by skeptics as showing that “ the argument fails”— as if 
an argument is a good one only if no one objects to it but all assent to 
it upon hearing it. O f course, skeptics do not treat other philosophical 
arguments this way. For example, that an argument for materialism
64Thomas Nagel, The Last Word (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), pp. 130—31.

30 6
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
or against free will has its critics is not taken to show that those argu­
ments simply “fail” . The attitude in these cases is rather: “Yes, like 
any philosophical argument, this one has its critics, but that doesn’t 
mean the critics are right. At the end of the day, the objections might 
be answerable and the argument ultimately correct, and we need 
to keep an open mind about it and consider what might be said in 
its defense.” In general, even the most eccentric philosophical argu­
ments are treated as if they are always “ on the table” as options wor­
thy of reconsideration. Mysteriously, though, arguments for God’s 
existence are refused this courtesy. The mere fact that Hume (say) 
said such-and-such two centuries ago is often treated as if it consti­
tuted a once-and-for-all decisive refutation.65
A third problem with the objection is that those who raise it often 
misunderstand what classical theists Hke Aquinas mean when they say 
that God’s existence can be “ demonstrated” . What is meant is that 
the conclusion that God exists follows with necessity or deductive 
validity from premises that are certain, where the certainty of the 
premises can in turn be shown via metaphysical analysis. That entails 
that such a demonstration gives us knowledge that is more secure 
than what any scientific inference can give us (as “ science” is gener­
ally understood today), in two respects. First, the inference is not a 
merely probabilistic one, nor an “argument to the best explanation” 
which appeals to considerations like parsimony, fit with existing 
background theory, and so forth, but where some alternative expla­
nation might in principle be correct. Again, it is instead an attempt 
at a strict deduction to what follows necessarily from the premises. 
Second, the premises cannot be overthrown by further empirical 
inquiry, because they have to do with what any possible empirical in­
quiry must presuppose.
65 Hilary Putnam noted the double standard too many contemporary secular analytic phi­
losophers bring to bear when evaluating arguments for God’s existence: “ The majority o f 
these philosophers take it to be quite clear what a ‘proof’ is: a demonstration that something 
is the case using the standards (or supposed standards) of, if not science, then, let us say, ana­
lytic philosophy. In addition, it is supposed that a sound proof ought to be able to convince 
any rational person who sees it. (W hy the arguments o f analytic philosophers themselves— not 
even the philosophical, as opposed to technical logical, arguments o f Frege, or Russell, or 
Quine, or Davidson, or David Lewis— all fail to meet this test is not something that analytical 
philosophers discuss a great deal.)” Hilary Putnam, “ Thoughts Addressed to an Analytical 
Thomist” , Monist 80 (1997): 487-88.

COMMON OBJECTIONS TO NATURAL THEOLOGY
307
For example, the Aristotelian proof begins with the premise that 
change occurs, together with premises to the effect that a potential 
can be actuaHzed only by what is already actual (the principle of cau­
sality) and that a hierarchically ordered series of causes cannot regress 
to infinity. The first premise is in a sense empirical, which is why the 
argument is not a priori. We know that change occurs because we 
experience it. However, it is not a premise which can be overthrown 
by further empirical inquiry, because any possible future experience 
will itself be a further instance of change. (We can coherently hold, 
on empirical grounds, that this or that purported instance of change is 
unreal; but we cannot coherently maintain on empirical grounds that 
all change is unreal.) The other premises can be defended by vari­
ous metaphysical arguments, such as arguments to the effect that the 
principle of causaHty follows from the principle of sufficient reason 
(PSR), and that PSR rightly understood can be established via reduc­
tio ad absurdum of any attempt to deny it. We have seen in this book 
how such a defense would go, and how there are at least four other 
demonstrations (the Neo-Platonic proof, the Augustinian proof, the 
Thomistic proof, and the rationalist proof) which can be defended 
in similar ways.
Now, arguments of this sort are certainly ambitious, but there is 
nothing in the strategy they embody that entails that every reader 
ought immediately to see the force of the argument and assent to it, 
or that significant philosophical work won’t have to be done in order 
to defend the key premises. It does not entail that even fair-minded 
and well-informed readers will automaticaUy see the force of such 
arguments and agree with them. Hence, the fact that an argument is 
controversial does not entail that it fails as a demonstration.
What is needed is merely that when aU is said and done, the argu­
ment can successfully be defended against all objections claiming to 
show that the conclusion does not reaHy follow or that the premises 
are doubtful. Now, that has been accompHshed in this book with 
respect to the proofs just mentioned, from all of which it foUows that 
God exists. Quod erat demonstrandum.


FURTHER READING
What follows are some suggestions for further reading for those who 
want to investigate in greater depth the arguments defended in this 
book. There are, in addition to these arguments, other sound argu­
ments for God’s existence, and I also make some recommendations 
for readers who want to investigate those arguments.
The Aristotelian proof
Aristotle’s classic statements of the argument from motion or change 
to an Unmoved Mover can be found in book 8 of his Physics and 
book 12 of his Metaphysics. The argument has been reformulated in 
various ways by many Aristotelian philosophers over the centuries. 
For example, Maimonides presents versions of it in The Guide of the 
Perplexed, book 2, chapter 1. Thomas Aquinas presents a version 
of it as the first of his famous Five Ways in the Summa Theologiae, 
part I, question 2, article 3. Aquinas develops the argument at greatest 
length, however, in book 1, chapter 13, of Summa Contra Gentiles. 
All of these works can be found in various translations, both in print 
and online.
One contemporary statement and defense of the AristoteHan proof 
can be found in chapters 2 and 3 of David Conway, The Rediscovery 
of Wisdom: From Here to Antiquity in Quest of Sophia (London: Mac­
millan, 2000). Defenses of Aquinas’ version can be found in David S. 
Oderberg, “ ‘Whatever Is Changing Is Being Changed by Something 
Else’: A Reappraisal of Premise One of the First Way” , in Mind, 
Method and Morality: Essays in Honour of Anthony Kenny, ed. J. Cot­
tingham and P. Hacker (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 
pp. 140-64; and Michael Augros, “ Ten Objections to the Prima Via” , 
Peripatetikos 6 (2007): 59-101. As these two references indicate, most 
contemporary defenses of the AristoteHan argument occur in the
309

310
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
context of discussions of Aquinas’ Five Ways, so the interested reader 
is directed to the contemporary works on the Five Ways that I refer 
to below.
The Neo-Platonic proof
The basic idea of the Neo-Platonic proof is given expression in the 
fifth of Plotinus’ Enneads, fourth tractate. Various translations of 
the Enneads are available, both in print and online. Detailed expo­
sition of Plotinus’ argument can be found in chapter i of Lloyd P. 
Gerson, Plotinus (London: Routledge, 1994).
Aquinas does not present an argument exactly Hke the one I defend 
in chapter 2. However, he puts such emphasis on the idea that God 
qua the ultimate cause of things must be simple or noncomposite that 
an argument Hke the one I present is, I think, implicit in his work. 
See Summa Contra Gentiles, book 1, chapter 18, and Summa Theolo­
giae, part I, question 3.
An important argument that is different from Plotinus’, Aqui­
nas’, and mine but bears a family resemblance to them has been 
defended by William F. Vallicella. See “ From Facts to God: An 
Onto-Cosmological Argument” , International Journal for Philosophy of 
Religion 48 (2000): 157—81; and A Paradigm Theory of Existence: Onto- 
Theology Vindicated (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002), 
especially chapter 8.
The Augustinian proof
Augustine presents a version of the argument from eternal truths in 
book 2 of On Free Choice of the Will, which is available in several 
translations. Leibniz presents a version of the argument in sections 
43-46 of the Monadology, also available in several translations. A use­
ful critical exposition of Leibniz’s version can be found in chapter 7 
of Robert Merrihew Adams, Leibniz: Determinist, Theist, Idealist 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994).
For two recent defenses of arguments of the broadly Augustinian 
type, see David S. Oderberg, Real Essentialism (London: Routledge,

FURTHER READING
2007), pp. 125-30; and Greg Welty, “ Theistic Conceptual Realism” , 
in Beyond the Control of God? Six Views on the Problem of God and 
Abstract Objects, ed. Paul M. Gould (London: Bloomsbury, 2014), 
pp. 81-96.
SU
The Thomistic proof
Aquinas’ presentation of this argument can be found in chapter 4 
of On Being and Essence, which is available in several translations. A 
book-length exposition and defense of Aquinas’ argument can be 
found in Gaven Kerr, Aquinas's Way to God: The Proof in De Ente et 
Essentia (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015).
An argument similar to Aquinas’ is defended in chapter 2 of Brian 
Davies, The Reality of God and the Problem of Evil (London: Con­
tinuum, 2006). More different from Aquinas’ argument but still 
in the same ballpark is the argument developed by Barry Miller in 
From Existence to God: A Contemporary Philosophical Argument (Lon­
don: Routledge, 1992). A useful exposition and critical discussion of 
Miller’s argument can be found in Elmar J. Kremer, Analysis of Exist­
ing: Barry Miller's Approach to God (New York: Bloomsbury, 2014).
An argument that is also in some respects similar to the Thomistic 
proof (though in other respects similar to the Neo-Platonic proof, 
and in yet others to the third of Aquinas’ Five Ways) is developed in 
David Braine, The Reality of Time and the Existence of God: The Project 
of Proving God's Existence (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988).
The Rationalist proof
Leibniz presents versions of the rationalist cosmological argument 
in The Ultimate Origination of Things, and in sections 36—39 of the 
Monadology. Samuel Clarke presents a version of it in A Demonstration 
of the Being and Attributes of God. These are all available in various 
editions.
A useful recent exposition and defense can be found in Alexander 
R . Pruss, “ The Leibnizian Cosmological Argument” , in The Black- 
well Companion to Natural Theology, ed. William Lane Craig and J.P .

312
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Moreland (Oxford: Blackwell, 2009), pp. 24-100. Further important 
defenses can be found in Bruce R . Reichenbach, The Cosmological 
Argument: A Reassessment (Springfield, 111.: Charles Thomas, 1972), 
and in chapter 11 of Richard Taylor, Metaphysics, 4th ed. (Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1992).
Aquinas’ Five Ways
Aquinas’ famous Five Ways can be found in Summa Theologiae, part I, 
question 2, article 3. The First Way is also known as the argument 
from motion or change to the existence of an Unmoved Mover, and 
the Aristotelian proof defended in this book is essentially a variation 
on it. The Second Way is also known as the argument from effi­
cient causality to the existence of an uncaused cause. The Third Way 
is also known as the argument from the contingency of the world 
to the existence of an absolutely necessary being. (Insofar as it argues 
for the existence of a necessary being it is like the rationalist proof, 
but in other respects it is very different.) The Fourth Way is also 
known as the argument from degrees of perfection to the existence of 
a Most Perfect Being. The Fifth Way is also known as the argument 
from final causality to the existence of a Supreme Intelligence.
Though I have not defended all of these arguments in this book, 
I do in fact think that each of the Five Ways is a sound argument 
for God’s existence. I defend them in chapter 3 of my book Aquinas 
(Oxford: Oneworld Publications, 2009), and in my essay “Existential 
Inertia and the Five Ways” , which first appeared in American Catholic 
Philosophical Quarterly 85, no. 2 (2011): 237-67, and is reprinted in my 
book Neo-Scholastic Essays (South Bend, Ind.: St. Augustine’s Press, 
2015), pp. 84-117. I address a specific science-based objection to the 
First Way at length in my article “Motion in Aristotle, Newton, and 
Einstein” , which first appeared in Aristotle on Method and Metaphysics, 
ed. Edward Feser (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), pp. 236— 
58, and is also reprinted in Neo-Scholastic Essays, pp. 3—27. I defend 
the Fifth Way at length in my essay “Between Aristotle and William 
Paley: Aquinas’s Fifth Way” , which first appeared in Nova et Vetera 
i i , no. 3 (2013): 707—49, and is also reprinted in Neo-Scholastic Essays, 
147-92.

FURTHER READING
313
Important in-depth studies of each of Aquinas’ Five Ways can also 
be found in Dennis Bonnette, Aquinas's Proofs for God's Existence (The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1972); Christopher F.J. Martin, Thomas 
Aquinas: God and Explanations (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press, 1997); and chapter 12 of John F. Wippel, The Metaphysical 
Thought of Thomas Aquinas (Washington, D.C.: Catholic University 
of America Press, 2000). The first three Ways are defended by John 
Haldane in J.J. C. Smart and J.J. Haldane, Atheism and Theism, 2nd 
ed. (Oxford: Blackwell, 2003).
Many older manuals of Thomistic natural theology contain very 
useful material on the Five Ways and related arguments. Some exam­
ples are James F. Anderson, Natural Theology: The Metaphysics of God 
(Milwaukee: Bruce Publishing, 1962); Celestine N. Bittle, God and 
His Creatures (Milwaukee: Bruce Publishing, 1953); Bernard Boed- 
der, Natural Theology (New York: Benziger Brothers, 1891); Reg­
inald Garrigou-Lagrange, God: His Existence and His Nature, vol. 1 
(St. Louis: B. Herder, 1939); Maurice Holloway, An Introduction 
to Natural Theology (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1959); 
G.H . Joyce, Principles of Natural Theology, 2nd ed. (London: Long­
mans, Green, 1924); John F. McCormick, Scholastic Metaphysics, Part 
II: Natural Theology (Chicago: Loyola University Press, 1943); Henri 
Renard, The Philosophy of God (Milwaukee: Bruce Publishing, 1951); 
and Gerard Smith, Natural Theology (New York: Macmillan, 1951). 
Many of these are available in reprint editions via online booksellers.
Other cosmological arguments
At least the first three of Aquinas’ Five Ways, and (other than the 
Augustinian proof) the arguments defended in this book, might all 
be regarded as versions of the cosmological argument. There are 
yet other versions of the cosmological argument that are worthy of 
serious attention. An invaluable overview of the history and variet­
ies of cosmological argument can be found in William Lane Craig, 
The Cosmological Argument from Plato to Leibniz (London: Macmillan, 
1980).
Unlike the arguments defended in this book, and unlike Aquinas’ 
Five Ways, the kaläm cosmological argument is concerned to show

314
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
that the universe must have had a beginning in time and that God is 
the cause of that beginning. This argument was defended by medie­
val Islamic thinkers like Al-Ghazali and medieval Christian thinkers 
Hke Bonaventure. In recent decades its most prominent defender has 
been William Lane Craig. See Craig’s The Kaläm Cosmological Argu­
ment (London: Macmillan, 1979), and William Lane Craig and Quen­
tin Smith, Theism, Atheism, and Big Bang Cosmology (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1993). One Thomist philosopher who defends 
the kaläm argument is David S. Oderberg. See his articles “Adolf 
Grünbaum and the Beginning of the Universe” , Philosophia Naturalis 
36 (1999): 187—94; “ The Kalam Cosmological Argument Neither 
Bloodied nor Bowed: A Response to Graham Oppy” , Philosophia 
Christi 3 (2001): 193—96; “ Traversal of the Infinite, the ‘Big Bang’ 
and the Kalam Cosmological Argument” , Philosophia Christi 4 (2002): 
305—34; “ The Tristram Shandy Paradox: A Reply to Graham Oppy” , 
Philosophia Christi 4 (2002): 353—56; and “ The Beginning of Exis­
tence” , International Philosophical Quarterly 43 (2003): 145—57. See also 
Robert C. Koons, “A New Kalam Argument: Revenge of the Grim 
Reaper” , Nous 48 (2014): 256-67.
The medieval Islamic philosopher Avicenna defended a distinctive 
argument from contingency for the existence of a necessary being. A 
useful recent discussion can be found in Jon McGinnis, “ The Ulti­
mate Why Question: Avicenna on Why God Is Absolutely Neces­
sary” , in The Ultimate Why Question: Why Is There Anything at All 
Rather than Nothing Whatsoever?, ed. John F. Wippel (Washington, 
D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 2011), pp. 65—83.
The two most prominent Scholastic thinkers after Aquinas’ time 
to put forward cosmological arguments for God’s existence are John 
Duns Scotus and Francisco Suarez, whose approaches differ in signif­
icant ways from Aquinas’. Scotus’ argument can be found in Duns 
Scotus, Philosophical Writings, translated by Allan Wolter (Indianap­
olis: Hackett Publishing, 1987). For discussion of the argument, 
see Richard Cross, Duns Scotus on God (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2005). 
Suarez’s argument can be found in Francisco Suarez, The Metaphys­
ical Demonstration of the Existence of God: Metaphysical Disputations 
28-29, translated and edited by John P. Doyle (South Bend, Ind.: St. 
Augustine’s Press, 2004). For discussion of the argument, see Ber- 
nie Cantens, “ Suarez’s Cosmological Argument for the Existence

FURTHER READING
315
of God” , in Interpreting Suarez: Critical Essays, ed. Daniel Schwartz 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), pp. 89-114.
Versions of the cosmological argument have been put forward in 
recent philosophy in Richard M. Gale and Alexander R . Pruss, “A 
New Cosmological Argument” , Religious Studies 35 (1999): 461-76; 
Robert C. Koons, “A New Look at the Cosmological Argument” , 
American Philosophical Quarterly 34 (1997): 19 3-211; Timothy O’Con­
nor, Theism and Ultimate Explanation (London: Wiley-Blackwell, 
2008); Joshua Rasmussen, “A New Argument for a Necessary Being” , 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 89 (2010): 351-56; and Robert J. 
Spitzer, New Proofs for the Existence of God (Grand Rapids, Mich.: 
Eerdmans, 2010).
The divine attributes
Aquinas puts forward many detailed arguments deriving the various 
divine attributes in Summa Theologiae, part I, questions 3-26, and 
Summa Contra Gentiles, book 1, chapters 14—102. Other works of his 
are relevant as well, such as De Potentia Dei. Many of the Thomistic 
manuals of natural theology cited above also offer substantive treat­
ments of the divine attributes, and in connection with the divine attri­
butes we should add to the list Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange, God: His 
Existence and His Nature, volume 2 (St. Louis: B. Herder, 1939).
Useful recent studies of Aquinas’ derivation of various of the 
divine attributes can be found in Michael Dodds, The Unchanging God 
of Love: Thomas Aquinas and Contemporary Theology on Divine Immu­
tability (Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 
2008); Brian Davies, The Thought of Thomas Aquinas (Oxford: Claren­
don Press, 1992), chapters 3—8; Norman Kretzmann, The Metaphys­
ics of Theism: Aquinasfs Natural Theology in Summa Contra Gentiles I 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997); Eleonore Stump, Aquinas (London: 
Routledge, 2003), chapters 2—5; and Peter Weigel, Aquinas on Sim­
plicity: An Investigation into the Foundations of His Philosophical Theology 
(New York: Peter Lang, 2008).
Recent expositions and defenses of the doctrine of divine sim­
plicity that are sympathetic with the Thomistic approach can be 
found in James E. Dolezal, God without Parts: Divine Simplicity and

FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
316
the Metaphysics of God's Absoluteness (Eugene, Ore.: Pickwick Publi­
cations, 2011); Steven J. Duby, Divine Simplicity: A Dogmatic Account 
(London: Bloomsbury T& T Clark, 2016); and Barry Miller, A Most 
Unlikely God: A Philosophical Enquiry into the Nature of God (Notre 
Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1996).
Important recent treatments of divine goodness and the problem 
of evil written from a Thomistic point of view are Brian Davies’ 
books The Reality of God and the Problem of Evil, cited above, and 
Thomas Aquinas on God and Evil (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2011); Herbert McCabe, God and Evil in the Theology of St Thomas 
Aquinas (London: Continuum, 2010); and Eleonore Stump, Wander­
ing in Darkness: Narrative and the Problem of Suffering (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2010).

INDEX
abstract objects, 88—97
in Aristotelian realism, 100, 107, 109, 
h i , m - i 2 n i 9
conceptualism on, 90, 9 4 -9 7, 109 
in divine intellect, 108—9, n o , n 6 , 
ιό9
intentionality of, 10 7 
interlocking systems of, 10 4 -5 , n o  
laws o f nature as, 279 
necessity of, 107, 108, 16 7η  16 
nominalism on, 90, 92—94, 109 
numbers as, 89, 169, 204 
objections to, h i  
objectivity of, 10 7 
in Platonic realism, 97, 107, 109 
plenitude condition for, 10 7, 108 
possible worlds and, 89—90, 92, 169 
propositions as, 88, 16 5, 169 
realism on, 90—92, 106, 109 
relevance condition for, 10 7, 108 
in Scholastic realism, 108—9, m ,  
m - i 2 n i 9  
simplicity of, 10 7 
in third realm, 13, 97, 10 3, 19 1 
universals as, 88, 169 
accident, fallacy of, 67—68, 1 9 6 ^ 2 , 
19 7-9 9 , 2 2 5 -2 6 , 228 
actualization o f potential 
Aristotle on, 18
change as, 19 -2 0 , 22, 2 4 -2 8 , 3 4 -3 5 , 
46, 58
goodness and badness in, 2 18 —19,
2 2 1
physics and, 4 9 -50  
privations as barrier to, 30, 36, 
2 1 8 - 1 9
in quantum mechanics, 54, 56 
Adams, Robert, 105, 1 1 4  
ad hominem fallacy, 40, 304
agere sequitur esse (action follows being) 
defined, 14
doctrine o f divine concurrence and, 
234
First Cause argument and, 185 
mere conservationism and, 236 
occasionalism and, 23 5 
omnipotence and, 206—7 
in Scholasticism, 174 , 176  
Thom as Aquinas and, 174, 17 5 
agnosticism, 183 
Albert, David, 2 7 2 ^ 8  
Alexander, David, 220 
analogical language 
affirmation of, 18 2 
divine attributes in, 78—79, 230 —32 
examples of, 176 —77  
G o d in , 18 3 -8 4 , 192, 2 15 , 2 3 0 -3 2  
omniscience in, 2 1 5 —16 
in physics, 18 4 
Thom istic account of, 14, 78 
analogy
o f attribution, 17 7 , i8 o n i4, 184, 
192, 230
o f being, 17 7 , 17 8 -8 0 , i8 o n i4,
18 2
o f proportionaHty, 17 7 -7 8 , 180,
184, 192, 230
animafity, 98—100, 12 2, 193 
Anjum , R an i Lill, 6 1, 62 
Anscom be, Elizabeth, 4 1, 264 
a priori knowledge, 140, 150, 163 
Aquinas. See Thom as Aquinas 
AristoteHan proof o f G od, 17 —68. See 
also causation
actuaHzation o f potential in, 19—20, 
22, 2 4 -2 8 , 3 4 -3 5 , 46, 58 
divine attributes in, 29—3 1, 34—35 
formal argument, 34—37
317

318
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Aristotelian proof o f G od (continued ) 
G od as U nm oved M over in, 12, 
2 9 - 3 1
informal argument (stage 1), 17 —29 
informal argument (stage 2), 29—34 
objections to, 37—68 
com m on misunderstandings, 3 8 -40  
derivation o f divine attributes, 
37-38
Einstein and change, 49—50 
hierarchical causal series, existence 
of, 60-66
H um e and Kant on causation, 
4 0 -4 3
N ew to n  on inertia, 46—48 
outdated science, 57—60 
quantum mechanics and causality,
5 0 -5 7
Russell on causation, 4 3—46 
unm oved m over, 66—68 
overview, 12 —13 , 169 
reality o f change in, 17 —19, 28, 29 
unactualized actualizer in, 27, 29, 30 
uncaused universe theory refuted 
by, 26 1
Aristotelian realism, 99—102, 10 7—8,
109, h i , m - i 2 n i 9  
Aristotle
on actualization o f potential, 18 
classical theism of, 289 
on composites o f form and matter,
72, 73, 199
on divine attributes, 268 
on essences, 14 1 
G od as characterized by, 12 
hylemorphic understanding o f 
material substance, 28—29n2 
on laws o f nature, 85n7, 239, 240 
Metaphysics, 12 
on natural theology, 275 
on nature o f change in material 
world, 20 
Physics, 12 , 14 1 
on U nm oved M over, 27, 300 
atheism. See also N e w  Atheism 
denial o f simplicity and noncom ­
posite being, 190, 195
on eternal and necessary possibilities, 
116
on evil as p roof G od does not exist, 
294
intellectual foundation of, 44 
on necessary being, 2 3 3 ^ 5  
“ one god further” objection and,
289
on universe as uncaused or necessary 
being, 2 6 0 -6 1, 262 
“ what caused G od?” objection and, 
13 2, 24 9 -50 , 2 5 1, 252, 255 
The Atheist’s Guide to Reality 
(Rosenberg), 280 
attributes. See divine attributes 
attribution, analogy of, 17 7 , i8 o n i4, 
184, 19 2, 230
Augustine o f Hippo, 1 1 , 13 , 102, 289 
Augustinian proof o f God, 87—116 . See 
also abstract objects; universals 
divine intellect in, 108—10 
formal argument, 109—10 
informal argument (stage 1), 87—102 
informal argument (stage 2), 10 3 -9  
objections to, 1 1 0 - 1 6  
overview, 13 , 169 
realism in, 90—102, 106—9 
Avicenna, 190, 254, 268, 289, 303
badness
in actualization o f potential, 2 18 —19, 
2 2 1
judgments of, 2 16 —17  
moral goodness, 2 18 , 220—2 1 
o f pain, 2 19 —20 
privation account of, 2 1 8 - 2 1  
triangularity and, 2 17 , 2 1 8 -1 9 ,
2 2 2 -2 3
being, analogy of, 17 7, 17 8 —80, i8on i4, 
18 2
being, necessary. See necessary being 
Bell, Joh n  S., 5oni8 
Bell inequalities, 50, 50n i8, 5 1, 54 
B ig Bang theory, 20—2 1, 154, 26 1,
265
B ig Crunch theory, 15 4  
black-and-white artwork, 5 2 -5 3

INDEX
319
Bohm , David, 50—5 1, 511119  
brute facts, 150 —5 1, 15 2 , 164, 285—87
Calvin, John, 190
Cam bridge change, 196, 1 9 6 ^ 1 ,  19 7 
Cartwright, N ancy, 143 
Catholic Church, 190, 293 
Causal Adequacy Principle, 1 7 1 m  
causality principle. See principle o f 
causality
causation, 19—29. See also First Cause 
argument; formal causality; 
hierarchical causal series; linear 
causal series; principle o f causality; 
principle o f proportionate causality 
actualization o f potential in, 19—20, 
22, 2 4 -2 8 , 3 4 -3 5 , 46, 58 
for composites, 7 1 - 7 2 , 74, 80, 83,
250
efficient, 55, 56n29, 17 4  
eminent, 33, 34, 170, 17 2  
for essence and existence, 12 4 -2 8 , 
12 9 -3 1 , 250
heirloom view  of, 17 0 -7 2  
H um e on, 4 0 -4 2, 6 1-6 2 , 2 8 8 -8 9  
immanent, 1 9 8 ^ 4  
indeterminism and, 50—5 1, 54, 55 
instruments and derivative pow er in, 
2 2 -2 3 , 24, 25, 63, 64-66, 64n38 
Kant on, 42—43 
in naturalism, 44
noncomposite, 7 4 -7 8 , 8 0 -82, 18 7 
in physics, 4 3 -4 6
purely actual actualizer and, 28, 33, 
35- 36, 56, 250
quantum mechanics and, 5 0 -5 7 , 
2 6 2 -6 3
Russell on, 43—46 
secondary, 2 3 7 —38, 242 
simultaneous relationship with effect, 
60-63
transient, 1 9 8 ^ 4
unactualized actualizer and, 27, 29,
30
uncaused cause o f existence, 27, 12 7, 
128, 1 3 1
virtual, 33, 34, 170, 17 2
“ what caused G od?”  objection, 
39 -40 , 8 2 -8 3 , 1 3 1 - 3 2 , 16 7, 
24 9 -6 0
chance events, 262—63 
change
actualization o f potential for, 19—20, 
22, 2 4 -2 8 , 3 4 -3 5 , 46, 58 
Cambridge, 196, 1 9 6 ^ 1 ,  19 7 
causation requirements for, 19—20, 
24, 28, 39
Einstein and, 49—50
in physics, 49—50
reality of, 17 —19, 28, 29, 180, 18 1
types of, 17
Churchland, Paul, 17 2 —73 
Clarke, Richard, 260 
Clarke, Samuel, 15 5 , 15 7 —58, 268 
Clarke, W . Norris, 42, 6 1, 256, 257, 
2 58 -6 0
classical theism, 13 , 190, 19 2—93, 
19 4 -9 5 , 242, 28 9 -9 0  
Coffey, Peter, 1 1 5 , 11 6  
color holds, 53 
composites, 70—74
causation for, 7 1 —72, 74, 80, 83, 250 
essence vs. existence of, 73—74 
existence and arrangement o f parts, 
7 0 -7 1
o f form and matter, 72—73 , 199 
metaphysical theories of, 72—73 
objections to, 8 3 -8 5  
composition, fallacy of, 134 , 15 5 —56, 
2 6 6 -6 7
conceptual analysis, 28 3—85, 2841146 
conceptualism, 90, 9 4 -9 7, 10 7 m 5, 109, 
209
conceptual omniscience, 10 5—6, n o , 
1 1 4
concurrentism, 15 , 234, 2 35, 2 3 7 -3 8  
constituent ontology, I93n 26 
contingent accidents, 19 3, I94n 27 
contingent beings, 15 4 —59, I 5 5 n8, 160, 
16 2 -6 3 , 250
conventionalism, 144—45, 202—3 
Copleston, Frederick, 202n42 
cosmological argument. See First Cause 
argument

320
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Cottingham, John, 1 7 0 -7 1 , 1 7 1 m , 17 2  
councils o f the Church
First Vatican Council (1869—1870), 
190
Fourth Lateran Council (12 15 ), 190 
courage, 223, 223n6o 
Craig, W illiam  Lane, 200n36 
Creating God in the Image of Man? 
(Geisler), 190η 18
Darwinism, 254
Davies, Brian, I90ni8, 198, 226, 242 
Davies, Paul, 173
Dawkins, Richard, 260, 267, 268, 2 7 1, 
287, 28 8-8 9 , 289n49 
de Broglie, Louis, 50—5 1, 5 in i9  
deism, 236
deity theories, 1 1 2 —14  
Della R occa, Michael, 15 1 , 15 2 —53, 166 
A  Demonstration of the Being and 
Attributes of God (Clarke), 268 
Dennett, Daniel, 252, 255, 257, 260, 
2 6 2 -6 3
De potentia (Thomas Aquinas), 268 
Descartes, R en é
on Causal Adequacy Principle, 1 7 1 m  
on First Cause argument, 2 5 7 —59 
on laws o f nature, 279 
Meditations on First Philosophy, 17, 
2 5 7 -5 8
ontological argument of, 269 
rationalist philosophy of, 14, 163 
design arguments, 254, 28 7—88 
De veritate (Thomas Aquinas), 268 
Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion 
(Hume), 15 5 , 256 
dispositional properties, 44, 239 
divine attributes, 184—232. See also 
divine intellect; eternity; goodness; 
immateriality; immutability; 
omnipotence; omniscience 
analogical understanding of, 78—79, 
2 3 0 -3 2
in AristoteHan proof o f God, 29—3 1,
34-35
o f First Cause, 267—68 
incomprehensibility, 229—32
incorporeaHty, 29, 35, 128, 16 1, 
19 9 -20 0
love, 2 2 8 -2 9 , 230 
necessity, 16 1, 202—5 
objections to derivation of, 37—38 
perfection. See perfection 
o f purely actual actuaHzer, 29—3 1, 
3 4 -3 7 , 67, 82, 206 
in rationaHst proof o f God, 16 1 
simpHcity, 13, 18 9 -9 6 , 225 
o f subsistent existence, 128, 18 7 -8 9 , 
2 0 6 -7
unity, II, 30, 35, 18 4 -8 9  
wiH, 2 2 3 -2 8 , 229, 230 
divine concurrence, doctrine of, 15, 
234 , 2 35, 2 3 7 -3 8
divine conservation, doctrine of, 14 —15, 
233, 243
divine hiddenness, 30 0 -30 4 
divine inteHect
abstract objects in, 10 8 -9 , no» n 6 , 
i69
AristoteHan reaHsm on, h i , m n i 9  
possibiHties and necessities grounded 
in, 13 , 1 12, 2 2 4 -2 5  
propositions in, 1 1 5 , 2 1 0 - 1 1 , 2 15  
in Scholasticism, 102, h i , m n i 9  
state o f affairs in, 2 10  
D ow e, Phil, 55, 56n29, 57
E A s (explicability arguments), 1 5 1 —5 3, 
166
Eddington, Arthur, 58—59 
efficient causaHty, 55, 56n29, 17 4  
Einstein, Albert, 49—50, 63 
Elder, Crawford, 144, 145 
EHis, Brian, 14 3 -4 4 , 1 4 4 ^ 1  
eminent causaHty, 33, 34, 170, 17 2  
Enneads (Plotinus), 13 
epistemic distance, 30 1, 302 
equivocal language, 78, 176, 179, 183 
essences
in AristoteHan reaHsm, 10 1 
causation for, 12 4 —28, 129 —3 1, 250 
defined, 13 , 1 1 7 , 14 0 -4 1 
distinction from existence, 1 1 7 —22, 
12 8 -2 9 , 13 5 -4 0 , 1 8 1, 18 7 -8 8

INDEX
32I
o f human beings, 122, 14 1, 186, 193 
laws o f nature and, 14 3—44 
o f necessary being, 160 
in Platonic reaHsm, 99 
reaHty of, 14 0 -4 5 
o f triangularity, 7 3 -7 4 , 124, 2 1 7  
unity and, 14 2
essentiaHsm, 14 1, I4 in 2 5 , 14 2 -4 3 , 
H4n3i 
eternity
in informal argument o f proofs, 1 1  
o f necessary being, 16 1 
o f noncomposite cause, 81 
o f the O ne, 75
o f purely actual actualizer, 29, 3 5 
subsistent existence and, 128 
timelessness and, 200—202 
EucHdean geometry, 43, 88, 90, 2 17 , 
29 0 -9 2
evidential argument from evil, 297, 298 
evil, compatibiHty with existence o f 
God, 29 4 -30 0
evolutionary theories, 17 3 , 254  
existence. See also subsistent existence 
causation for, 12 4 -2 8 , 1 2 9 - 3 1 , 250 
defined, 13 , 1 1 7
distinction from essence, 1 1 7 —22, 
12 8 -2 9 , 13 5 -4 0 , 1 8 1, 18 7 -8 8  
individual, 13 5 , I3 5 n i4 , 136 —37 
o f necessary being, 160 
specific, 13 5 , I3 5 n i4 , 136 , 1 3 7 - 3 8  
o f triangularity, 73—74 
uncaused cause of, 27, 12 7, 128, 1 3 1  
existential inertia, 233 
existentiaHsm, 14 11125 
explanandum, 164, 16 4 m l, 16 5—66 
explanans, 164, 16 4 m l, 166 
explanatory demonstrations, 153 
expHcabiHty arguments (EAs), 1 5 1 —53, 
166
expressions, sense vs. reference of, 77 
extraHnguistic reaHty, 202, 203
faith, rational basis for, 246 
faHacies. See also straw man faHacy 
o f accident, 6 7-6 8 , 1 9 6 ^ 2 , 19 7-9 9 , 
2 2 5 -2 6 , 228
ad hominem, 40, 304 
o f composition, 134 , 15 5 —56, 266—67 
“ poisoning the weH” , 304 
special pleading, 39, 264 
Feynman, Richard, 265 
First Cause argument
agere sequitur esse and, 185 
in AristoteHan proof, 38, 39—40, 68 
defenders of, 254—55, 260, 270 
divine attributes in, 267—68 
faHacy o f composition in, 266—67 
formulation of, 236 
in hierarchical causal series, 2 1,
2 3 -2 4 , 2 5 -2 7 , 28, 6 4 -6 5, 1 3 2 - 3 3  
in Neo-Platonic proof, 82, 86 
objections to, 1 3 2 - 3  5 
preservation version of, 2 5 7 -5 8  
presupposition o f ontological 
argument from, 269—70 
simpHcity in, 189, 195 
straw man faHacy in, 40, 250, 252, 
2 55- 58, 260 
unity in, 18 7—88
“ what caused G od?”  objection to, 
39 -40 , 8 2 -8 3 , 1 3 1 - 3 2 , 16 7, 
24 9 -6 0
First L aw  o f M otion, 4 6 -4 8 , 5 6 - 5 7 ^ 9  
First Vatican Counril (18 6 9 -18 70 ), 190 
Five W ays (Thomas Aquinas), 9 m , 12, 
26 7
Fork thesis (Hume), 284, 285 
form, composites of, 72—73, 199 
formal causaHty
in AristoteHan phüosophy, 55, 17 4  
examples of, 33, 170  
in heirloom view  o f causation, 17 2  
in material substances, I74n9 
in radioactive decay, 56n29 
four dimensionalism, 2 12 , 2 13  
Fourth Lateran CouncH (12 15 ), 190 
Frankfurt, Harry, 2o8n47 
Freddoso, Alfred, 2 3 7  
free wiU, 2 1 3 —15, 2 18 , 224—26, 2 2 5 ^ 3 ,  
238 , 2 9 5 -9 7
Frege, Gotdob, 77, 95, I3 5 n i4 , I38n 22, 
306n65
Garrigou-Lagrange, Reginald, 149

322
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Geach, Peter, 196, 1961131 
Geisler, Norm an, 190η 18 
genetic mutations, 96, 17 3 
geometry
arguments for realism from, 90—91 
Euclidean, 43, 88, 90, 2 17 , 290—92 
Gerson, Lloyd, 84—85, 264, 286 
Gilson, Etienne, I4 in 2 5  
God. See also divine attributes; proofs 
o f G od
in analogical language, 18 3 —84, 192, 
2 15 , 2 3 0 -3 2
in concurrentism, 15, 234, 235, 
2 3 7 -3 8
divine hiddenness of, 30 0 -30 4 
in doctrine o f divine conservation, 
1 4 - 1 5 , 2 33, 243
epistemic distance o f humans from, 
30 1, 302
in equivocal language, 183 
evil, compatibility with existence of, 
29 4 -30 0
explanations for, 16 7 -6 8  
masculine characterizations of, 
24 7 -4 8
in mere conservationism, 234 —35,
236-37
nature o f relationship to world, 
1 4 - 1 5
as necessary being, 159 —6 1, i6onio, 
16 3, 16 7
in occasionalism, 234, 2 3 5 —36, 
236n79, 2 3 7
as the O ne, 7 6 -7 7 , 187, 188 
self-knowledge of, 2 1 2  
sexless nature of, 246—47 
as subsistent existence, 126 —28, 13 1, 
234
timelessness of, 20 0 -20 2, 200n36 
as uncaused cause o f existence, 128,
13 1
in univocal language, 18 2—83 
as U nm oved M over, 12 , 29—3 1, 
7 6 -7 7 , 300
“ what caused G od?” objection, 
39 -40 , 8 2 -8 3 , 1 3 1 - 3 2 , 167, 
249 -6 0
“ god o f the gaps” explanations, 2 7 1 —73 
goodness, 2 16 —23
in actualization o f potential, 2 1 8 -1 9 , 
2 2 1
analogical understanding of, 2 3 0 - 3 1 
inability to sin due to, 208 
in informal argument o f proofs, 1 1  
judgments of, 2 1 6 - 1 7  
moral goodness, 2 18  
o f necessary being, 16 1 
o f the O ne, 76 
o f pain, 220
proportionate causaHty principle and, 
2 2 1 - 2 2
o f purely actual actualizer, 3 1, 35, 82 
subsistent existence and, 128 
triangularity and, 2 17 , 2 2 2 -2 3  
GrayHng, A .C ., 260, 263, 266, 267, 268, 
26 9 -70
Grim , Patrick, 114 , 1 1 5 , 2 1 2  
Harris, Sam, 2 7 1
Hartshome, Charles, i9 0 -9 in n i8 —19 
Hawking, Stephen, 2 7 1, 272 
Healey, Richard, 49 
heirloom view  o f causation, 170 —72 
Heisenberg, W erner, 5 3 - 5 4  
Heraclitus, 18 1 
Hick, John, 2 9 6 ^ 3 , 3 0 1 -2  
hiddenness, divine, 30 0 -30 4 
hidden variable theory o f quantum 
mechanics, 5 0 -5 1 
hierarchical causal series 
actuaHzers in, 3 5 
change in, 2 1 —22
comparison with Hnear causal series, 
25, 2 5 m , 60, 63 
composites and, 72, 74 
in essence and existence, 126, 130  
First Cause in, 2 1, 2 3 -2 4 , 2 5 -2 7 , 28,
64-65, 132-33
objections to existence of, 60-66 
Hitchens, Christopher, 2 7 1 
Hospers, John, 256, 2 57 
Hum e, D avid
on causation, 4 0 -4 2, 6 1-6 2 , 28 8 -8 9  
on contingent vs. necessary being, 155

INDEX
323
Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, 
15 5 , 256
on effects independent o f causation, 
263, 26 4 -6 5
fallacy o f composition committed 
by, 267
on First Cause argument, 13 2 , 256, 
257, 259
Fork thesis, 284, 285
on laws o f nature, 238 , 240, 279
immanent causation, 1 9 8 ^ 4  
immateriality
characteristics of, 19 9 -20 0  
in informal argument o f proofs, 1 1  
o f intellect, 17 5 
o f necessary being, 16 1 
o f noncomposite cause, 8 1—82 
o f the O ne, 7 5 -7 6  
o f purely actual actualizer, 29, 3 5 
subsistent existence and, 128 
immutability
fallacy o f accident related to, 19 7—99 
o f necessary being, 16 1 
o f noncomposite cause, 81 
o f the O ne, 75
o f purely actual actualizer, 29, 3 5 
subsistent existence and, 128 
improper proportionality, 17 7 , 178 
incomprehensibility, as divine attribute, 
2 2 9 -3 2  
incorporeality
characteristics of, 199—200 
o f necessary being, 16 1 
o f purely actual actualizer, 29, 3 5 
subsistent existence and, 128 
indeterminism and causation, 5 0 -5 1,
54, 55
individual existence, 13 5 , 1 3 5 m 4,
13 6 -3 7
inductive reasoning, 14 3, 15 2 , 153 
inertia, law  of, 46 -4 8 , 5 6 - 5 7 ^ 9  
innate ideas, doctrine of, 163 
intellect. See also divine intellect; 
knowledge; omniscience 
capacities involved in, 3 1 —32, 34 
immateriality of, 17 5
o f necessary being, 16 1 
in Neo-Platonic philosophy, 76n4 
property dualism on, 17 5 “ 7<5 
o f purely actual actualizer, 3 5 
subsistent existence and, 128 
Intelligent Design theory, 254, 287, 
288
intrinsic accidents, 19 3, I94n 27
Kant, Immanuel, 42—43, 96, 269 
Kekes, John, 275 
Kenny, Anthony, 13 5 —38 
Klima, Gyula, 136 , 13 7 , 139 , 140 
Knasas, John, 13 7 —38 
knowledge. See also intellect; 
omniscience 
causal theories of, 44 
objectivity of, 9 4 -9 7  
a priori, 140, 150, 163 
science as only genuine source of, 
273-85
self-knowledge, 2 1 2  
Koons, Robert, 5 1, 149 
Krauss, Lawrence M . 
critiques of, 2 7 2 ^ 8  
on divine attributes, 267, 268 
on multiverse hypothesis, 265 
rejection o f divine cause, 26 1 
on scientific explanations for 
universe, 2 7 1, 2 7 2 —73 
A  Universe from Nothing, 2 7 1 
Kretzmann, Norm an, 225n 63
language. See also analogical language 
equivocal, 78, 176, 179, 183 
extralinguistic reaHty, 202, 203 
univocal, 78, 176, 178, 18 2 -8 3  
Lateran Council IV  (12 15 ), 190 
law  o f inertia, 46—48, 56—571129 
laws o f motion, 46—48, 56—571129 
laws o f nature
as abstract objects, 279 
AristoteHan view  of, 85n7, 239, 240 
as brute facts, 28 5—87 
composites as explained by, 85 
defined, 47, 85n7 
Descartes on, 279

324
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
laws o f nature (continued)
as dispositional properties, 239, 
2 4 0 -4 1
essences and, 14 3 —44 
H um e on, 238, 240, 279 
miracles as suspension or violation of, 
2 38 -4 0 , 2 4 4 -4 5  
scientism and, 2 7 3 —74, 278 —80 
Thom as Aquinas on, 239  
Leftow , Brian, 11 2 , 1 1 3 —14  
Leibniz, G .W .
on argument from eternal truths, 103 
classical theism of, 289 
on contingent beings, 15 5 , 156, 
15 7 -5 8
on divine attributes, 268 
divine intellect defended by, 13 
on free will, 226 
principle o f sufficient reason 
formulated by, 14, 14 7 
rationalist philosophy of, 14, 16 3, 266 
Le Poidevin, R obin, 2 53, 254, 2 5 5 -5 6 , 
2 5 7
Lewis, C .S ., 24in 84, 2 4 4 ^ 9  
limit cases, 224, 224n 6 i, 2 3 1 
linear causal series
change in, 20—2 1, 24—25, 28 
characteristics of, 23, 3 4 -3 5 , 6 4 ^ 8  
comparison with hierarchical causal 
series, 25, 2 5 m , 60, 63 
composites and, 7 1 —72 
local motion, 56n29 
locative change, 17  
logical necessity, 270 
Losee, John, 57n29 
love, as divine attribute, 2 2 8 -2 9 , 230  
Luther, Martin, 190
M ackie, J . L . , 150, 286, 29 4-9 6 , 29 7 
Maimonides, 12 , 13 , 190, 254, 289,
303
Martin, C .B ., 44, 45, 52 
masculine characterizations o f God, 
2 4 7-4 8
mathematics. See also geometry 
argument for reaHsm from, 91 
infinite series in, 65 
physics and, 45, 47, 52, 276
propositions of, 203 
psychologism and, 95 
matter, composites of, 72, 73, 199 
M cC abe, Herbert, 242 
M cG inn, Colin, 289, 2891149 
M cTaggart, J .M .E ., 1 9 6 ^ 1  
Meditations on First Philosophy 
(Descartes), 17 , 2 5 7 -5 8  
mere conservationism, 234 —35, 236—37  
metaphorical proportionaHty, 17 7 , 178 
metaphysical necessity, 270 
Metaphysics (Aristotle), 12  
MiH, Joh n  Stuart, 256 
MiHer, Barry, 13 3 —34, 196, 224n 6 i 
mind-independent reaHty, 49, 100, 117^ 
12 3 , 14 1, 14 2, 14 5, 284 
M inkowski, Hermann, 49 
miracles, 238 —46
in classical theism, 242 
as interventions, 242—43 
Lewis on, 24in 8 4, 2 4 4 ^ 9  
purpose of, 24 5—46 
as subtractions from natural order, 
244, 245
as suspension o f laws o f nature, 
2 4 4 -4 5
Thom as Aquinas on, 24 1 
as violation o f laws o f nature, 238 —40 
Miracles (Lewis), 24 in 8 4  
M lodinow , Leonard, 2 7 1, 272  
monotheism, 18 7, 19 5, 289 
moral goodness/badness, 2 18 , 220—2 1 
Morris, Thom as, 19 5, 196 
A  Most Unlikely God (MiHer), 224n 6 i 
m otion
laws of, 46—48, 56—571129 
local, 56n29
multiverse, 2 1, 65, 1 3 1 , 154 , 15 7 , 158 , 
159 , 2 6 1, 265
M um ford, Stephen, 6 1, 62 
murder, 14 7, 2 14 , 220—2 1 
mutations, genetic, 96, 173
Nagel, Thom as, 304—5 
naturaHsm, causation in, 44 
natural theology 
Aristotle on, 275 
criticisms of, 15

INDEX
325
defined, 9 -10
on evaluation o f religions, 246 
miracles as bridge between revealed 
theology and, 245—46 
mysteries of, 2 32  
objections to, 249—307 
arguments for G od are
rationalizations o f preordained 
conclusions, 30 4 -5 
attributes ascribed to First Cause,
2 6 7 - 
68
beginnings o f universe, 26 5-6 6  
belief in G od o f philosophical 
theism, 292—93
controversy surrounding proof o f 
G o d ’s existence, 3 0 5 -7  
design arguments, 28 7—89 
divine hiddenness, 300—304 
evil as proof G od does not exist, 
29 4 -30 0
fallacy o f composition in First 
Cause argument, 2 6 6 -6 7  
false to suppose everything has 
cause or explanation, 262—65 
First Cause argument presupposes 
ontological argument, 26 9 -70  
“ god o f the gaps” explanations,
271-73
laws o f nature as brute facts, 2 8 5 -8 7  
“ one god further” objection, 2 8 9 - 
92
religious tenets, lack o f proof 
deriving from First Cause,
268— 
69
science as only genuine source o f 
knowledge, 2 7 3 -8 5  
termination o f regress o f causes,
265—66
universe as uncaused or necessary 
being, 260—62
“ what caused G od?” objection, 
39 -40 , 8 2 -8 3 , 1 3 1 - 3 2 , 16 7, 
24 9 -6 0
as science, 275—76 
Thom as Aquinas on, 10, 275 
nature. See laws o f nature 
The Nature of the Physical World 
(Eddington), 5 8 -5 9
necessary being 
atheists on, 2 3 3 ^ 5  
G odas, 15 9 -6 1, i6on io, 16 3, 16 7 
in ontological argument, 2 6 9 -70  
principle o f sufficient reason and,
154, 15 7 -5 9 , 16 1, 162, 16 7 
Thom as Aquinas on, i6on io, 2 3 3 ^ 5  
universe as, 260—62 
necessity
o f abstract objects, 10 7, 108, i6 7 n i6  
deity theories of, 11 2 , 1 1 3  
as divine attribute, 16 1, 202—5 
logical, 270 
metaphysical, 270 
o f propositions, 2 0 2 -3 
Neo-Platonic proof o f God, 69—86 
composites in, 70—74, 80, 83—85, 250 
formal argument, 80—82 
informal argument (stage 1), 69—74 
informal argument (stage 2), 74—80 
noncomposite cause in, 74—78, 80—82 
objections to, 82—86 
the O ne in, 7 4 -7 8 , 18 7, 188 
overview, 13 , 169
uncaused universe theory refuted by, 
26 1
neo-theism, 19 0 -9 1, I90n i8, 195 
N e w  Atheism
on empirical explanations for 
existence o f universe, 2 7 1 
scientism in, 273
on universe as uncaused or necessary 
being, 260—61
“ what caused G od?” objection in, 
24 9 -50 , 2 5 1, 252, 255 
new  essentialism, 143 
N ew ton, Isaac, 4 6 -4 8 , 5 6 - 5 7 ^ 9 , 279 
nominalism, 90, 92—94, 109, 209 
noncomposite cause, 74—78, 80—82, 18 7 
numbers, as abstract objects, 89, 169, 204
obscurantism, 2 32
occasionalism, 234, 2 3 5 —36, 2 3 6 ^ 9 ,
237
Oderberg, David, 100, m n i 9 , 238, 
240, 244
omnipotence, 205—8
analogical understanding of, 230

326
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
omnipotence (continued)
in informal argument o f proofs, 1 1 
o f necessary being, 16 1 
objections to, 20 7-8 , 29 7 
o f the O ne, 76
o f purely actual actualizer, 3 1, 35, 82, 
206
subsistent existence and, 128, 206—7 
omniscience, 208—16. See also divine 
intellect
in analogical language, 2 1 5 —16 
conceptual, 10 5-6 , n o , 1 1 4  
free will and, 2 1 3 —15 
in informal argument o f proofs, 1 1  
o f necessary being, 16 1 
objections to, 11 4 —15 , 2 12 , 2 1 3 —15, 
297
o f the O ne, 76—77
proportionate causality principle and, 
208, 209
propositions and, 209—1 1  
o f purely actual actualizer, 34, 35,
82
subsistent existence and, 128 
On Being and Essence (Thomas Aquinas),
13
the O ne, in Neo-Platonism , 74—78,
187, 188
“ one god further” objection, 2 8 9 -9 2  
“ one over m any” argument for realism, 
90, 94
“ O n the N otion o f Cause” (Russell), 43 
ontological argument, 269—70
pain, goodness vs. badness of, 2 19 -2 0  
pain asymbolia, 220 
Paley, W illiam, 287, 288 
panentheism, 234, 247, 248 
pantheism, 234, 2 3 5 - 3 6 ^ 8 , 247, 248, 
262, 303
paradox o f the stone, 20 7-8 , 2o8n47 
Parmenides, 17 —18, 18 1 
partial consideration o f material reaHty, 
45, 52
part-to-whole reasoning, 134 , 266 
P C . See principle o f causaHty 
perceptual skepticism, 149, 150
perfection
in capacity for creation, 228 
o f necessary being, 16 1 
o f the O ne, 76
o f purely actual actuahzer, 30, 35,
82
subsistent existence and, 128 
physics
abstractions in, 276 , 2 7 7 —78 
actuaHzation o f potential and, 49—50 
analogical language in, 18 4 
causation in, 43—46 
change in, 4 9 -50
intrinsic features described by, 46, 52 
mathematics and, 45, 47, 52, 276 
mysteries of, 2 3 2  
Newtonian, 48
predictive and technological success 
of, 2 8 0 -8 1
quantum mechanics, 50-57, 262—63 
wave-particle duaHty in, 79 
Physics (Aristotle), 12, 141 
Plantinga, Alvin, 114, I90ni8, 191—92, 
193-94, 1941127 
Plato, 13, 97, 98, 191, 193 
Platonic Forms, 97-98, 99, 193, 279, 
291, 292
Platonic reaHsm, 97—99, 107, 108, 109,
1 16, 209
plenitude condition for abstract objects, 
10 7, 108
Plotinus, 13 , 74, 76n4, 194, 254, 268, 
289, 303
“ poisoning the weH” faHacy, 304
polytheism, 303
pop philosophy, 252, 255
possible worlds, 89—90, 92, 169
potential. See actuaHzation o f potential
power. See omnipotence
pow er sets, 1 1 4
P P C . See principle o f proportionate 
causaHty
Priest, Graham, 2 5 2 -5 3 , 255, 2 5 7 
primary analogates, 17 7 , i8 o n i4, 230 
principle o f causaHty (PC)
comparison with principle o f 
sufficient reason, 148

INDEX
327
defined, 32, 35
objections to, 42—43, 48, 50, 52, 54»
166
principle o f proportionate causality
(PPC)
defined, 14, 32, 37, 170, 17 4  
goodness and, 2 2 1 —22 
heirloom interpretation of, 17 0 -7 2  
in natural philosophy, 17 2 —73, 17 5 
objections to, 17 0 -7 4  
omniscience and, 208, 209 
purely actual actualizer and, 76 
principle o f sufficient reason (P SR ),
14 7 -5 9
arguments for, 148—53, 1 6 1 - 6 2  
comparison w ith principle o f 
causality, 148
contingent beings in, 154 —59, 15 5^8, 
16 2
defined, 14 7, 16 1 
formulations of, 14, 14 7—48, 166 
indirect method o f proof for, 149 
necessary being in, 154, 15 7 —59, 162,
16 7
objections to, 164—66 
privations, 30, 36, 2 18 —2 1 
proofs o f God
AristoteHan, 17 -6 8 . See also 
AristoteHan p roof o f G od 
Augustinian, 87—116 . See also 
Augustinian proof o f G od 
double standards for, 305—7, 3o6n65 
neglect in academic philosophy, 9 
N eo-Platonic, 69—86. See also N e o - 
Platonic p roof o f G od 
rationaHst, 14 7 -6 8 . See also rationaHst 
proof o f G od
structure for presentation of, 1 1 —12  
Thomistic, 1 1 7 —45. See also 
Thom istic proof o f G od 
proper proportionaHty, 17 7 —78, 180, 
184, 192, 230 
property duaHsm, 17 5 -7 6  
proportionaHty. See also principle o f 
proportionate causaHty 
analogy of, 17 7 -7 8 , 180, 184, 192, 230 
improper, 17 7 , 178
metaphorical, 17 7 , 178 
proper, 17 7 -7 8 , 180, 184, 19 2, 230 
proportional similarity, 179, 230, 2 3 1 
propositions
as abstract objects, 88, 16 5, 169 
argument for reaHsm from  nature 
of, 91
in AristoteHan reaHsm, 10 1, 102 
conceptuaHsm on, 94—95 
in divine inteHect, 1 1 5 , 2 1 0 - 1 1 , 2 1 5  
explanations of, 164—65 
interlocking systems of, 105 
necessity of, 202—3 
nominaHsm on, 92 
in Platonic reaHsm, 97 
state o f affairs of, 209—10, 2 1 1  
Pruss, Alexander, 5 1, 149, 165 
P S R . See principle o f sufficient reason 
psychologism, 95—97 
purely actual actuahzer
causation and, 28, 33, 35—36, 56, 250 
divine attributes of, 29—3 1 , 34—37, 67, 
82, 206
essence and existence of, 18 7—88 
noncomposite, 79, 18 7  
proportionate causaHty principle and, 
76
pure possibles, 102 
Putnam, Hilary, 3o6n65
quaHtative change, 17  
quantitative change, 17  
quantum mechanics, causation and, 
5 0 -5 7 , 2 6 2 -6 3
radioactive decay, 5 5 -5 7 , 56n29 
R am elow , Anselm, 239, 2 4 1, 243, 244 
rational animaHty, 12 2, 193 
rational appetite (wiU), 2 2 3 -2 8  
rationaHst proof o f God, 14 7 -6 8 . See 
also necessary being; principle o f 
sufficient reason
contingent beings in, 154-59, I 55n8, 
160, 162-63, 250 
divine attributes in, 161 
formal argument, 161-63 
informal argument (stage 1), 147-59

328
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
rationalist proof o f G od (continued ) 
informal argument (stage 2), 159 —6 1 
objections to, 16 3—68 
overview, 14, 169
uncaused universe theory refuted by, 
26 1
realism, 90—102
on abstract objects, 90—92, 106, 109 
Aristotelian, 99—102, 10 7—8, 109, h i , 
m - i 2 n i 9
direct arguments for, 90—92 
indirect arguments for, 92—97 
Platonic, 9 7-9 9 , 107, 108, 109, 116 , 
209
Scholastic, 102, 107, 108-9, h i —12, 
m -i2 n i9 , 115—16 
Theistic Conceptual Realism, 107 
reasoning. See also principle o f sufficient 
reason
inductive, 14 3, 15 2 , 15 3 
part-to-whole, 134 , 266 
reductio ad absurdum, 149, 307 
reference o f expressions, 7 7  
relativity theory, 49, 50, 54, 63, 184,
269
relevance condition for abstract objects, 
107, 108
revealed theology, 2 4 5 -4 6  
Richards, Jay W esley, 225n 63 
Rosenberg, Alex, 2 6 1, 2 6 2 -6 3 , 265, 
28 0 -8 2
R o w e , W illiam, 2 9 7-9 8  
Russell, Bertrand
on Cam bridge changes, 1 9 6 ^ 1  
on causation, 4 3 -4 6  
debate on existence o f God, 202n42 
on First Cause argument, 256, 2 5 7  
on laws o f nature, 286 
‘O n  the N otion o f Cause” , 43 
on physics, 52, 277—78 
on scientific explanations o f 
phenomena, 150  
on universals, 93 
Why I  Am  Not a Christian, 256
sadism, 2 2 1
Schaffer, Jonathan, 43—44
Schellenberg, J. L ., 3 00—3 o 1 
Scholasticism
agere sequitur esse in, 174, 176 
on causation, 1 9 8 ^ 4  
divine intellect in, 102, h i , m n i 9  
on propositions, 165 
on reaHsm, 102, 107, 108—9, h i —12, 
m - i 2 n i 9 ,  1 1 5 - 1 6  
Schrader, David, 203—4, 205 
scientific laws, arguments for reaHsm 
from, 92
scientism, 2 7 3 —85
on conceptual analysis, 28 3—85, 
284n46
defenses of, 28 0 -8 3 
defined, 273
laws o f nature and, 2 7 3 -7 4 , 2 7 8 -8 0  
reaHty, inabiHty to provide complete 
description of, 2 73, 2 7 6 -7 9  
self-refuting and trivial nature of,
273, 2 7 4 -7 6  
Scotus, 268 
Searle,John, 17 5 —76 
secondary analogates, 17 7 , i8 o n i4,
230
secondary causation, 2 3 7 —38, 242 
second law o f thermodynamics, 17 3 —74 
sense o f expressions, 7 7  
sensory appetites, 223 
set theory, 1 1 4
sexless nature o f God, 2 4 6 -4 7  
Simmons, Keith, 1 1 5  
simpHcity, 18 9 -9 6
o f abstract objects, 10 7 
in classical theism, 13 , 190, 19 2 -9 3 , 
19 4 -9 5
in First Cause argument, 189, 195 
free wiH and, 225, 2 2 5 ^ 3  
impHcations o f denying G od’s 
simpHcity, 18 9 -9 0  
objections to doctrine of, 19 0 -9 6  
simultaneity o f cause and effect, 60—63 
skepticism, perceptual, 149, 150  
Sobel, Jordan H ow ard, 65n40 
Socrates, 19 1, 193 
soul-making function o f suffering, 
296n53

INDEX
329
special pleading fallacy, 39, 264 
specific existence, 13 5 , I3 5 n i4 , 136, 
137-38
Spinoza, Baruch, 14, 16 3, 257, 2 5 8 -5 9  
Stenger, V ictor J., 26 1, 262, 263 
straw man fallacy
in First Cause argument, 40, 250,
252, 2 5 5 -5 8 , 260 
in “ G od as property”  claims, 192 
heirloom view  o f causation and, 17 1 
strict metaphysical demonstration, 
2 7 1 -7 2 , 288 
subsistent existence
as cause o f universe, 13 5 
divine attributes of, 128, 18 7 -8 9 , 
2 0 6 -7
G od as, 12 6 -2 8 , 1 3 1, 234  
in rationalist proof o f God, 16 0 -6 1, 
163
in Thomistic proof o f God, 1 2 6 - 3 1 , 
169
substantial change, 17  
substitutivity o f identicals, 139  
sufficient reason principle. See principle 
o f sufficient reason 
Summa Contra Gentiles (Thomas 
Aquinas), 267
Summa Theologiae (Thomas Aquinas), 
267
Swinburne, Richard, 19 0 m  8 
theism
classical, 13 , 190, 19 2 -9 3 , 19 4 -9 5 , 
242, 28 9 -9 0
neo-theism, 190—9 1, 19 0 m  8, 195 
Theistic Conceptual Realism , 10 7 
theistic personalism, 19 0 -9 1, 190— 
9 in n i8 -i9 , 195 
theodicy, 294, 2 9 4 ^ 0 , 299 
Theories of Causality (Losee), 57n29 
thermodynamics, second law of, 1 7 3 - 7 4  
“ Third M an”  argument, 98, 292 
third realm
abstract objects in, 13, 97, 10 3, 19 1 
in Platonic realism, 97, 99, 10 1, 102, 
10 3, 108, 109, 209 
rejection of, 209
Thom as Aquinas. See also Thomistic 
proof o f G od
agere sequitur esse as utilized by, 174, 175 
on analogical use o f terms, 14, 78 
On Being and Essence, 13 
classical theism of, 289 
De potentia, 268 
De veritate, 268 
on divine attributes, 26 7 -6 8  
on essence vs. existence, 7 3 -7 4 , 11 7 , 
12 7, 18 1
existentialism of, I4 in 2 5 
on faith, 246 
Five W ays, 9 m , 12 , 267 
on G od as U nm oved M over, 12 
on heirloom view  o f causation, 
1 7 1 - 7 2
on instrumental causality, 6 5 ^ 9  
on intellect, 17 5 
on laws o f nature, 239 
on local motion, 56n29 
on miracles, 24 1 
on natural theology, 10, 275 
on necessary being, i6on io, 2 3 3 ^ 5  
principle o f sufficient reason 
formulated by, 148 
simpHcity doctrine defended by, 19 1, 
19 2
Summa Contra Gentiles, 267 
Summa Theologiae, 26η 
terminological considerations, ιοη 3, 
19 2 -9 4 , I94n 27
Thom istic proof o f G od, 1 1 7 - 4 5  
essence and existence distinction in, 
1 1 7 - 2 2 , 12 8 -2 9 , 1 3 5 -3 8 , 18 1 
formal argument, 128 —3 1 
informal argument (stage 1), 1 1 7 - 2 6  
informal argument (stage 2), 12 6 -2 8  
objections to, 1 3 1 - 4 5  
comm on misunderstandings, 1 3 1 - 3 2  
First Cause argument, necessity of,
1 3 2 -3 5
by Kenny, 13 5 -3 8  
reality o f essence, 14 0 -4 5 
real vs. conceptual distinction
between essence and existence, 
13 8 -4 0

330
FIVE PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
Thom istic proof o f G od (continued ) 
overview, 13 , 169 
subsistent existence in, 12 6 —3 1, 169 
uncaused cause in, 12 7 , 128, 1 3 1 
uncaused universe theory refuted by, 
26 1
timelessness, 200—202, 200n36. See also 
eternity
tough love, 229
transient causation, 1 9 8 ^ 4
triangularity
essence and existence of, 7 3 —74, 124, 
2 1 7
explanations of, 165 
goodness and badness of, 2 17 , 
2 1 8 -1 9 , 2 2 2 -2 3
in “ one over m any” argument, 90 
in third realm, 97 
trilaterality and, 12 3 , 124, 264 
as universal, 87, 88, 9 7-9 8 , 103
unactualized actualizer, 27, 29, 30 
uncaused cause o f existence, 27, 12 7, 
1 2 8 , 13 1 
unity, 18 4 -8 9  
essences and, 14 2 
in First Cause argument, 18 7 -8 8  
in informal argument o f proofs, 11 
o f the One, 18 7, 188 
o f purely actual actualizer, 30, 35, 
18 4 -8 6
subsistent existence and, 18 7 -8 9  
universals
as abstract objects, 88, 169
animality, 9 8 -10 0
in Aristotelian realism, 9 9 -10 0 , 10 1
conceptualism on, 94-95
defined, 87
existence of, 209
interlocking systems of, 10 4 -5
nominalism on, 9 2 -9 4
in “ one over m any”  argument, 90
in Platonic realism, 9 7-9 9
in Scholastic realism, 102 
in scientific laws, 92 
in third realm, 97 
triangularity, 87, 88, 9 7-9 8 , 103 
universe
B ig  Bang theory of, 2 0 -2 1, 154, 26 1, 
265
design arguments, 254, 28 7—88 
four-dimensional block model of, 49, 
50, 52, 54
origins of, 2 0 -2 1, 3 8 -3 9  
religious ambiguity of, 301 
scientific explanations for existence 
of, 2 7 1 - 7 3
subsistent existence as cause of, 13 5  
as uncaused or necessary being, 
26 0 -6 2
A  Universe from Nothing (Krauss), 2 7 1 
univocal language, 78, 176, 178, 18 2 -8 3 
U nm oved M over
Aristotle’s use o f term, 27, 300 
divine hiddenness of, 300 
G od as, 12 , 2 9 - 3 1 , 7 6 -7 7 , 300 
objections to, 66—68
Vallicella, W illiam , 75, 76, 84 
Vatican Council I (18 6 9 -18 70 ), 190 
vicious regress problem, 67, 93, 94 
virtual causality, 33, 34, 170, 17 2  
voluntarism, 1 1 4
W ainwright, W illiam, 1 1 5  
W arburton, Nigel, 252, 255, 257 
wave-particle duality, 79 
W eisheipl, James, 4 7 -4 8 , 5 1 - 5 2  
W elty, Greg, 10 6 -7 , 10 7m  5, 108, h i  
Why I  A m  Not a Christian (Russell), 256 
will, as divine attribute, 2 2 3 -2 8 , 229, 
230. See also free will 
W ittgenstein, Ludw ig, 280 
Wolterstorff, Nicholas, I93n 26 
“ words are universals too”  problem, 
93-94





T
his book provides a detailed, updated exposition and defense of five of the
historically most important (but in recent years largely neglected) philosophical 
proofs of Gods existence: the Aristotelian, the Neo-Platonic, the Augustinian, the 
Thomistic, and the Rationalist.
It also offers a thorough treatment of each of the key divine attributes—unity, simplicity, 
eternity, omnipotence, omniscience, perfect goodness, and so forth—showing that they 
must be possessed by the God whose existence is demonstrated by the proofs. Finally, it 
answers at length all of the objections that have been leveled against these proofs.
This work provides as ambitious and complete a defense of traditional natural theology as is 
currently in print. Its aim is to vindicate the view of the greatest philosophers of the past— 
thinkers like Aristotle, Plotinus, Augustine, Aquinas, Leibniz, and many others— that the 
existence of God can be established with certainty by way of purely rational arguments. It 
thereby serves as a refutation both of atheism and of the fideism that gives aid and comfort 
to atheism.
“A watershed book. Feser has completely severed the intellectual legs upon which modern 
atheism had hoped to stand.”
—Matthew Levering, James N. and Mary D. Perry Jr. Chair of Theology, Mundelein 
Seminary
“A powerful and important book. The concluding chapter, where Feser replies to possible 
objections to his arguments, is a gem; it alone is worth the price of this excellent work.”
—Stephen T. Davis, Russell K. Pitzer Professor of Philosophy, Claremont McKenna College
“Edward Feser is widely recognized as a top scholar in the history of philosophy in general, 
and in Thomistic and Aristotelian philosophy in particular. This book is a must-read for 
anyone interested in natural theology. I happily and highly recommend it.”
—J. P. Moreland, Distinguished Professor of Philosophy, Biola University
“Refutes with devastating effect the standard objections to theistic proofs, from David 
Hume to the New Atheists.”
— Robert C. Koons, Professor of Philosophy, University of Texas at Austin
“Yet another fine book by Edward Feser. He replies to (literally) all of the objections and 
shows convincingly how the most popular objections (the kind one hears in Introduction to 
Philosophy courses) are very often completely beside the point and, even when they’re not, 
are ‘staggeringly feeble and overrated’.
—Alfred J. Freddoso, Professor Emeritus of Philosophy, University of Notre Dame
Edward Feser, Ph.D., is Associate Professor of Philosophy 
at Pasadena City College in Pasadena, California. Called 
by National Review “one of the best contemporary writers 
on philosophy”, he is the author of The Last Superstition:
A Refutation of the New Atheism, Aquinas, Scholastic Meta­
physics, By Man Shall His Blood Be Shed\ and many other 
books and articles.

