Selecting and Customizing a Mereology 
Ontology for its Reuse in a Pharmaceutical 
Product Ontology 
Mariano FERNÁNDEZ-LÓPEZP a, 1P, Asunción GÓMEZ-PÉREZP b, 2
P, Mari Carmen 
SUÁREZ-FIGUEROAP b, 2
P 
aEscuela Politécnica Superior. Universidad San Pablo CEU 
 
bFacultad de Informática. Universidad Politécnica de Madrid 
Abstract. This paper presents our experience in reusing mereology ontologies in a 
Pharmaceutical Product ontology, an ontology built by the EU NeOn project. It 
shows a set of mereology ontologies implemented in different machine 
interpretable languages and analyzes them according to the different types of 
mereology identified by Varzi. Then, it describes the specifications of mereology 
modeling necessities for Pharmaceutical Product. Finally, it presents the ontology 
which fits best with the specifications. One of the results of this work is a 
procedure to reuse general (also called common) ontologies. 
Keywords. Mereology, implemented ontology, pattern reuse, competency 
question 
Introduction 
The part-whole relationship has been analyzed over the ages by philosophers. In the  
Ancient Greece, by the atomists Plato and  Aristotle, in the Middle Ages, by Thomas 
Aquinas and Raymond Llull, in the Age of Enlightenment by Kant and, at the end of 
the XIX century and beginning of the  XX, by Brentano and Husserl. However, none of 
them formulated a precise theory on this part-whole relationship. It was Lesniewiski  [1] 
who coined the word mereology (from the Greek word méros, meaning part) in 1927 to 
refer to a formal theory he devised in his papers published between 1916 and 1931. 
However, because Lesniewiski wrote all his papers in Polish, his theory was unknown 
by most of his contemporary scientists. Leonard and Goodman’s work “The Calculus 
of the Individuals”  [2] in 1940 made that this formal theory began to be studied in 
Logics and Ontology. Later on, authors such as Simons  [3], Casati and Varzi  [4] [5], 
                                                           
1 
Urbanización 
Montepríncipe, 
s/n; 
28668 
Boadilla 
del 
Monte, 
Madrid, 
Spain; 
E-mail: 
mfernandez.eps@ceu.es 
2 Campus de Montegancedo, s/n; 28660 Boadilla del Monte, Madrid, Spain; E-mail: {asun@fi.upm.es, 
mcsuarez@fi.upm.es } 

Smith  [6] [7]and Lambrix  [8], among others, made relevant  contributions to this field. 
Lambrix is well known for his contribution to the application of mereology to 
information systems. 
In this paper we have adopted the definition of ontology proposed by Studer et al. 
( [9], page 185, based on Gruber’s definition  [10]), “an ontology is a formal, explicit 
specification of a shared conceptualization”. When explaining such a definition, the 
authors interpret the word shared as agreed, and the word formal as machine 
interpretable. Therefore, if this definition holds, we can say that a mereology ontology 
is an agreed mereology implemented in a machine-interpretable language. 
Recently, researchers like Gangemi et al.  [11] and Massolo et al.  [12] have 
proposed the use of mereology in ontology construction. This idea is embodied in the 
work of Borst  [13], who built and used a mereology ontology in an engineering 
application for modeling, simulating and designing physical systems. In this article we 
intend to describe our experience in reusing ontologies that implement mereology 
ontologies in an EU Project. The main difference between the work shown in this 
section and Borst’s is that we analyze, reuse and customize a mereology ontology 
already built, and that we do not develop a mereology ontology from scratch. 
In Section 1, following Varzi’s study, we present the different formalizations that 
the notion part-whole has undergone. In Section 2, we provide a list of the different 
ontologies that implement mereological definitions and then, we analyze them 
according to the formalization variants presented in section 1. In Section 3, we show a 
case in which these ontologies have been reused for building a Pharmaceutical 
Products ontology. Finally, in Section 4 we present the conclusions and future lines of 
research.  
The Pharmaceutical Product ontology (PPO) will be used as a bridge between 
proprietary systems for managing financial and product knowledge interoperability in 
pharmaceutical laboratories, companies and distributors in Spain  [14]. The composition 
of drugs, the interaction between them, etc., require the formalization of the part of 
relation. Consequently, it seems reasonable to consider the reuse of a mereology 
ontology. 
1. Mereologies 
A mereology is a formal theory of parts and associated concepts  [13] [15]. We have said 
‘a mereology’ instead of ‘the mereology’ because different assumptions can be taken 
into account in the formalization of the part-whole relationship. Therefore, different 
mereologies can be proposed. 
Theory M 
Part-of, otherwise subclass-of, is a relation between individuals. Most of the authors 
agree on the following core of axioms (named with an A) and definitions (named with 
a D)  [5]: 
A1) Reflexivity. Every object of the universe of discourse is part of itself. For instance, 
the European Union (EU) is part of the EU. 

A2) Antisymmetry. If an object x is part of y, and y is part of x, then x and y are the 
same object. For instance, if the territory TB1
B is part of the territory TB2
B, then the only 
way for  TB2
B to be  part of TB1
B is  by being TB1
B and TB2
B the same territory. 
A3) Transitivity. If x is part of y, and y is part of z, then x is part of z. For instance, 
Madrid is part of Spain, and Spain is part of EU, therefore, Madrid is part of EU. 
A number of additional mereological predicates can be then introduced by 
definition. For example: 
D1) Proper part. A proper part is a part that is other than the individual itself. For 
example, Spain is a proper part of EU, since Spain is part of EU and they are 
different entities. 
D2) Direct part. X is a direct part of y if and only if x is a proper part of y and there is 
no part between x and yTP3
PT. For example, Italy is a direct part of EU, but Madrid is 
not, since Madrid is part of EU through Spain. 
D3) Overlap. The relation overlap is defined as a sharing part. That is, x and y overlap 
if and only if there is a z such that z is part of x and part of y. For instance, Spain 
and Africa overlap, since Spain has territories in Africa (Canaries, Ceuta, Melilla, 
etc.). 
D4) Underlap. The relation underlap is defined as a sharing whole. That is, x and y 
underlap if and only if there is a z such that x and y are parts of z. For example, 
Portugal, Spain, France and Italy underlap because they share a common whole: 
EU. 
D5) Disjoint. The disjoint relation is the logical negation of overlaps. For example, EU 
and USA territories are disjoint. 
Theory M may be viewed as the embodiment of the common core of any 
mereological theory. A.1-A.3 should be extended to build a mereology. 
Minimal Mereology (MM) 
A way to extend M is to assume the following decomposition principle  [5]: 
A4) Weak supplementation principle. Every object x with a proper part y has another 
part z that is disjoint of y. The domain of territories fulfils this principle. For 
example, given that Spain is a proper part of the European Union (EU), then EU 
has other parts that are disjoint of Spain: Portugal, France, Italy, etc. 
Most of the authors maintain that A.4 should be incorporated to M as a further 
fundamental principle of the meaning of part-of. Other authors provide scenarios that 
could be counterexamples of this principle (see  [4]). However, it has not been 
                                                           
TP3 http://hcs.science.uva.nl/projects/NewKACTUS/library/lib/mereology.html 

demonstrated yet that such supposed counterexamples have implications in computer 
applications. 
Extensional Mereology (EM) 
Another stronger way to express decomposition is the following: 
A5) Strong supplementation. If y is not part of x, then there is a part of y that does not 
overlap with x. For example, given that Spain is not part of Africa, there is a part 
of Spain (e.g. Madrid) that is not part of Africa. 
A.5 implies A.4. 
This theory is called ‘extensional’ because a theorem that can be demonstrated is 
T1) for all x’s and y’s, such that x has proper parts or y has proper parts, x and y are 
identical if and only if x and y have the same proper parts, that is, for all z’s , z is 
proper part of x if and only if z is part of y. For example, the territory of the 
Community of Madrid is the same as that of the province of Madrid because both 
territories are composed of the same proper parts, that is, by the same 
municipalities. 
Closure Mereology (CM) 
Another way of extending M is by composition  [4] 
A6) Sum principle. If x and y underlap, then there is a z such that, for all w’s, w 
overlaps z if and only if w overlaps x or w overlaps y. That is, if two objects 
underlap, then it may be assumed that there is a smallest object of which they are 
part (an object that exactly and completely exhausts both). 
According to (A6), there is an object made up exactly of Madrid and Barcelona. 
A7) Product principle. If x overlaps y, then there is a z such that for all w’s, w is part of 
z if and only if w is part of x and w is part of y. That is, if two objects overlap, then 
it may be assumed that there is the largest object that is part of both (the common 
part at their junction). For example, Spain and Africa overlap, and it may be 
assumed that there is the largest object overlapped by both: Canaries, Ceuta, 
Melilla, etc. 
The assumption of (A6) and (A7) is controversial. In fact, it is not obvious that the 
overlap of Spain and Africa makes an entity. 
Closure Extensional Mereology (CEM) 
The result of adding these axioms to MM or EM yields corresponding Minimal or 
Extensional Closure Mereologies, that is, CMM and CEM, respectively. In the presence 
of (A4), (A7) implies (A5). Consequently, CMM and CEM are the same theory  [4]. 

The entities whose conditional existence is asserted by (A6) and (A7) must be 
unique in the presence of extensionality. Thus, 
TCEMT supports the following 
definitions: 
D6) Binary sum. X + y is the z that fulfils that for all w’s , w overlaps z if and only if w 
overlaps x or w overlaps y. That is, x + y is the smallest object of which x and y are 
part. 
D7) Binary product. X . y is the z that fulfils that for all w’s, w is part of z if and only if 
w is part of x and w is part of y. That is, X . y is the largest object that is part of x 
and y. 
General (classical) Mereology (GM) 
Another way of extending M is through the following axiom schema: 
A8) Unrestricted fusion principle. For every satisfied property or condition φ, there is a 
z such that for all y’s, y overlaps z if and only if there is an x such that it satisfies φ 
and overlaps y. That is, there is an entity consisting of all those things that satisfy 
φ. For example, suppose that φ means “country with more than 10 million 
inhabitants”, then there is an object that consists of all the countries with more than 
10 million inhabitants. 
If (A5) is satisfied, then at most one entity can satisfy the consequent of (A8). 
Therefore, the operation of general sum (σ) can be defined as follows:  
D8) General sum. The general sum of all x’s satisfying φ is that z that for every y, it 
overlaps z if and only if there is an x such that it satisfies φ and overlaps y. That is, 
the sum of φs is the entity that consists of all entities that satisfy φ. 
General Extensional Mereology (GEM) 
The extensions of MM and EM, which yield the same extensional strengthening of GM 
 [4], is the theory of General Extensional Mereology, or GEM, since (A8) implies (A7) 
and (A7)+(A4) imply (A5) ( [3], page 31). It is also clear that GM is an extension of CM 
and GEM is an extension of CEM, since (A6) can be deduced from (A8).   
Atomistic Mereology 
In an atomistic mereological theory, every element is made up of elements that are 
building blocks or atoms. To describe such a theory, the following definition can be 
provided: 
D9) Atom. It is an element that does not have proper parts. 
The atomistic axiom can be formulated in the following way: 

A9) Atomicity. Every object has at least a part that is an atom. For example, the 
administrative division of territories follows this axiom, since there are simple 
divisions that are not divided. 
Figure 1 shows a diagram with all the theories presented in this section. 
A mereology X (e.g. GEM) extended with the atomicity axiom is known as AX 
(e.g. AGEM). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Hasse’s diagram of mereological theories (from weaker to stronger, going uphill)  [4]. 
2. Mereology Ontologies 
Using a general purpose search engine (Google) and a specific one (Swoogle), we have 
found a series of mereology ontologies. Some of them have been rejected because they 
lack documentation; therefore, the final list of ontologies that we have studied is this  
 
KACTUS  [16] ontology library, implemented in CML, it is maintained by the 
University of Amsterdam. Such a library contains the Mereological Ontology 
(MO), which is an adapted version of Borst’s proposals  [13](see foot note 3). 
 
DOLCE is one of the ontologies developed within the WonderWeb European 
projectTP4
PT  [12]. It is available in KIF and OWL. 
 
The Standard Upper Ontology5
TPPT (SUO) is the result of a joint effort to create a 
large, general-purpose, formal ontology  [17]. It is promoted by the IEEE Standard 
Upper Ontology working group, and its development began in May 2000. This 
ontology is implemented in KIF and Protégé format; on the other hand,  SUO 
formally describes mereology and topology terms. The general predicates in this 
section of the ontology are adapted from Barry Smith, Borgo et al.’s work, and 
from Casati and Varzi’s mereologies. 
 
The ontology based on Barry Smith and other authors’ work  [6] [7] in KIF, which  
is referred in the SUO web page. It represents various mereological definitions and 
axioms concerning boundaries and objects6
PT. 
                                                           
TP4
PT http://wonderweb.semanticweb.org/ 
5 http://suo.ieee.org/SUO/ontologies/Guarino.txt 
6 http://suo.ieee.org/ 

 
The mereology based on the work of Borgo et al., which is another ontology 
referred in SUO web page. These authors describe a set of definitions and axioms 
concerning mereology in  [18]. Such ontology is currently implemented in KIFTP7
PT. 
The ontology formalizes a CEM mereology (except the product principle). 
 
Casati and Varzi’s  [19] mereology can be also found implemented in KIF and is 
also referred in the SUO web page. 
The features of these ontologies with regard to the theories previously presented 
are shown in table 1. 
3. Use Case: a Pharmaceutical Product Ontology Built within the NeOn Project 
NeOnTP8
PT is a project co-funded by the European Commission’s Sixth Framework 
Programme. Its aim is to advance the state of the art of the use of ontologies for Tlarge-
scaleT semantic applications in the distributed organizations. Particularly, it aims to 
improve the capability of handling multiple 
Tnetworked ontologiesT that exist in a 
particular 
TcontextT, that are created 
TcollaborativelyT, and that might be highly dynamic 
and constantly TevolvingT. 
The Pharmaceutical Product ontology (PPO) will be part of the supportive 
collaboration of the pharmaceutical industry, concerned with the infrastructure and its 
APIs to bridge the currently used proprietary systems for managing financial and 
product knowledge interoperability in the networks/clusters of pharmaceutical 
laboratories, companies and distributors in Spain  [14]. In this section, we will focus 
just in four (out of 61) competency questions (CQs) that allow us to explain our idea as 
best as possible (see table 2). 
The activities that we have carried out to identify the mereology terms, axioms and 
definitions required in the PPO are the following: 
I) 
Ontology search. The activity implies finding candidate ontologies or ontology 
modules to be reused. To perform this activity, we have started from the analysis 
of the PPO competency questions (CQs): 
 
I.a) Analysis of the PPO CQs. The steps carried out are the following: 
I.a.i) 
To obtain the concepts and their relations that allow us to represent 
the terms appearing in the CQs. For our case, the concepts are 
chemical substance and drug, and the relations are has component 
and has interaction with (both relations are found between chemical 
substances), and has main substance and has active ingredient (both 
relations are found between drugs and chemical substances). Besides, 
drug is subclass of chemical substance. Drug-drug interaction does 
not necessarily require the physical interaction between their 
ingredients. While some drugs might inactivate other drugs by 
bonding with them, others simply compete for the same receptors 
without interacting physically. 
 
                                                           
TP7
PT http://suo.ieee.org/SUO/ontologies/Guarino.txt 
TP8
PT http://www.neon-project.org 

Table 1. Features of ontologies that implement mereotopology theories. The characteristics that appear shaded are those required for the Pharmaceutical Product Ontology. 
Theory 
Principles and definitions 
KACTUS 
DOLCE 
SUO 
Smith et al. 
Borgo et al. 
Casati and Varzi 
A.1) Reflexivity 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
A.2) Antisymmetry 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
A.3) Transitivity 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
D.1) Proper part 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
D.2) Direct part 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
D.3) Overlap 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
D.4) Underlap 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
M 
D.5) Disjoint 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
MM = M + (P4) 
A.4) Weak supplementation 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
Inferred 
No 
EM = M + (A5) (Let’s note that 
(A5) implies (A4) 
A.5) Strong supplementation 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
A.6) Sum principle 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
CM = M + (A6) + (A7)  
A.7) Product principle 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
D.6) Binary sum 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
CEM = CM + (A5) 
D.7) Binary product 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
GM = M + (A8) 
A.8) Unrestricted fusion principle 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
GEM = GM + (A5) 
D.8) General sum 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
D.9) Atom 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
No 
AX = (A9) + a mereology X 
A.9) Atomicity 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
 

Table 2. Competency question analysis for mereology ontology reuse 
Identifier 
Competency question 
Competency question using 
the vocabulary of mereology 
Extracted terms 
CQ1 
What is the composition of the 
drug? 
Which are the parts of the 
drug? 
- part of 
CQ2 
Which is the main active 
ingredient (molecule) of the 
drug)? 
(It does not directly require 
mereotopology) 
- active ingredient 
 
This term requires the 
definition of: part of 
CQ3 
Which is the main substance of 
the composition? 
(It does not directly require 
mereotopology) 
- main substance 
 
This term requires the 
definition of: part of 
CQ4 
Does the drug have interaction 
with another drug? 
Are there parts of the drug that 
interact with parts of another 
drug? 
- part of 
 
 
I.a.ii) 
To apply a pattern of reuse of mereologies (inspired by  [20] [21]), 
which answers the question ¿what relations are candidate to be 
renamed so that mereology definitions and axioms can be reused? 
The pattern involves the use of the following rules: 
• 
Rule 1. If the relation establishes a (partial) order, then this 
relation (or its inverse) is candidate to be a kind of part-of. An 
example that adheres to this rule is component of, since a 
substance x can be a component of y, y can be a component of z, 
etc, in such a way that an order x < y < z is established. Note that 
the engineer could have decided to model the relation has 
component instead of component of. 
• 
Rule 2. If we can find a super-relation that establishes an order, 
then this relation is candidate to be modeled in terms of a 
mereology, even though it is not itself a type of  part-of. For 
example, that x has as a main substance y implies that y is part of 
x. 
I.a.iii) 
To try to reformulate the competency questions in terms of mereology 
by following the results of the pattern rules. Table 2 shows how these 
CQs require mereology terms in PPO. The competency question, 
What is the drug main active ingredient (molecule)?, has led to the 
formalization of the term active ingredient by means of the following 
SWRL rule: 
R1) hasActiveIngredient(?x, ?y) → partOf(?y, ?x) 
The competency question, Which is the main substance of the 
composition? has led to the formalization of the term main substance 
by means of the following SWRL rule: 

R2) hasMainSubstance(?x, ?y) → partOf(?y, ?x) 
The competency question, Does the drug have interaction with 
another drug? has led to the following SWRL rule concerning the 
term interaction with: 
R3) chemicalSubstance(?chs1) ∧ chemicalSubstance(?chs2) ∧ 
partOf(?chs11, ?chs1) ∧ 
partOf(?chs21, ?chs2) ∧ 
hasInteractionWith(?chs11, ?chs21) → 
hasInteractionWith(?chs1, ?chs2) 
that is, if a part of a chemical substance chs1 interacts with another 
part of a chemical substance chs2, then chs1 interacts with chs2. In 
other words, the interaction is inherited from the parts to the whole 
 [22]. 
The analysis of other competency questions produces rules that 
link chemical substance terms to mereology terms. 
I.b) 
Identification of the features of the mereology ontology to be reused. 
Section 1 and, particularly, table 1 permits us to identify which 
features the reused mereology ontology should have. 
Some properties (e.g. transitivity) were not clearly determined by 
competence questions. This fact indicates that the meaning of the 
CQs was not completely clear. That is, the study of the axioms and 
definitions shown in table 1 has helped us to identify ambiguities and, 
as will be seen in the further paragraphs, to precise the meaning of the 
CQs. 
For the PPO case, the following formalization has been 
necessary: 
A.1) Reflexivity. To ensure the right meaning of the ontology terms. 
Thus, for example, if part of is not reflexive, then rule (R3) may 
not work for a query where chs1 is identical to chs11 or ch2 is 
identical to chs21. 
A.2) Antisymmetry. To help the user to check constraints. 
A.3) Transitivity. To be modeled if the different levels of the structure 
of components are provided. For example, Frenadol® is 
composed of paracetamol, dextrometorphan, and clorfenamine. 
Paracetamol, in its turn, is composed of an alcohol, an amino 
group and a carbonyl group. The alcohol is composed of oxygen 
and hydrogen, etc. Given that the inclusion of the transitivity 
axiom is low cost, we have opted to include all the components 
in the answer of CQs. 

D.1) Proper part. The formalization of this term eases the 
interpretation of the competency questions. Thus, the very 
substance should not be a result of CQ1, but a result of CQ4 
instead, since the very substance can interact with a part of 
another substance. 
D.2) Direct part. This term allows answering CQ1 just in a level. 
Therefore, CQ1 has been split into two competency questions: 
(CQ1’) What is the drug composition? (considering only a level) 
and (CQ1’’) idem (considering all the components). 
A.4) Weak supplementation principle. This axiom helps the user to 
check constraints. 
D.3) Overlap. It is necessary to formalize (A4). 
D.4) Underlap. It is not necessary for the PPO at the moment. 
D.5) Disjoint. It is necessary to formalize (A4). 
A.5) Strong supplementation principle is not true if the bounds 
between atoms are not taken into account. We should remember 
that (A5) implies that two not atomic entities are identical if and 
only if they have the same parts. However, isomers are not ruled 
out in the Pharmaceutical Product ontology. An isomer is a 
chemical compound with the same number and kind of atoms as 
another but different structural arrangement. If the structure of 
drugs is required, then a topology ontology is needed. 
D.6 and more) Sums and product. We do not find necessary to define 
sums and products. 
D.10) Atom. As will be seen, the term atom will be used to represent 
the weak supplementation principle. 
A.9) Atomicity. We do not think that atomicity is needed in the PPO. 
The aforementioned features are shadowed in table 1. 
 
II) Selection of a mereology ontology. This activity involves choosing the most 
suitable ontologies or ontology modules among those available in an ontology 
repository or library, for a concrete domain of interest and associated tasks. No 
mereology ontology completely fulfills all criteria, but KACTUS MO is the 
ontology that best fits the required features. This ontology has the added advantage 
of having been built to be easily reused in knowledge based systems. 
Note however that the rest of the ontologies cover more characteristics that are 
not considered in the current CQs than KACTUS MO does. In this step, therefore, 

we have decided to reuse more the mereology ontology within the current version 
of the ontology, and to reuse it less in further versions. 
 
III) Customization of the chosen mereology ontology. This activity involves adapting 
an ontology to a specific user’s needs. We have carried out the following 
subactivities: (1) pruning the reused ontology according to the features really 
necessary; (2) enriching the ontology (e.g. with the part of reflexivity axiom); (3) 
translating from CML into OWL + SWRL; and (4) evaluating the ontology 
obtained. The result of this activity is the tree shown in Figure 2 (the concepts in 
italic have been added during activity (IV), and a series of OWL definitions and 
SWRL rules. Some of them are the following: 
D.1’) MereologicalIndividual ⊆ owl:thing 
D.2’) mereologicalIndividualNotFWSPrinciple9 ≡   
mereologicalIndividual ∩ not mereologicalIndividualFWSPrinciple 
D.3’) atom ≡ mereologicalIndividualFWSPrinciple ∩ 
(= 0 properPart  mereologicalIndividual) 
Asymmetry of proper part of: 
R.4) properPartOf(?x, ?y) ∧ properPartOf(?z, ?x) → differentFrom(?y, ?z) 
Transitivity of proper part of: 
R.5)properPartOf(?x, ?y) ∧ properPartOf(?y, ?z) → properPart(?x, ?z) 
Weak supplementation principle: 
R.6) properPartOf(?x, ?y) ∧ properPartOf(?z, ?y) ∧ differentFrom(?z, ?x) → 
merologicalIndividualFWSPrinciple(?y) 
This principle is completed with the atom definition (D.3’). 
 
IV) Integration of the chosen mereology ontology in the PPO. The product of the 
activity (III) has been included in the PPO. Besides the bridge rules (R1), (R2) and 
(R3), the following definitions have been incorporated to obtain the ontology to be 
newly evaluated: 
D.4) chemicalSubstance ⊆ mereologicalIndividualFWSPrinciple 
D.5) drug ≡ 
chemicalSubstance ∩ 
(> 1 hasActiveIngredient chemicalSubstance) ∩ 
(> 1 hasMainSubstance chemicalSubstance) 
                                                           
9 FWS means ‘fulfilling weak supplementation principle’. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Resulting mereology ontology concept tree integrated in the Pharmaceutical Product ontology 
through the concepts chemical substance and drug. 
4. Conclusions and Future Directions 
In this paper, we have presented the study of different mereologies following Varzi’s 
work  [5], and have analyzed a set of mereology ontologies according to the principles 
and definitions previously identified. Then, we have specified the mereology modeling 
necessities in the Pharmaceutical Product ontology in the NeOn European project. We 
have observed that the formalization of the reflexivity, antisymmetry and transitivity 
axioms, together with the weak supplementation principle and the proper part of and 
direct part of definitions are useful for the development of the ontology. Moreover, in 
the future, it is possible to incorporate axioms that imply extensionality, if a detailed 
structure of drugs is modeled in the ontology. Future investigation lines should include 
the analysis of  other types of part-of different to the functional one and the reuse of 
patterns for other types of common ontologies (e.g. topologies). 
After analyzing the candidate mereology ontologies, we select KACTUS MO to 
model the part-whole relationship in the NeOn Pharmaceutical Product. 
One of the results of this work is the procedure to reuse mereology ontologies, 
which refines the one presented in  [23] for time ontologies. Such a procedure consists 
in: (I) searching the candidate mereology ontologies; (II) selecting the mereology 
ontology that best matches the modeling necessities; (III) adapting the chosen 
mereology ontology; and (IV) integrating the mereology ontology in the host ontology. 
Activity (I) requires analyzing  the CQs of the ontology where the mereology ontology 
will be reused, and identifying the features required by the mereology ontology. We 
provide a table explaining the features of the most well-known mereology ontologies. 
The table also indicates which of these features have been useful in the real case 
presented in the paper. It must be added that the analysis of CQs may imply their 
redefinition. Another result of our work is the OWL+SWRL mereology ontology. 
mereologicalIndividual
mereologicalIndividualFulfillingWeakSupplementationAxiom
mereologicalIndividualNotFulfillingWeakSupplementationAxiom
atom
chemicalSubstance
drug
subClassOf
 

Acknowledgements 
This work has been partially supported by the IST European Project NeOn (IST-2005-
027595). We are grateful to the reviewers for their interesting comments, and to  
Rosario Plaza for her help in checking and reviewing the grammar and spelling of the 
paper and improving clarity and style. 
References 
[1] Lesniewski S (1916) Podstawy ogolnej teoryi mnogosci. I, Moscow: Prace Polskiego Kola 
Naukowegow Moskwie (English translation due to Barnett DI, ‘Foundations of the General Theory of 
Sets. I’, in Lesniewski S, Collected Works, Surma SJ et al. (eds), Dordrecht, Boston, y Londres: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 1992, Volume 1, pp. 129 -173) 
[2] Leonard HS, Goodman N (1940) The Calculus of Individuals and Its Uses. Journal of Symbolic Logic 
5:45-55 
[3] Simons P (1987) Parts: A Study in Ontology. Clarendon Press, Oxford, United Kingdom 
[4] Varzi A (2003) Mereology. In Zalta EN, Nodelman U, Allen C (eds) Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, Stanford: CSLI (on line publication) (http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mereology/) (last 
access: 6PthP February 2008) 
[5] Varzi A (2007) Spatial Reasoning and Ontology: Parts, Wholes, and Locations. In Aiello M, Pratt-
Hartmann I, van Benthem J (eds) Springer-Verlag, pp 945-1038 
[6] Smith B (1996) Mereotopology: A Theory of Parts and Boundaries. Data and Knowledge Engineering, 
20, 287-303 
[7] Smith B (2001) Fiat objects. Topoi, 20(2):131-148 
[8] Lambrix P (2000) Part-Whole Reasoning in an Object-Centered Framework. Lecture Notes in 
Artificial Intelligence LNAI 1771, Springer Verlag, Berlin, Germany 
[9] Studer R, Benjamins VR, Fensel D (1998) Knowledge Engineering: Principles and Methods. IEEE 
Transactions on Data and Knowledge Engineering 25(1-2):161–197 
[10] Gruber TR (1993) A translation approach to portable ontology specification. Knowledge Acquisition 
5(2):199–220 
[11] Gangemi A, Guarino N, Massolo C, Oltramari A (2001) Understanding top-level ontological 
distinctions. In: Gómez-Pérez A, Grüninger M, Stuckenschmidt H, Uschold M (eds) IJCAI’01 
Workshop on Ontologies and Information Sharing. Seattle, Washington, pp 26-33. CEUR Workshop 
Proceedings 47:26-33. Amsterdam, The Netherlands (http:/ceur-ws.org/Vol-47/) 
[12] Masolo C, Borgo S, Gangemi A, Guarino N, Oltramari A, Schneider L (2003) The WonderWeb Library 
of Foundational Ontologies, Preliminary Report, WonderWeb deliverable D1.7 (HTUhttp://www.loa-
cnr.it/Papers/DOLCE2.1-FOL.pdfUTH) 
[13] Borst WN (1997) Construction of Engineering Ontologies. Centre for Telematica and Information 
Technology, University of Tweenty. Enschede, The Netherlands 
[14] Gómez-Pérez JM, Pariente T, Buil-Aranda C, Herrero G, Baena A (2007). NeOn Deliverable D8.3.1. 
Ontologies for pharmaceutical case studies. 
[15] Schneider L (2004) How to Build a Foundational Ontology. The Object-Centered High-level Reference 
Ontology 
OCHRE. 
Saarland 
University 
forthcoming 
publication. 
(http://www.ifomis.uni-
saarland.de/Research/Publications/forthcoming/ki2003epaper.pdf) 
[16] KACTUS 
(1996) 
The 
KACTUS 
Booklet 
version 
1.0. 
Esprit 
Project 
8145 
KACTUS.  
http://www.swi.psy.uva.nl/projects/NewKACTUS/Reports.html 
[17] Pease RA, Niles I (2002) IEEE Standard Upper Ontology: A Progress Report. The Knowledge 
Engineering Review 17(1):65–70 
[18] Borgo S, Guarino N, Masolo C (1996) A Pointless Theory of Space Based on Strong Connection and 
Congruence. In: Carlucci-Aiello L, Doyle J (eds) 5PthP International Conference on Principles of 
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR’96). Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, 
California, pp 220–229 
[19] Casati R, Varzi A (1995) Holes and other superficialities. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
[20] Clark P, Thompson J, Porter BW (2004) Knowledge Patterns. In: Staab S, Studer R (eds) Handbook on 
Ontologies. International Handbooks on Information Systems. Springer-Verlag, pp 191-208 
[21] Presutti V et al. (2008) A Library of Ontology Design Patterns: reusable solutions for collaborative 
design of networked ontologies. Deliverable 2.5.1 IST European Project NeOn (IST-2005-027595) 

[22] Bernauer J (1996) Analysis of part-whole relation and subsumption in the medical domain. Data & 
Knowledge Engineering 20(3):405-415 
[23] Fernández-López M, Gómez-Pérez A (2004) Searching for a Time Ontology for Semantic Web 
Applications. In: Varzi A, Vieu L (eds) Formal Ontology in Information Systems, Torino, Italy IOS 
Press, Amsterdam 

