NO ˆUS 51:2 (2017) 238–270
doi: 10.1111/nous.12123
Folk Mereology is Teleological
DAVID ROSE
Rutgers University
JONATHAN SCHAFFER
Rutgers University
When does mereological composition occur? For instance, if a paper plate is po-
sitioned on a table between a plastic knife and a metal fork, does this scattered
plurality of diverse objects make up a single composite object (a ‘table setting’) or
not? Or if two people shake hands, does this connected plurality of similar objects
make up a single composite object (shaped like a sculpture of two people shaking
hands) or not? In general, when does a collection of things form a whole? Many
metaphysicians have wanted a view of composition that respects folk intuitions,
and have charged leading views with failing on this score. For instance, Hirsch
(2002: 60) declares that ‘the linguistic evidence indicates that fluent speakers of En-
glish do not speak the mereologist’s language.’ And Markosian (1998: 211) sets out
from the claim that ‘no one has yet defended a view . . . consistent with standard,
pre-philosophical intuitions about the universe’s composite objects.’
Yet there is widespread disagreement among metaphysicians as to what the
folk intuit about mereological composition and why they do so, and no empirical
discipline to the debate. We see this situation as an opportunity to put the tools
of experimental philosophy to constructive use. Accordingly we aim to discover
when the folk tend to think that composition occurs, and why they do so. So
our question is: when do the folk think that mereological composition occurs? That
is, what is folk mereology, against which metaphysical accounts of real mereology
might be measured?
Our question—beyond whatever intrinsic interest it might possess—should be of
interest to anyone interested in the psychological question of how humans concep-
tualize the world, and in the connected project of descriptive metaphysics. Whether
our question is also relevant to prescriptive metaphysics is controversial. For those
who take conformity with folk intuitions to be at least one desideratum of theory
choice in prescriptive metaphysics, our question bears obvious relevance. But even
those who would dismiss folk intuitions as irrelevant to real metaphysics (either be-
cause they deny that intuitions should play any role, or because they deny that the
intuitions of the folk should play any role) may still want to know what they would
dismiss. Indeed, it seems to us that understanding folk mereology is a precondition
to considering whether it deserves to be taken seriously.
C⃝2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
238

Folk Mereology is Teleological
239
Our own view is twofold. First, we hold that folk mereology is teleological, in
that the folk tend to think that composition occurs in restricted circumstances, in
which the question of whether the plurality has a purpose plays a major role. So, for
instance, we predict that people will tend to say that composition has occurred with
the knife, fork, and plate (since they collectively serve as a table setting) but not
with the two people shaking hands (unless they are accorded a collective function).
This view seems not even to be considered in the contemporary discussion, though
it coheres with a wide swath of current psychological work on object concepts.
Secondly, we regard such a folk theory as tied into a benighted teleological view
of nature, and thus fit for debunking. As such we think that understanding folk
mereology should actually lead us to liberate the discussion of when composition
really occurs from any demanded conformity with folk intuitions. On this matter,
the folk deserve to be ignored.
Overview: In §1 we review the existing discussion about when composition occurs,
with an eye to claims that have been made about what the folk think. In §2 we review
current psychological work on object cognition and promiscuous teleology, with an
eye to documenting the extent to which the folk worldview is teleological. In §3 we
use the methods of experimental philosophy to extract a teleological account of folk
mereology, articulate some of the details, and connect this to current psychological
research. Finally in §4 we address methodological issues about the role of folk
intuitions in real metaphysics, having (we hope) achieved sufficient understanding
of folk mereology to see why it should be ignored.
1. Composition and Intuition
When does mereological composition occur? The metaphysical debate often centers
on claims about what common sense would say. Yet there is disagreement about
what common sense would say and why it would say so, and no empirical discipline
to the debate.
1.1 The special composition question
When does mereological composition occur? That is, under what conditions does
some plurality of individuals Xs compose some one individual y? This question is
what van Inwagen (1990: 30) calls the ‘special composition question,’ and it has
set the agenda for one of the main debates in metaphysics spanning the last two
decades.
Strictly speaking, we—following van Inwagen—are focused on a question that
is more restricted in two respects. First, we are only focused on when composition
occurs for material objects. So in what follows all quantifiers should be read as
restricted to material objects (unless the local context makes obvious otherwise).
Perhaps mereological composition can occur among events or among abstract
objects or among entities of some other sort, or even across categories of objects.
Such is not our concern.1 Secondly, we are only interested in when many make one.
It is standard to use ‘plurality’ in a way that is actually number neutral, allowing for
pluralities of one or more individuals. With ‘degenerate pluralities’ of just a single

240
NO ˆUS
individual, it is—at least on one usage of terms—trivial that composition occurs
(everything composes itself). It is smoother to state the views in ways that ignore
degenerate pluralities, and so we follow suit. Bringing this together, a more explicit
formulation of our question is: under what conditions does some non-degenerate
plurality of material objects Xs compose some one material object y?
The literature offers a wide variety of proposed answers to the special compo-
sition question. Perhaps the most standard answer is always, under any condition
whatsoever. This is the answer of the Universalist (built into the classical mere-
ology of Lesniewski and Goodman (cf. Simons 1987: 37–41), and defended by
Lewis 1991). A second sort of answer to this question is never, under no condition
whatsoever. This is the answer of the Nihilist (explored by Rosen & Dorr 2002,
and recently advocated by Sider 2013). Various intermediate answers are consid-
ered as well, such as sometimes, when the plurality is in contact, and sometimes,
when the activities of the plurality constitute a life (the former is van Inwagen’s first
‘representative answer,’ and the latter is his final considered position).
Without further discussion, we will simply tabulate various answers in the current
literature. This table is not intended to be exhaustive, but just to illustrate the main
options under consideration:2
Universalism (Lesniewski, Goodman,
Lewis)
Composition always occurs
Nihilism (Rosen & Dorr, Sider)
Composition never occurs
Contact (van Inwagen’s first
illustrative view)
Composition occurs when the plurality is
in contact
Fastening (van Inwagen’s second
considered view)
Composition occurs when the plurality is
fastened together
Vitalism (van Inwagen’s final
considered view)
Composition occurs when the activities of
the plurality constitute a life
Emergentism (Merricks)
Composition occurs when the plurality
exhibits novel and irreducible collective
powers
Regionalism (Markosian’s latter view)
Composition occurs when the fusion of
the regions occupied by the plurality is
occupied by an individual
Serialism (Sanford)
Composition occurs if the plurality is so
and this condition is met, or if the
plurality is such and that condition is
met, or if the plurality is thus and the
other condition is met, or . . .
Brutalism (Markosian’s earlier view)
Composition occurs when it does, as a
brute matter of fact

Folk Mereology is Teleological
241
1.2 The role of folk intuitions
Virtually every single view on the table as to when composition occurs has been
charged with violating common sense, though the charges are usually disputed. In
this vein Markosian (2014: §2) charges the main views with generating ‘wildly coun-
terintuitive consequences’ and so evincing ‘mereological madness.’ In the interests
of brevity we will focus on the role of intuitions in the debate over Universalism.
It is often said that Universalism posits bizarre fusions which common sense
would reject. Here is a representative quote, from Hirsch (2002: 60):
I understand perfectly well what it means to talk (in plain English) about such things
as cars, bees, human beings, books, and the Eiffel Tower, or even to talk about such
marginal things as noses and car-hoods. But it’s crazy to say (in plain English) that
there exists something composed of my nose and the Eiffel Tower.
Indeed Markosian (1998: 228) considers this sort of charge to be ‘a fatal objection’
to Universalism, and Kriegel (2011: 198) tells us what the folk will think: ‘Com-
monsense shuns [arbitrary] fusions, but . . . mereological universalists . . . embrace
them. The folk’s intuitive verdicts will be against ‘there is a fusion of this table and
the moon’ . . . ’
But the friends of Universalism usually reject this charge. As Korman (2008:
320; cf. van Inwagen 1990: 75) observes: ‘[U]niversalists typically take the view to
be entirely compatible with what the folk say in ordinary discourse about material
objects.’ In this vein, Lewis (1991: 80), discussing the fusion of the front of a trout
with the back of a turkey, explains away hesitation to affirm existence via quantifier
domain restriction:
Only if you speak with your quantifiers wide open must you affirm the trout-turkey’s
existence. If, like most of us all the time and all of us most of the time, you quantify
subject to restrictions, then you can leave it out.
And in a slightly different vein, Thomasson—who (2007: 3) explicitly aims to show
‘how, reflectively, we can make sense of our unreflective common sense worldview’—
maintains (2007: 183) that the folk simply have no view one way or another on
arbitrary sums, never having considered them:
Certainly it is true that common sense does not recognize the existence of gollyswoggles,
mereological sums, and the like. Nor, of course, does it deny their existence—There are
no terms in ordinary English for these things, and common sense understandably does
not consider such things at all, since given our current range of practices, such entities
would be quite irrelevant and uninteresting.
Indeed she (2007: 184) then speculates that if ‘we explained to ‘normal’ people’ a
term for some arbitrary sum, and then asked them if there is such a thing, they
‘would certainly accept that there is.’
So we find a debate over what the folk think. Is Universalism a form of ‘mereo-
logical madness’ or ‘entirely compatible with what the folk say’? We see little hope
in settling this debate without empirical work.

242
NO ˆUS
We could easily spend many more pages documenting further appeals to folk
intuitions in the debate as to when composition occurs, but will instead just flag
some main points:
• virtually every answer to the special composition question (not just Univer-
salism) has been charged with violating folk intuitions,3
• metaphysicians have moreover constructed psychological theories about
why the folk have the intuitions they allegedly have,4 and
• teleological notions are almost entirely absent from the current debate,
including when the metaphysicians are speculating about what intuitions
the folk have and why they have them.
Just on the last point: teleological notions do not come up when metaphysicians
are presenting their own theories.5 This is not so surprising: orthodoxy has it that
teleological notions are a vestige of an obsolete conception of nature—‘part of
a superseded, pre-scientific muddle about how the world works’ (Hawthorne &
Nolan 2006: 267; cf. Jenkins & Nolan 2008)—and thus unfit for real metaphysics.
What is more surprising is that teleological notions do not come up even when
metaphysicians are speculating about what the folk think. It almost seems as if the
metaphysicians regard teleology as being so muddled that they cannot charitably
imagine the folk wallowing in it.
1.3 Aristotelian roots
While teleological notions are almost entirely absent from the current debate, we
would be remiss not to mention their roots in a broadly Aristotelian worldview.6
For Aristotle, substances are composites of matter and form, where the form
plays the role of unifying the parts of a composite substance. The form unifies
the parts of a composite substance by lending them a unified purpose: the parts
become one because they act for the sake of a common end. This is the perspective
that Aristotle seems to take when defending natural teleology in Physics (Aristotle
1984a: 340; Phys199a.30–33), saying: ‘[S]ince nature is twofold, the matter and the
form, of which the latter is the end, and since all the rest is for the sake of the end,
the form must be the cause in the sense of that for the sake of which.’ And this
perspective is perhaps most explicit when Aristotle is explaining the many senses in
which things are called one in Metaphysics, in the course of which he (1984b: 1605;
Meta1016b.12–16) specifies the sense in which something is called one as ‘a whole,’
which he glosses in terms of having ‘one form,’ and illustrates with the example of
the shoe: ‘[I]f we saw the parts of a shoe put together anyhow we should not call
them one . . . ; we do this only if they are put together so as to be a shoe and have
thereby some one form.’
We are not alone in finding a teleological account of composition in Aristotle.
We find Charles’s (2001: 100) discussion of Aristotle on unity especially clear on
this point:
[I]t is the presence of a final cause which makes the relevant planks and bricks into a
house. Being a house, on this view, cannot be reduced to being a mereological sum of

Folk Mereology is Teleological
243
bricks and planks. There is more to its unity than that of the sum of its components
and their physical interrelations; for merely to specify these is to ignore the goal whose
attainment is required if there is to be a house . . . Houses are the result of the operation
of the final cause as a principle which organizes the relevant type of matter . . .
So we see in Aristotle a teleologically-laden view on when composition occurs,
and thus want to credit Aristotle with delivering an account that proves to be
insightful for folk metaphysics (even if that rules it out for real metaphysics).
2. Psychological Context
Empirical work on folk mereology need not begin ex nihilo. For while there is
no psychological work that specifically considers the special composition question,
there is a rich body of psychological work surrounding our object concepts, which
ought to guide informed inquiry into folk mereology. A major theme emerging in
this psychological work is the extent to which the folk worldview is teleological. We
have a deep-seated tendency to view not just animals but all of nature—every rock
and cloud—as infused with agency and purpose. As Dawkins (1995: 96) observes:
‘We humans have purpose on the brain. We find it hard to look at anything without
wondering what it is ‘for,’ what the motive for it is, or the purpose behind it.’
It is fairly well-established that when it comes to object categorization—saying
what sort of thing something is—people tend to associate what something is with
what it is for. Against this psychological background, our thesis can be understood
as the thesis that people also tend to associate whether something is with whether
there is something it is for.
2.1 Selective teleology: artifacts and organisms
It is widely accepted that we are at least ‘selectively teleological,’ in that our artifact
and organism concepts are infused with notions of purpose and function. Most of
the relevant psychological work concerns principles of object categorization (how we
determine what a thing is). With both artifacts and organisms, we tend to identify
what a thing is with what it is for.
So starting with artifact concepts, as German & Johnson (2002: 279–280) note, it
is well established that people take ‘the design stance, in which an entity’s properties,
behavior, and existence is explained in terms of its having been designed to serve a
particular purpose.’ Likewise Bloom (1996: 3), reviewing earlier work by Rips and
by Keil, notes: ‘This has suggested to many scholars that the psychological ‘core’
of artifact concepts is that their members share a common intended function.’
To illustrate, Rips (1989) found that adults judge that an object that looks like a
lampshade is actually an umbrella when they are told that it was originally designed
to protect people from rain.
With artifact concepts, there is a robust debate over the developmental details.
For instance, Kelemen (1999a) argues that children take the design stance as early
as four, Matan & Carey (2001) argue for a more complicated developmental process
in which the design stance is not fully in place until six years of age, and German

244
NO ˆUS
& Johnson (2002) argue for a different developmental process in which the ability
to use an integrated adult-level design stance continues to develop in the period
between five to seven years of age. We are only interested in adult competence,
which all sides agree is based on the design stance, and we remain neutral on how
and when this competence develops.
Turning to the organism concepts of ‘folk biology,’ it is well established that we
strongly tend towards teleological thinking in this domain as well. For instance Keil
(1995: 245) writes:
Historically there have been many arguments for a ‘design’ stance, which can include
teleological interpretations and tool construction and use . . . Notions of functional
architecture are among the most cognitively compelling ways of approaching the bio-
logical world and much of the artificial world as well, . . .
Likewise Atran (1998: 550–551) speaks of the folk idea of a ‘biological essence’
as ‘an intrinsic . . . teleological agent, which physically . . . causes the biologically
relevant parts and properties of a generic species to function and cohere ‘for the
sake of’ the generic species itself.’
Again there is robust debate concerning ‘folk biology,’ as to the extent to which
biological cognition is domain-specific (perhaps subserved by a partially encapsu-
lated ‘folk biology module’) or an application of more general-purpose cognition.
And there is debate concerning the details of how we naturally organize the biolog-
ical world hierarchically.7 Again we remain neutral on these debates, maintaining
only the minimal and uncontroversial claim that organism concepts are teleologi-
cally infused.
2.2 Promiscuous teleology
So far we have discussed object categorization with artifact and organism concepts.
One might think, in accord with the approach that Kelemen (1999a: 243) calls
‘selective teleology,’ that teleological thinking is largely restricted to these domains.
But, as Kelemen (1999a: 244) argues, the more psychologically plausible view is
that of ‘promiscuous teleology,’ according to which teleological thinking is not
restricted:
[T]he teleological stance derives from children’s understanding of agency and inten-
tional object-directed behavior and may never become entirely autonomous from the
intentional domain . . . [D]ue to these origins the teleological stance is applied broadly
rather than selectively early in development: Infants may start out generally assuming
that objects exist to be used by agents in some way and subsequently, in lieu of alter-
native explanations, develop the teleological belief that virtually all sorts of living and
non-living entities are intentionally caused for a purpose. Children may only begin to
revise and restrict this belief once they begin to assimilate more formal scientific ideas.
Indeed Kelemen (1999a: 245) goes on to note a historical tendency to view all of
nature as an artifact:
[T]hroughout history, non-living natural objects have also been considered in such
[teleological] terms . . . The earth, its climates, landforms, water sources, and elements,

Folk Mereology is Teleological
245
were seen as intentionally designed to create a habitat for, and meet the needs of, people.
In other words, natural objects of all kinds—particularly those fulfilling a significant
function in people’s lives—were candidates for construal as quasi-artifacts.
Moreover Kelemen & DiYanni (2005; cf. Kelemen 2004) report a strong ten-
dency among children—both from religious and nonreligious backgrounds—to an
‘intuitive theism’ in which nature is viewed as an artifact of a creator, as well as a
significant correlation between viewing something teleologically and regarding it as
created. So one should expect teleological thinking to extend through to our general
conception of an object. As Bloom (2007: 150)—in an article entitled ‘Religion is
Natural’—summarizes:
One of the most interesting discoveries in the developmental psychology of religion
is that the bias towards creationism appears to be cognitively natural. Four-year-olds
insist that everything has a purpose, including things like lions (‘to go to the zoo’) and
clouds (‘for raining’). When asked to explain why a bunch of rocks are pointy, adults
prefer a physical explanation, while children choose functional answers, such as ‘so that
animals could scratch on them when they get itchy.’
Thus it seems that the four-year old view has it that ‘everything has a purpose,’ not
just lamps and lions, but even rocks and clouds.
We take the main unresolved issue concerning ‘promiscuous teleology’ to be the
extent to which it extends beyond children to adults, with even adults retaining
the mindset of ‘everything has a purpose.’ While children show a strong tendency
to prefer teleological explanations to mechanistic explanations across the board,
adults in contemporary Western cultures tend to resist teleological accounts when
considering inanimate natural things like rock piles. For instance, Kelemen (1999b:
1443–1444) asked both children and adults why a certain rock was pointy, and found
that children tend to resist a mechanistic explanation in terms of bits of stuff being
piled up, and instead prefer the following (bizarre) teleological explanation: ‘so
that animals wouldn’t sit on them and smash them.’ She found a strong preference
for this style of teleological explanation among first and second graders, which
persisted (albeit in diminished form) even among fourth graders, but was finally
reversed with adults. Extending this research, Lombrozo & Carey (2006: 180) found
that ‘adults accepted teleological explanations selectively,’ summarizing (2006: 184):
We found that adults accept teleological explanations when two conditions obtain: (a)
the function invoked in the explanation played a causal role in bringing about what is
being explained and (b) the process by which the function played a causal role seems
general, in the sense that it conforms to a predictable pattern.
That said, there is recent converging evidence that our childhood tendencies to
teleological thinking persist through adulthood, being merely occasionally masked.
Thus Lombrozo, Kelemen & Zaitchik—investigating the recurrence of teleological
explanation in patients with Alzheimer’s Disease—claim (2007: 999–1000) that ‘an
underlying tendency to construe the world in terms of functions persists throughout
life’ and represents an ‘explanatory default.’ They (2007: 1004) conclude:

246
NO ˆUS
[T]he preference for teleology is never outgrown. Rather, the preference persists through-
out life, reemerging when causal beliefs that might otherwise constrain it are limited or
compromised. In short, these findings provide evidence for a basic human preference
to understand the world in terms of purpose. When faced with an object that supports
a plausible function, humans make an immediate but defeasible inference to design,
and assume a teleological explanation is warranted.
In a similar vein, Kelemen & Rosset—speeding up adults to prevent their back-
ground beliefs from intruding—elicited explicitly teleological judgments even in sci-
entific contexts, concluding (2009: 143): ‘[T]he bottom line implied by the current
findings remains that, like children, college-educated adults display scientifically
unwarranted teleological explanations with ease.’ And perhaps the most interest-
ing and recent results, due to Kelemen, Rottman & Seston (2013: 1079), involved
research on an expert population of physical scientists, with the finding that: ‘even
physical scientists, despite their extensive scientific training, routine adoption of
physical-causal explanations, and anti-teleological norms, default to scientifically
inaccurate teleological explanations when their cognitive resources are limited.’8
2.3 Folk teleology as unscientific
In the psychological literature, the folk tendency to teleological explanation is gen-
erally recognized as an error, and indeed an obstacle students face in properly un-
derstanding processes such as natural selection (cf. Galli & Meinardi 2011; Kelemen
2012). In this vein, Kelemen (2012: 68; cf. Kampourakis & Zogza 2008; Moore et al.
2002; Gregory 2009) notes that students tend to think that a ‘personified ‘Mother
Nature’ or ‘Evolution’ responded to the functional needs of animals by generating
or conferring the functional part with a view to preserving the animal’s survival,’
such as by stretching a giraffe’s neck so it could reach its food. She (2012: 71) goes
on to explain:
Findings suggesting that underlying beliefs about natural agency exert non-obvious
influence on students’ biological reasoning are potentially less surprising when con-
sidered in a broader context of research which suggests that such immanent agentive
ideas influence adults’ scientifically incorrect ideas about living and non-living nature
more generally. For example, in contrast to their ratings of belief in God, students’
ratings of the Gaia notion that ‘Nature is driven to preserve living things’ has been
found to strongly predict undergraduates promiscuous (but often covert) tendencies to
teleologically explain not only living but also non-living natural phenomena in terms
of a purpose: That is, an agentive construal of nature provides a significant reason why
American undergraduates find scientifically inaccurate teleological statements such as
‘the sun makes light so that plants can photosynthesize’ highly believable even after
extensive high school and college level instruction in both the physical and life sciences.
The dismissal of teleological explanation from real science goes back at least to
Bacon and the emergence of modern science from medieval Aristotelianism. As
Bacon himself (1996: 365) memorably declares: ‘For the inquisition of Final Causes
is barren, and like a virgin consecrated to God produced nothing.’

Folk Mereology is Teleological
247
That said, we recognize that some philosophers—especially in response to the
recurrent use of teleological notions within biology—have sought to legitimize a
revised kind of ‘naturalistically acceptable’ teleological thinking (Cummins 1975;
Millikan 1989). Indeed one reaction we have encountered to our work (in certain
philosophical quarters) is to ask whether folk teleology is so wrong. So—to pick
up on the terminology of Allen & Bekoff (1995: 13–14)—one may distinguish the
crude and unscientific idea of teleomentalism (or ‘teleology-heavy’) which regards
‘the teleology of psychological intentions, goals, and purposes as the primary model
for understanding teleology in biology,’ from a revisionary notion of teleonatural-
ism (‘teleology-lite’) through which one may ‘seek naturalistic truth conditions for
teleological claims in biology that do not refer to the intentions, goals, or purposes
of psychological agents’ and so attempt to ‘reduce teleological language to forms
of description and explanation that are found in other parts of science.’
We grant—if only for the sake of the argument—that there may be some revised
and scientifically legitimate teleonaturalist notions which philosophers of biology
might usefully identify. Our point is simply that the folk are not teleonaturalists
but full-blown teleomentalists, indulging in the heavy mentalistic projection of
agency onto the entirety of nature. A classical demonstration of our adult tendency
toward teleomentalism is found in an experiment due to Heider & Simmel (1944),
which involved a simple movie in which various geometrical figures—circles,
squares, triangles—moved in certain systematic ways. When shown this movie,
people instinctively describe the figures as if they have goals and desires. This
effect persists even with unbounded figures, such as moving dots and swarms of
tiny squares (Bloom & Veres 1999). Other work suggests that this tendency to
attribute agency and purpose extends to real world entities including cities, clouds,
earthquakes, fire, hurricanes, the moon, mountains, plants, rain, the sun, rivers,
rocks, trees, volcanoes, water, and wind (Guthrie 1993).
(In what follows we will continue to use the term ‘teleology,’ but we are
throughout referring to the illegitimate superstition of teleomentalism, and not
to any potentially respectable but revisionary version of teleonaturalism that
philosophers of biology might construct.)
Putting this together: Background work in psychology suggests that adults in-
dulge in promiscuous teleological thinking. In particular, we tend to classify objects
by their purposes. There is a natural connection between object categorization and
the special composition question, even beyond the fact that both involve object
cognition (and for that reason alone might already be thought to follow common
principles). For one can think of the special composition question as asking whether
a thing is (that is, asking whether there is an individual y that fuses the plurality
of individuals Xs). And there is a natural connection between how we determine
what a thing is (object categorization) and how we determine whether a thing is
(folk mereology). Indeed, one can plausibly equate the question of whether a thing
is with the question of whether there is anything that it is (that is, one can equate
existence with falling under some category or other). When the plurality of indi-
viduals collectively falls under an object category, then (and only then) should we
be expected to say that the plurality has a fusion. When the plurality is for some-
thing then it is something. But when the plurality lacks a purpose—when it is for

248
NO ˆUS
nothing—then it is nothing. Against this background of promiscuous teleological
thinking even by adults, our hypothesis that folk mereology is teleological should
be unsurprising. Our hypothesis deserves high initial credence.
3. Folk Mereology is Teleological
So far we have displayed a range of armchair disputes about folk mereology (§1),
and documented some background psychological work on folk teleology (§2). We
now describe a range of studies we conducted which support the idea that folk
mereology is teleological, in the sense that people tend to intuit that a plurality of
objects has a fusion partly on the basis of considering when that plurality serves a
purpose.
We did face a methodological difficulty worth flagging from the start. Simply
asking people the special composition question directly (‘Under what conditions
does some plurality of individuals Xs compose some one individual y?’) will presum-
ably elicit something between blank incomprehension and pure noise. Attempting
to teach the relevant concepts first comes with no guarantee of success (and may
generate bias, and will generate cognitive load). So instead we chose to design a
variety of surveys describing various particular cases and then posing composition
questions in various ways (e.g., do two mice glued together ‘compose a new ob-
ject’? do two ropes tied together ‘create a single, unified object’ or still leave one
with ‘two, distinct pieces of rope’?) We hoped that our results might prove robust
across these diverse vignettes and probes, thereby buttressing the conclusion that
we have been uniformly successful in eliciting the intended mereological concepts.
Our hopes turn out to be realized. But still, we would flag the concern that some
of our questions may have been read in an unintended way.
As with all empirical work, our results are subject to potential confounds and
diverse interpretations, and defeasible in the light of future inquiry. We think that
any open-minded person who considers all of our studies together will agree that
they point overall towards a teleological view of folk mereology (especially given the
psychological background of promiscuous teleological thinking). But each specific
study may be questioned, and of course future results may always point in other
directions, or towards a more specific form of a teleological view. Overall we hope
to have provided the first but not the last word on folk mereology.
3.1 Handshake cases
We begin with studies we ran based on van Inwagen’s (1990: 35; 57–59) famous
‘handshake case.’ Van Inwagen—after hypothesizing that the folk theory is some-
thing like Contact or Fastenation—asks one to imagine two people shaking hands
(thereby coming into contact), or even gluing their hands together (so as to be-
come fastened together), and then to consider whether ‘a new thing’ has ‘at that
moment come into existence.’ If the folk theory were Contact or Fastenation one
should think ‘yes.’ But if the folk theory were Nihilism, Vitalism, or Emergentism
one should think: ‘no, there is no sum, nothing has coming into existence.’ While
if the folk theory were based on Universalism one should think: ‘no, there always

Folk Mereology is Teleological
249
was a sum—nothing new has come into existence.’ (If the folk theory were based
on Regionalism, Serialism, or Brutalism then no prediction can be made one way
or another.)
We had two goals in mind. First we wanted to test whether van Inwagen was
right to predict that most people would say ‘no’ to the question of whether a new
thing has come into existence. Secondly we wanted to see if we could flip intuitions
by manipulating function. So we first tested van Inwagen’s initial question, as to
whether two people shaking hands and thereby coming into contact thereby create
a new thing. We set up a vignette involving a handshake, and then described a
disagreement between two characters—Andy and Liz—as to whether a new larger
object was thereby created:
Handshake
Sally and Tom are leaders of rival political factions, and have recently decided
to lay aside their differences. They have worked out all the details, signed all
the official papers, and will now seal their deal with a public and historic
handshake.
Later that day, Andy and Liz—who were both present for the historic
handshake—have a disagreement over whether Sally and Tom created a new
object when they shook hands. Andy says that simply coming into contact
with someone or something is not enough to create some new thing, and
claims that Sally and Tom did not create a new larger object in the moment
when they shook hands.
Liz, however, disagrees. She thinks that when Sally and Tom came into
contact in this case, they thereby created a new larger thing, made from Sally
and Tom together.
Participants were asked the extent to which they agreed with either Andy or Liz
(they were given a seven point scale with 1 marked ‘Andy is right,’ 4 marked ‘Neither
is right,’ and 7 marked ‘Liz is right’). Just as van Inwagen predicted, participants
tended to side with Andy (M = 2.48, SD = 1.84).
We then made minimal adjustments to the vignette so that the larger object
formed served a purpose, by adding that a sculptor would use it as a model for a
sculpture of two people shaking hands:
Handshake with function
Sally and Tom are leaders of rival political factions, and have recently decided
to lay aside their differences. They have worked out all the details, signed all
the official papers, and will now seal their deal with a public and historic
handshake. To commemorate this historic event, a sculptor has been com-
missioned to sculpt the handshake. Sally and Tom together, while they are
shaking hands, will be providing a model for the sculpture, which will be
dubbed ‘Unity.’
Later that day, Andy and Liz—who were both present for the historic
handshake—have a disagreement over whether Sally and Tom created a new
object when they shook hands. Andy says that simply coming into contact
with someone or something is not enough to create some new thing, and

250
NO ˆUS
claims that Sally and Tom did not create a new larger object in the moment
when they shook hands.
Liz, however, disagrees. She thinks that when Sally and Tom came into
contact in this case, they thereby created a new larger thing, made from Sally
and Tom together, which served to provide a model for the sculpture.
Adding a function produced a large-sized effect on intuitions. Participants in Hand-
shake with function tended to side with Liz (M = 4.86, SD = 1.60), agreeing that
‘when Sally and Tom came into contact in this case, they thereby created a new
larger thing, made from Sally and Tom together, which served to provide a model
for the sculpture.’ Here is a visual depiction of the effect of function on intuitions:9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Function
No Function
Handshake cases
Composition
While our primary claim is just that adding a function produced a large-sized
effect on intuitions, we also note that the overall effect in this case was to flip
intuitions. In both Handshake and Handshake with function the responses were
significantly different (p < .01 in both cases) from the midpoint (4.0). So we were
able to take a paradigm case in the literature of when composition fails to occur,
and flip intuitions about composition by manipulating function. None of the extant
answers to the special composition question (§1.1) predict this pattern. So, to the
extent that metaphysicians are beholden to folk intuitions, we have just provided
an empirically substantiated counterexample to virtually every extant account.
With these Handshake cases we see a first sign of an underlying pattern, in which
intuitions about whether or not composition occurs are significantly impacted by
whether or not there is a function for the candidate larger thing to serve. Our
remaining studies further illustrate and clarify this pattern.
3.2 Gollywag cases
In another series of studies we wanted to consider an unfamiliar type of artifact
(‘gollywags’) and consider the effect of function along multiple dimensions. We
wanted to see whether there was an effect of function, and also look for any
interactions with contact or with fastening. So we began with:

Folk Mereology is Teleological
251
Gollywags with fusion
Acme Inc. is a large research company. Two Acme Inc. researchers, Jones and
Smith, have recently discovered a new thing, a ‘gollywag.’ Nobody has ever
seen or heard of such a thing so Jones and Smith were quite surprised to
stumble upon this new thing.
One day, Jones takes two gollywags and superglues them together. He
thinks that he has created a new object.
Later that same day, Smith and Jones have a disagreement over whether
the arrangement of gollywags composes a new object. Smith claims that the
arrangement of gollywags does not compose a new object at all. He claims that
simply supergluing some stuff together with some other stuff is not sufficient
to compose a new object.
Jones, however, disagrees. He claims that simply supergluing some stuff
together with some other stuff is sufficient to compose a new object. Con-
cerning the specific case that they are considering, Jones concludes that the
arrangement of gollywags does compose a new object.
We also had a Gollywags with contact case, just like Gollywags with fusion except
that Jones, instead of supergluing the gollywags together, simply placed them into
contact with one another.
We compared Gollywags with fusion with a case that added a function for the
superglued gollywags:
Gollywags with fusion with function
Acme Inc. is a large research company. Two Acme Inc. researchers, Jones and
Smith, have recently discovered a new thing, a ‘gollywag.’ Nobody has ever
seen or heard of such a thing so Jones and Smith were quite surprised to
stumble upon this new thing.
Jones is a very hard worker and spends long hours in his office, spending
most of his time sitting at his desk. On most days, his back becomes very sore
from sitting for so long at his desk.
One day, Jones is working at his desk as he usually does. His back starts
to become very sore from sitting for so long. He decides that he will take two
of the gollywags and superglue them together, making what he thinks to be a
new object, what he calls the ‘Gollywag-Supporter.’
He places the Gollywag-Supporter on his desk chair and continues to
work. At the end of the day, his back is not sore at all.
The next day, Smith and Jones have a disagreement over whether the
arrangement of gollywags composes a new object. Smith claims that the
arrangement of gollywags does not compose a new object at all. He claims
that simply super-gluing some stuff together with some other stuff is not
sufficient to compose a new object.
Jones, however, disagrees. He claims that simply supergluing some stuff
together with some other stuff is sufficient to compose a new object. Con-
cerning the specific case that they are considering, Jones concludes that the

252
NO ˆUS
arrangement of gollywags does compose a new object, namely a Gollywag-
Supporter.
We also had a Gollywags with contact with function case, just like Gollywags with
fusion and function except that Jones, instead of supergluing the gollywags together,
simply placed them into contact with one another.
We found, in line with our Handshake cases (§3.1) but not in line with any of the
extant answers to the special composition question, that function continued to have
a significant (in this case medium-sized) impact on judgments about composition.
We also found no effect of contact versus fusion (thus undermining the idea that
causal joining plays a significant role in our intuitions), and no interaction between
the presence or absence of function and the presence of contact or fusion, as may
be visualized in:10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
No Function
Function
Gollywag cases
Contact
Fusion
With the Gollywag cases we thus see a continuation of the underlying pattern of
teleologically influenced intuitions. Further, we see no evidence that other factors,
in particular the kind of causal connectedness or joining that fastening adds to
contact, play any role in folk intuitions about when composition occurs, either
alone or in interaction with function.
We also note that this is the one case of ours in which we did not see a flip in
intuitions, insofar as we did not detect a statistically significant difference between
responses in the No Function cases and the midpoint (marked as ‘Neither is right’).
The presence or absence of function is continuing to produce an effect on intuitions,
as per our primary claim. Moreover, responses in the Function cases were signifi-
cantly above midpoint (in the direction of ‘Jones is right’). But our data in this one
case is consistent with the thought that people tend to be neutral, undecided, or
just confused about what to say in some cases when no function is specified.
3.3 Mouse cases
With our Gollywag cases we looked at composition judgments for artifacts. We
wanted to see if the same pattern of intuitions extended for biological organisms,
and we also wanted to explore potential effects of familiarity, and of having a name

Folk Mereology is Teleological
253
to label the larger thing. So we began with familiar organisms—mice—and looked
at the effect of function between:
Mice with fusion
Acme Inc. is a large research company. Two Acme Inc. researchers, Jones and
Smith, are experimenting with mice.
One day, Jones takes two mice and superglues them together. He thinks
that he has created a new object.
Later that same day, Smith and Jones, have a disagreement over whether
the arrangement of mice composes a new object. Smith claims that the ar-
rangement of mice does not compose a new object at all. He claims that
simply supergluing some together with some other stuff is not sufficient to
compose a new object.
Jones, however, disagrees. He claims that simply supergluing some stuff
together with some other stuff is sufficient to compose a new object. Con-
cerning the specific case that they are considering, Jones concludes that the
arrangement of mice does compose a new object.
And:
Mice with fusion and function
Acme Inc. is a large research company. Two Acme Inc. researchers, Jones and
Smith, are experimenting with mice.
The FBI has commissioned Jones and Smith and given them the task of
determining whether mice can be used to sniff out explosives. Typically, dogs
are used to sniff out explosives but in some cases dogs are way too large to
enter certain types of spaces. So, the FBI wants to see if a smaller creature
can sniff out explosives with the same degree of accuracy as a dog.
For many months, Jones and Smith have been running the mice through
various types of mazes, trying to determine how quickly and accurately the
mice can find explosives. But they are having little luck: the mice are much
slower and much less accurate than dogs in finding explosives.
One day, Jones takes two mice and superglues them together. He runs a
wide range of experiments and finds that when the two mice are superglued
together they are both very fast and highly accurate at detecting explosives.
As a matter of fact, when two mice are superglued together, they are both
faster and more accurate than dogs at detecting explosives. Jones thus thinks
that he has created a new object, the ‘Mini-Bomb Detector.’
The next day, Smith and Jones have a disagreement over whether the ar-
rangement of mice composes a new object. Smith claims that the arrangement
of mice does not compose a new object at all. He claims that simply super-
gluing some stuff together with some other stuff is not sufficient to compose
a new object.
Jones, however, disagrees. He claims that simply supergluing some stuff
together with some other stuff is sufficient to compose a new object. Con-
cerning the specific case that they are considering, Jones concludes that the

254
NO ˆUS
arrangement of mice does compose a new object, namely a Mini-Bomb De-
tector.
Alongside all of this, we also wanted to explore potential effects of familiarity,
and of having a name to label the thing. So we looked at counterpart cases in which
we replaced the mice with an unfamiliar sort of organism, for which we again used
‘gollywag.’ And we also looked at further counterpart cases in which we deleted
the label ‘mini-bomb detector,’ to check if the presence of the label was influencing
intuitions.11
Our results confirmed and extended the results of our Handshake and Gollywag
(artifact) cases (§§3.1–3.2). We continued to find a significant medium-sized effect
of function on judgments about composition, and we found no other effects (either
alone or in interaction). Whether the organisms were familiar (mice) or unfamiliar
(gollywags), and whether they were jointly labeled (a ‘mini-bomb detector’) or left
unlabeled made no detectable difference to intuitions. All that seemed to drive
intuitions was whether or not the candidate larger thing served a purpose. Since
only function had any effect on composition, we’ve aggregated responses across all
remaining conditions in the following visualization:12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
No Function
Function
Mouse cases
Composition
Judgment
With the Mouse cases we thus see a continuation of the underlying pattern of
teleologically influenced intuitions. We moreover see that the effect of function was
to again flip intuitions (i.e., responses in both the Function and No Function cases
were significantly different from the midpoint). Further, we see no evidence that
other factors including familiarity and labeling play any role in folk intuitions about
when composition occurs.
3.4 Avalanche cases
Our cases so far have been limited in two main respects. First, we have mainly
focused on artifacts and organisms, for which it is well established (even given just
‘selective teleology’: §2.1) that people tend to think teleologically. We have not yet
looked at natural non-biological things such as rocks (where one needs ‘promiscious
telelology’ [§2.2] to predict an effect). Secondly, we have only looked at larger things
that are at least spatiotemporally connected, and sometimes even fastened together.
We have not yet looked at scattered things, so left open whether there still might be
some effect of scattering versus contact, or some interaction between scattering and
function. So we turned to cases involving a scattered collection of rocks, to see if

Folk Mereology is Teleological
255
attributing a function (having the rocks designed to serve as a rock garden) would
have an effect, and to continue checking for effects of labeling. We also wanted to
start getting ‘inside’ the notion of a function by comparing the case in which a
thing was designed from the start to serve a function, with the case in which a thing
has already come to be (seemingly by accident) and is then accorded a function
after the fact.
So in order to look at scattered collections of rocks, we began with:
Avalanche (base)
Jones lives on the side of a mountain. He has just been awoken by a series
of loud crashes from a small avalanche on the mountain. Jones wakes up
and looks outside, and sees a bunch of rocks strewn across his lawn from the
avalanche.
We wanted to vary whether or not the rocks were given a label, whether or not
they were accorded a function as a rock garden, and whether or not Jones then
rearranged the rocks so that they were actually designed to serve that function.
This resulted in six different extensions of Avalanche (base):
Avalanche
[Avalanche (base) plus] Though he is surprised, he just goes back to bed.
Avalanche with label
[Avalanche (base) plus] He thinks to himself, ‘Looks like I have mountain
man’s rock garden!’ He goes on thinking to himself, ‘What a useless mess—
looks like I’ll have to clean all this up in the morning.’
Avalanche with accorded function
[Avalanche (base) plus] Even though avalanches are usually quite annoying
for Jones, he decides at that moment that the rocks are actually strewn across
his lawn in such a way that they will make his front lawn beautiful. He thus
thinks that the arrangement of rocks from the avalanche compose a new
object, namely an object that would make his front lawn beautiful.
Avalanche with accorded function and label
[Avalanche (base) plus] Even though avalanches are usually quite annoying
for Jones, he decides at that moment that the rocks are actually strewn across
his lawn in such a way that they will do perfectly for a beautiful rock garden.
He thus thinks that the arrangement of rocks from the avalanche compose a
new object, namely a rock garden.
Avalanche with designed function
[Avalanche (base) plus] Even though avalanches are usually quite annoying
for Jones, he decides that in the morning he’ll use them to make his front
lawn beautiful.
The next day, he arranges all of the rocks in such a way that he thinks he
has created something that makes his front lawn beautiful. He thus thinks
that the arrangement of rocks compose a new object, namely an object that
makes his front lawn beautiful.

256
NO ˆUS
Avalanche with designed function and label
[Avalanche (base) plus] Even though avalanches are usually quite annoying
for Jones, he decides that in the morning he’ll use them to make a rock garden.
The next day, he arranges all of the rocks in such a way that he thinks
he has created a rock garden. He thus thinks that the arrangement of rocks
compose a new object, namely a rock garden.
Our results on these six cases confirmed and extended our previous results. We
continued to find a significant (now large-sized) effect of function on judgments
about composition, and we found no effect of naming and no interaction between
naming and function. We also found a significant difference between accorded
function and designed function, as may overall be visualized in:13
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Accorded          Designed
No Function
Function
Function
Avalanche cases
Composition Judgment
Thus with the Avalanche cases we see a continuation of the underlying pattern
of teleologically influenced intuitions, extended even to cases with scattered rocks.
And we start to see inside this pattern, by seeing that merely according a function
is already sufficient to influence intuitions, but that having the thing designed all
along to serve the function produces an even stronger effect. Putting this all together,
and considering the totality of our studies, it seems that the folk operate with a
restricted and teleologically-laden view of when composition occurs. Through a
range of very different cases we find a significant effect of function on judgments
of when composition occurs, as per our main thesis. Indeed, in all cases save that
of our Gollywag cases (§3.2) we saw an effect that we would describe as ‘flipping
intuitions,’ from significantly below to significantly above the midpoint.
3.5 Rope cases
So far we have only looked at cases in which the object succeeds at serving its
purpose. Indeed the existing psychological literature on object categorization fo-
cuses almost exclusively on such cases, in which the object works as intended. We
also wanted to consider cases in which something fails to serve the purpose it was
designed for (so as to get further ‘inside’ our notion of function), as well as take the
opportunity to vary our probe further. So we worked with the following vignettes:

Folk Mereology is Teleological
257
Ropes failure
Jones has an old, rusty water heater lying in his backyard. He thinks the water
heater is ugly and so decides to move it out of his yard. So he ties a piece
of rope around the water heater and pulls on it. But it does not move at all.
Jones then thinks to himself, ‘The rope must be too short. I need something
longer to get more leverage.’ He thus grabs another piece of rope and ties
it in a knot around the other piece of rope that is already around the water
heater. Jones then pulls on it but still the water heater does not move at all.
Ropes success
Jones has an old, rusty water heater lying in his backyard. He thinks the water
heater is ugly and so decides to move it out of his yard. So he ties a piece
of rope around the water heater and pulls on it. But it does not move at all.
Jones then thinks to himself, ‘The rope must be too short. I need something
longer to get more leverage.’ He thus grabs another piece of rope and ties
it in a knot around the other piece of rope that is already around the water
heater. Jones then pulls on it and is easily able to drag the water heater out
of his yard.
We asked people whether they thought that Jones ‘created a single, unified object’
or whether ‘When Jones tied the pieces of rope together, he did not create a single,
unified object out of the rope. Rather, he simply had two, distinct pieces of rope.’
We found that success matters in a significant small-sized way to people’s intu-
itions. In Ropes failure only 36% of our participants chose the option of ‘a single,
unified object,’ while in Ropes success 63% of our participants chose the option of
‘a single, unified object.’ Graphically:14
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Moved Water
Tank
Did Not Move
Water Tank
Rope cases
Single, Unified Object
Two Separate Objects
We thus see further confirmation for the view that the folk operate with a re-
stricted and teleologically-laden view of when composition occurs, alongside further
and new clarification of the folk notion of function. Comparing these results with

258
NO ˆUS
our earlier results on Avalanche cases (§3.4), we can contrast two different dimen-
sions along which a thing might be said to have a purpose (in the sense relevant
to the folk). First, the thing might be originally designed to serve a given function,
or it might merely be accorded a function after the fact. Secondly, the thing might
succeed in serving whatever function it was either designed for or accorded, or it
might fail to serve this function. It seems (from the Avalanche cases) that accor-
dance versus design is not crucial for serving a purpose (though design seems to
bolster intuitions somewhat). And it seems (from the Rope cases) that success tends
to be required.15,16
3.6 Restricted composition or restricted domain?
The friend of Universalism who (like Lewis and Thomasson) thinks that her theory
does not conflict with folk intuitions has one more trick up her sleeve. Instead of
saying that the folk operate with a restricted and teleologically-laden view of when
composition occurs, she might say that the folk operate with an unrestricted view of
when composition occurs, coupled with a teleological restriction of the domain of
quantification. That is, she can treat the folk as upholding Universalism alongside:
Teleologically Restricted Domain: In normal contexts, quantifiers are re-
stricted to things that have a purpose
There is something to be said for this move, insofar as it will be vague whether
something has a purpose, and insofar as Teleologically Restricted Domain relo-
cates this vagueness from the metaphysics to the semantics (where vagueness most
plausibly belongs). If this move could be shown to work, we would regard this as a
very interesting result in its own right!
With this trick in mind, we returned to our Handshake cases (§3.1) and had one
of the characters (Andy) speak explicitly on behalf of Universalism, saying the sort
of things one might reasonably say to ensure that the domain of quantification is
sufficiently open. This yielded:
Handshake without restrictions
Sally and Tom are leaders of rival political factions, and have recently decided
to lay aside their differences. They have worked out all the details, signed all
the official papers, and will now seal their deal with a public and historic
handshake.
Later that day, Andy and Liz—who were both present for the historic
handshake—have a disagreement over whether Sally and Tom created a new
object when they shook hands.
Andy says that Sally and Tom did compose a single object. Indeed, he
says that Sally and Tom always made a single, larger object, not just during
the handshake, but before and after too. He says that in addition to the two
people, Sally and Tom, there is, was, and will also be this larger object made
of the two of them together. He says, ‘This larger object, which I will call ‘the
Sally-Tom hybrid’ has two parts: a Sally part, and a Tom part. It weighs just
as much as Sally and Tom put together. Before the handshake, its two parts

Folk Mereology is Teleological
259
were scattered, during the handshake its two parts came into contact briefly,
and after the handshake its two parts scattered. I know that we have no usual
name for this larger object, and I know that it is not the sort of thing we
usually chat about, but it is there all the same.’
Liz, however, disagrees. She says that, both before Sally and Tom shook
hands, during their handshake, and after, there were just two people present.
There was never any third, larger object made from Sally and Tom together,
either before, during, or after the handshake. She clarifies: ‘There is no such
thing of any sort as your alleged ‘Sally-Tom hybrid.’ It’s not just that we don’t
usually chat about this thing. There is no such thing.’
Despite Andy’s explicit description of the sort of fusion he has in mind, and despite
his explicit moves to open up the quantifiers, our participants still tended to agree
with Liz that ‘It’s not just that we don’t usually chat about this thing. There is no
such thing.’17
Accordingly we see little prospect in sustaining Lewis’s idea that our hesitation
to accept the existence of arbitrary sums is merely due to contextual domain restric-
tions, and little prospect in sustaining Thomasson’s (2007: 184) speculation that if
‘we explained to ‘normal’ people’ a term for some arbitrary sum, and then asked
them if there is such a thing, they ‘would certainly accept that there is.’ Instead we
find empirical substantiation for Korman’s (2008) skepticism that folk intuitions
can be explained by Universalism plus domain restrictions. Of course it is possible
that—despite Andy’s explicit description of the sort of sum he has in mind, and
his explicit moves to open up the quantifiers—he still failed to open up the quanti-
fiers sufficiently. But pending real evidence for this it must be considered doubtful.
(Compare: In paradigm cases of quantifier domain restriction such as when one
says ‘All the beer is in the fridge,’ it is very easy for an interlocutor to open up the
quantifiers such as by saying ‘If we need more beer there is more at the grocery
story on the corner.’) And given the background psychological evidence that we
are natural teleologists (§2) this view must be considered more doubtful still. It’s
not just that we usually choose to focus on things with a purpose; it’s rather that
we naturally equate being a thing with having a purpose.
3.7 Teleologically restricted composition
Putting this all together, and considering the totality of our studies in light of the
background psychological evidence about the role of teleology in folk metaphysics,
we find empirical support for the idea that teleology plays a significant role in folk
judgments about composition:
Teleologically Restricted Composition: Composition occurs in restricted cir-
cumstances, in which the question of whether the plurality has a purpose
plays a significant role
We would emphasize that we are offering Teleologically Restricted Composition
as an account of the folk theory, and not as a metaphysical claim. We sometimes
hear: ‘Surely the folk accept that there are composites like rocks and clouds which

260
NO ˆUS
serve no purpose.’ But it should not be presumed that the folk think that rocks and
clouds serve no purpose. Indeed, as we have already noted (§2.2), the folk tend to
regard everything as having a purpose, including every rock and cloud (‘clouds are
for rain’).
We would further emphasize that Teleologically Restricted Composition is not
an exhaustive claim about what factors drive folk intuitions. We claim that teleology
is one factor driving folk intuitions, not that it is the only such factor. That would
require the strong claim:
Purely Teleologically Restricted Composition: Composition occurs if and only
if the plurality has a purpose
We leave open whether Purely Teleologically Restricted Composition holds, and will
only operate with the more modest claim that Teleologically Restricted Composition
holds.
To establish Purely Teleologically Restricted Composition would be to prove
the negative existential that no other factors play a role in the folk theory, which
obviously we cannot prove. Indeed there may be good empirical reason to doubt
Purely Teleologically Restricted Composition, stemming from the role that gestalt
principles play in visual cognition.18 As Goldman (1993: 108) usefully summarizes:
We do not readily consider something as a physical body if it lacks cohesion (a pile of
leaves), lacks bounds (a drop of water in a pool), or lacks continuity (a row of flashing
lights). These may be considered collections of objects or parts of objects, but they are
not unitary and independent objects for us.
Indeed it may be the case that the visual system operates with an implicit ‘theory’
of composition that differs from that used by other cognitive systems. (Though we
would expect any such influence to be operative only when the plurality is visually
presented, and so probably not triggered in philosophical intuitions given the usual
narrative presentation of cases.)
That said, our studies did not turn up any effect of gestalt factors like contact or
fusion (§3.2), or of other factors like familiarity or labeling (§§3.3–3.4) or quantifier
restrictions (§3.6). While inferences from a null result on a particular study to a ‘no
effect’ conclusion are notoriously fraught (though see Machery 2012), these null
results at least provide some support for the idea that contact, fusion, familiarity,
labeling, and quantifier restrictions are not playing a significant role in folk intu-
itions about when composition occurs, at least in narrative presentations of cases.
This is especially relevant since philosophers have speculated that contact and/or
fusion may be the main drivers of folk intuition (§§1.2–1.3). Thus our studies do at
least provide some support for the idea that the most plausible additional factors
other than teleology are not in fact driving folk intuitions, at least for the usual nar-
ratively presented cases. (Perhaps contact, fusion, and other gestalt-related factors
might have played a role in judgments about visual stimuli.)
In any case, our ultimate purpose is to debunk folk intuitions on grounds that
they are laden with primitive teleological thinking (§4.2), and for that purpose
Teleologically Restricted Composition is sufficient. So in that sense the empirical

Folk Mereology is Teleological
261
question of whether there are further factors driving folk mereology—interesting
as it may be—does not make a difference to our ultimate conclusion. Accordingly
we will leave the prospect of further factors aside in what remains, as an invitation
for follow-up empirical work. (Though we briefly return to the issue in §4.1 when
we consider the prospects for a ‘cleaned up’ folk theory.)
4. Implications
We began by documenting various answers to the special composition question
and the charges of ‘mereological madness’ that have played a major role in the
metaphysical debate (§1). We then offered an empirically driven case for regarding
folk mereology as teleological (§§2–3). We conclude by discussing some of the
metaphysical and methodological implications of our research.
4.1 Metaphysical implications
If we are right that folk mereology is teleological, what follows for the special
composition question? That is, what if any morals should the metaphysician draw
from our discussion? First and foremost, we hope to have made an empirically
substantiated case that answers to the special composition question should not be
beholden to folk intuitions. Accordingly we claim to have liberated the prescriptive
metaphysician from the various charges of ‘mereological madness’ in the literature.
Whatever problems Universalism or Nihilism or any of the other extant views
about composition might have, failure to fit folk intuitions is not among them.
(Not because these views fit folk intuitions, but because folk intuitions in this
domain are tied into a benighted teleological view of nature.)
Folk mereology looks to us in many ways akin to folk physics. Both involve fas-
cinating conceptual machinery worthy of extended psychological study, but neither
can make any serious claim to fitting reality. Objecting to a philosophical theory
of mereology on grounds that it violates folk intuitions about composition looks
to us roughly on par with objecting to Newtonian mechanics on grounds that it
violates folk intuitions about persistent curvilinear motion (Kaiser, McCloskey, and
Proffitt 1986). In both cases the theories do conflict with folk intuitions, but the
folk intuitions deserve dismissal.19
We imagine three likely follow-up reactions to our claim that folk mereology is
teleological.20 One sort of follow-up reaction—which certain sorts of opponents of
experimental philosophy might be drawn to—would be to say ‘let us then ignore
the ignorant folk and turn to the real experts, namely the metaphysicians.’ We do
not think it is obvious that the metaphysicians have earned the mantle of ‘experts’
on the matter. But setting that aside, while we do not have empirical evidence as to
the distribution of views among metaphysicians, it certainly seems from the current
literature as if there is little agreement among the metaphysicians, not just with
respect to theory but with respect to intuitions reported. We see intuitions reported
swinging all the way from Universalism to Nihilism and stopping at many places
between (§1.2). The folk may be benighted, but the ‘experts’ seem divided.

262
NO ˆUS
A second sort of follow-up reaction—which some partisans in the metaphysical
dispute might be drawn to—would be to appeal to ‘corrected’ intuitions in a revised
argument for mereological sanity. Perhaps if we could just wipe the teleological
muck off from the folk theory we would find clean intuitions by which to judge
theories. We are skeptical, in part because we can imagine different partisans in
the metaphysical dispute spinning this move in different ways. We can imagine the
friend of Universalism saying: ‘The folk only ever reject composition when they
think the result has no purpose; wipe off the teleological muck and the folk would
no longer ever reject composition.’ But we can equally imagine the friend of Nihilism
saying: ‘The folk only ever accept composition when they think the result has a
purpose; wipe off the teleological muck and the folk would no longer ever accept
composition.’ And we can just as equally imagine partisans of various restrictive
views saying: ‘The folk clearly hold a restricted theory and we should try to honor
that commitment; wipe off the teleological muck and the folk would only need a
more respectable restriction.’ The folk concept can be cleaned up in many ways. We
doubt there is a determinate fact as to ‘the’ corrected folk theory.
(It may be that further empirical work will reveal that the folk operate with
a plurality of factors, or perhaps even recruit different factors for different tasks
[§3.7]. It may then be possible to consider a more determinate cleaned-up folk theory
operating with just those other factors. But for present purposes we can only say
that we have not uncovered any positive evidence for other factors [including factors
such as contact and fusion which had been thought operative], and we cannot guess
what further factors could potentially be involved. Overall we suggest that those
attracted to correcting the folk theory do the empirical work to determine if there
are any residual and respectable factors remaining in the folk theory, which might
still be retained. We would welcome such follow-up empirical work.)
A third sort of follow-up reaction—which some skeptics about prescriptive meta-
physics might be drawn to—would be to say that the special composition question
has been revealed to be hopeless, in that we lack the epistemic wherewithal to se-
lect the right answer.21 As Rosen & Dorr (2002: 154–156) clarify, each proposal is
analytically consistent, and all the proposals seem to be empirically equivalent. If
intuitions cannot help either, what remains? (We suspect that this is why intuitions
loom so large in the current debate: §1.1.)
Perhaps the skeptic is right. Though we think that there are still virtues of
simplicity, elegance, and coherence with wider theory in play that may still help
favor certain approaches. Overall we suspect that liberating the special composition
question from folk intuitions helps tilt the overall balance somewhat in favor of
the elegant but ‘radical’ extreme views of Universalism and Nihilism, over the more
complex but ‘conservative’ intermediate positions. But this is a matter that obviously
falls beyond the scope of the current discussion.
4.2 Methodological implications
We take our results to support a targeted debunking of folk intuitions about when
composition occurs. Epistemically speaking, we hold that any line of argument
that is premised on folk intuitions about composition suffers from an undermining

Folk Mereology is Teleological
263
defeater (cf. Pollock 1987). Just as the force of testimony is undermined if it is
discovered that the testimony is based on a deluded view on the topic, so the force
of intuition is undermined it is discovered that the intuitions are based on a hopeless
theory of the topic. (As is standard with defeaters, there can also be reinstaters.
For instance the deluded views of the testifier may happen by luck to agree with
reasoned views in the case at hand. But any such reinstatement must be shown.)
In other words, we want to say that there is a debunking explanation for folk
intuitions about when composition occurs.22 Imagine that it is discovered that we
intuit that something is alive when we think the thing has a spirit. Our intuitions
about when something is alive would thereby be debunked, and should be accorded
no weight in disputes about biological classification. Likewise if it is discovered that
we intuit that some things fuse when we think they have a collective purpose, our
intuitions would thereby be equally debunked, and would thereby equally deserve no
weight in disputes about mereological composition. (As is standard with debunking
explanations, there can be restorers. For instance it might be found that the ‘spirited’
view of life is connected with a tendency to attribute being spirited on the basis of
reliable indicators of life, such as self-movement. But any such restoration must be
shown.)
There are of course difficult background issues about where to draw the line
with debunking explanations. On the one hand, if we demand that our folk theories
be perfect to be trusted, then we will be left with a blanket skepticism about
intuitions. Perhaps such a skepticism is defensible; we only do not wish to premise
our argument on such a radical view. On the other hand, if we allow our folk
theories to be terrible and still trust them, then we are left with a naive credulity
about intuitions. Theorizing about this issue is obviously beyond the scope of the
current discussion. But for present purposes our claim is that there are clear cases
of undermining defeaters and debunking explanations (such as our hypothetical
spiritual folk biology), and that teleological folk mereology is one such clear case.
We note that our attempt at debunking is targeted, insofar as we have tried to
identify a very specific flaw in our folk worldview. Korman (2009: 244) raises the
general worry that attempts at debunking folk intuitions may either be globally
self-defeating, undermining all reasoning whatsoever, or locally self-defeating, un-
dermining specific premises in the very argument used for debunking. Insofar as
our reasoning targets specific features of our na¨ıve view of the natural world, it
does not undermine reasoning generally, nor do we ever appeal to naive teleological
reasoning ourselves. In this way we hope to have illustrated a stable and targeted
strategy for debunking folk intuitions.
To summarize: Many metaphysicians have wanted a view of mereological com-
position that fits with folk intuitions, and have charged leading views with failing
to do so, while failing themselves to agree as to what the folk intuit or why. So
we have tried to put the tools of experimental philosophy to constructive use to
break this impasse. We have found something that, though unconsidered by any
of the metaphysicians, coheres very well with recent psychological work: folk intu-
itions are based on a crude teleologically-laden conception of when composition
occurs. The folk tend to connect composition to purpose. And we have suggested, in

264
NO ˆUS
conclusion, that this finding should lead us to liberate the metaphysics of composi-
tion from any demand of fitting with folk intuitions. Folk mereology is teleological,
and hence unenlightened.23
Notes
1 There is debate as to whether there is a single category-neutral relation of composition, or perhaps
a range of analogous category-restricted relations (cf. van Inwagen 1990: 18–20). On the one hand we
do use ‘part’ for relations not just among material objects, but also among spatiotemporal regions,
events (‘the inning is part of the baseball game’), and abstracta (‘the chapter is part of the book,’ ‘the
hypotenuse is part of the triangle’). On the other hand it is not obvious that all of these are literal
applications of one and the same neutral notion. We also use temporal notions in describing abstracta
(‘the sequence converges rapidly’), but no one takes this to indicate that we need a single neutral account
of time that equally covers abstracta.
2 Serialism and Brutalism differ from the preceding seven views on the table over whether a general
and informative answer to the special composition question can be given, though this difference plays
no role in our discussion.
3 For the interested reader: On Nihilism, Bennett (2009: 44), Schaffer (2009: 358), and Kriegel (2011:
198) are among the many who charge that it violates commonsense, though Rosen & Dorr (2002: 158)
claim that commonsense is on reflection neutral. On Contact and Fastening, van Inwagen (1990: 34)
and Markosian (1998: 223) claim these views to be close to commonsensical, but van Inwagen (1990:
35; 57–59; cf. Markosian 1998: 224) offers an intuitive counterexample (his handshake case: §3.1). On
Vitalism, Hirsch (2002: 67) says that it is hard ‘to keep a polite straight face’ at the idea that there are
apple trees but no apples, while van Inwagen (1990: 103) claims no conflict with ‘Universal Belief.’
4 For instance, Lewis (1986: 211) claims that the folk focus on qualities, locations, and causal
connections, Hoffman and Rosenkrantz’s (1997: 73) speak of a ‘key commonsense intuition’ in terms
of the parts being joined together so as to be pushed or pulled together, and Simons (1987: 303) speaks
of a kind of intuitive ‘integrity of internal connectedness’ of wholes which he understands in terms of
ontological dependence.
5 The literature is vast and of course there are exceptions to the general rule. For instance, Rea
(1998: 354) speaks of having a possible purpose as sufficient for composition. And—as we discovered
after writing this paper—Bowers (manuscript) defends a teleological view of composition more or less
exactly in line with the view we attribute to the folk.
6 It is probably impossible to say anything about Aristotle without incurring scholarly controversy.
For present purposes we only claim ‘broadly Aristotelian’ roots. For a detailed discussion of Aristotle
on mereology, see Koslicki 2008 (ch. 6.).
7 See the response pieces to Atran (1998) for a useful overview of the main positions.
8 It may be useful to invoke the image of a ‘dual processing system,’ on which the human mind is
viewed as having both ‘Type 1’ automated, encapsulated, and intuitive animalistic systems, as well as
‘Type 2’ deliberative, general, and reflective systems layered over the Type 1 systems by evolution. Then
we might say that teleological thinking is the product of Type 1 systems. To the extent that college-
educated adults can sometimes avoid teleological thinking, it is only through the effortful employment
of a trained Type 2 cognitive mechanism. In this vein Kelemen, Rottman & Seston (2013: 1075) char-
acterize their view as ‘akin to dual-processing models that characterize early developing intuitions as
heuristics that can be increasingly overridden later in development by effortful processing, but which
can nevertheless persistently reemerge in cases when intuitions are favored or forced.’
9 A total of 62 participants were recruited through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk and randomly
assigned to either Handshake or Handshake with function. After reading the case and indicating who
they agreed with (Liz or Andy), participants were then taken to a separate page where they answered
three comprehension questions:
1.
Sally and Tom are leaders of rival political factions (yes/no)
2.
Andy thinks that the handshake did not create a larger object (yes/no)
3.
Liz thinks that the handshake did create a larger object (yes/no)

Folk Mereology is Teleological
265
Four participants missed one or more comprehension questions in Handshake while three partici-
pants missed one or more comprehension questions in Handshake with function. After excluding these
participants, a total of 55 responses were analyzed using a one-way analysis of variance. We found that
whether or not the larger object served a purpose (No Function: M=2.48, SD=1.84; Function: M=4.86,
SD=1.60) produced a statistically significant large-sized effect of people’s composition judgments F(1,
55)=26.824, p<.001, ηp2=.383. Moreover, responses in both the No Function and Function cases were
significantly different from the midpoint: No Function t(28)=−4.43, p<.001; Function, t(27)=2.82,
p<.01.
Throughout we report effect sizes. For the studies (such as the Handshake cases) which included a
scaled, dependent variable, we report effect sizes using partial Eta squared (ηp2), which is the amount
of variance in the dependent variable explained by a given independent variable plus its associated error
variance. For studies with a binary dependent variable, we report effect sizes using Cramer’s V, which is
a nonparametric correlation coefficient that indicates the strength of the relationship between nominal
variables. Both of these measures deliver a value between 0 and 1. We follow Ellis (2010) for interpreting
the magnitude of the effect sizes. So for Cramer’s V we interpret values greater than or equal to .5 as
large, greater than or equal to .3 but less than .5 as medium, and greater than or equal to .1 but less
than .3 as small. And for ηp2 we interpret values greater than or equal to .14 as large, greater than or
equal to .06 but less than .14 as medium, and greater than or equal to .01 but less than .06 as small.
10 121 participants were recruited from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, and randomly assigned to
one of four conditions. After reading the case, participants were asked the extent to which they agreed
with either Jones or Smith (they were given a seven point scale with 1 marked ‘Smith is right,’ 4
marked ‘Neither is right,’ and 7 marked ‘Jones is right’). Participants were then given, on a separate
page, three comprehension questions:
1.
Jones and Smith were talking about what is required to create a new thing (yes/no)
2.
When Jones said that supergluing two things together [putting two things into contact] is
sufficient for creating a new thing, what he was saying was that if you superglue any two things
together [put any two things into contact with one another], then that is enough to create a new
thing (yes/no)
3.
Suppose someone said that supergluing two things together [putting two things into contact] is
sufficient for creating a new thing. If that person were to take a wheel and a piece of metal and
then superglue them together [put them into contact with one another], then that person would
think that a new thing was created (yes/no)
Six people were excluded from the data analysis for failing at least one of the comprehension
questions. Analyzing the remaining 115 responses using a two-way analysis of variance, we found that
whether the gollywags had a function or not produced a statistically significant medium-sized effect
on people’s judgments F(1, 115)=12.492, p=.001, ηp2=.101, with people tending to disagree that the
gollywags composed an object when the gollywags had no function (M=3.85, SD=1.94) and agreeing
that the gollywags composed an object when they had a function (M=5.15, SD=1.99). There was
no effect of the relation type (contact, fusion) on people’s composition judgments F(1, 115)=.016,
p=.901 and there was no interaction between function and relation type on people’s judgments F(1,
115)=.329, p=.567. Since there was only an effect of function, we looked at whether responses in the
No Function and Function cases differed from the midpoint. We found that responses in the Function
cases were significantly different from the midpoint, t(60)=4.48, p<.001 but that responses in the No
Function cases were not, t(55)=-.557, p=.580.
11 We thus had a 2 (Function: Yes, No) x 2 (Label: Yes, No) x 2 (Familiarity: Gollywag, Mouse)
design, resulting in a total of eight conditions.
12 212 participants were recruited from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, and randomly assigned to one
of eight conditions. After reading the case, participants were asked the extent to which they agreed
with either Smith or Jones (they were given a seven point scale with 1 marked ‘Smith is right,’ 4
marked ‘Neither is right,’ and 7 marked ‘Jones is right’). Participants were then given, on a separate
page, five comprehension questions:
1. Jones said that supergluing the [gollywags/mice] together did create a new object (yes/no)
2. Smith said that supergluing the [gollywags/mice] together did not create a new object (yes/no)

266
NO ˆUS
3. Suppose someone said that supergluing two things together is sufficient for creating a new thing.
If that person were to take a wheel and a piece of metal and then superglue them together, then
that person would think that a new thing was created (yes/no)
4. When Jones said that supergluing two things together is sufficient for creating a new thing, what
he was saying was that if you superglue any two things together, then that is enough to create a
new thing (yes/no)
5. Jones and Smith were talking about what is required to create a new thing (yes/no)
Eight people were excluded from the data analysis for failing at least one of the comprehension
questions. Analyzing the remaining 204 responses using a three-way analysis of variance, we found that
having a function or not produced a statistically significant medium-sized effect on whether people
judged that the arrangement of mice or gollywags composed a new object F(1, 204)=30.115, p<.001,
ηp2=.133: when the mice or gollywags served a function people tended to judge that they composed
a new object (M=4.70, SD=1.15) but when they did not serve a function people tended to deny
this (M=3.00, SD=1.73). Neither Label F(1, 204)=.033, p=.856, Familiarity F(1, 204)=.219, p=.640,
nor any two- or three-way interactions were found (all p’s >.05). Since there was only an effect of
function, we looked at whether responses in the No Function and Function cases differed from the
midpoint and found that responses in both the No Function and Function cases were significantly
different from the midpoint: No Function, t(118)=-5.32, p<.001; Function, t(86)=2.82, p<.01.
13 173 participants were recruited from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, and randomly assigned to
one of six conditions. After reading the case participants were asked to indicated their agreement, on
a 7-point scale (anchored with 1=completely disagree and 7=completely agree), with the following
statement: ‘Rather than being a bunch of scattered objects that do not in any way compose some
one thing, the arrangement of rocks actually compose something.’ Participants were then given, on a
separate page, two comprehension questions:
1. Jones lives on the side of a mountain (yes/no)
2. Because of the avalanche, rocks were strewn across Jones’ lawn (yes/no)
Four people were excluded from the data analysis for failing at least one of the comprehen-
sion questions. Analyzing the remaining 169 responses using a two-way analysis of variance, we
found a statistically significant large-sized effect of function on people’s composition judgments F (1,
169)=46.341, p=.000, ηp2=.362. Bonferonni post-hoc tests showed that composition judgments across
each level of function were significantly different from the others: No Function Conditions (M=3.05,
SD=1.34) were significantly different from both the Accorded Function (M=5.05, SD=1.77, p<.001)
and Designed Function Conditions (M=5.84, SD=1.52, p<.001), and the Accorded Function Con-
ditions were significantly different from Designed Function Conditions (p<.05). Moreover, responses
in each of the conditions were significantly different from the midpoint: No Function, t(56)=-3.73,
p<.001; Accorded Function, t(50)=4.06, p<.001; Designed Function, t(63)=14.34, p<.001. There was
no effect of Naming F(1, 169)=2.185, p=.141 nor was there an interaction between Naming and
Function F(2, 169)=.533, p=.588.
14 75 participants were recruited from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, and randomly assigned to one
of two conditions. After reading the case, participants were given two response options:
a. When Jones tied the pieces of rope together, he created a single, unified object out of the rope
b. When Jones tied the pieces of rope together, he did not create a single, unified object out of the
rope. Rather, he simply had two, distinct pieces of rope
After answering, they were then asked, on a separate page, two comprehension questions:
1. Jones was trying to move a water heater (yes/no)
2. Jones was able to move the water heater (yes/no)
Seven people were excluded from the data analysis for failing at least one of the comprehension
questions. Analyzing the remaining 68 responses, we found that whether or not the rope successfully

Folk Mereology is Teleological
267
fulfilled its function had a statistically significant small-sized effect on whether people said that the
rope was a single, unified rope or two separate pieces of rope, X2(68)=4.769, p=.029, Cramer’s
V=.265.
15 When we say that success tends to be required, we mean to remain neutral on whether the
thing in question might survive a later failure to serve its function. Contrast (i) a botched watch that
never worked, with (ii) a broken watch that initially worked but later broke. We suspect that most
people would deny that the botched watch is really a watch (it’s just a collection of cogs and gears
that doesn’t really do anything), but may well uphold that the broken watch is still a watch if it can
easily be fixed so as to resume its successful performance. See Rose (2015) for empirical evidence that
folk judgments of persistence through time are tied to preservation of function.
16 We ran several further studies attempting to get further inside the folk notion of function,
which considerations of space prevent us from detailing here (for an expanded version of this paper
including these further studies see Rose & Schaffer forthcoming:, espec. §4). Overall we found a fairly
complicated interaction between accorded versus designed function, and success versus failure. When
something is both designed to serve a certain purpose and succeeds at that purpose, then it seems
that people will tend to lock onto that purpose in saying what a thing is as well as what it is for.
But when the thing is accorded a different purpose after the fact, and only succeeds at that accorded
purpose, then it seems that people may lock onto that accorded purpose in saying what a thing is as
well as what it is for, at least so long as the lack of a (successful) designed function is not sufficiently
emphasized.
17 A total of 33 participants were recruited through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. After reading
the case and indicating who they agreed with (Liz or Andy: again, using the same 7-point scale as
in Handshake above), participants were then taken to a separate page where they answered three
comprehension questions:
1. Sally and Tom are leaders of rival political factions (yes/no)
2. Andy thinks that the handshake did not create a larger object (yes/no)
3. Liz thinks that the handshake did create a larger object (yes/no)
Four participants were excluded for missing one or more comprehension questions, which left a
total of 29 responses. Overall, participants showed strong agreement with Liz (M=1.88, SD=1.48),
with responses being significantly below the midpoint t(29)=−7.16, p<.001.
18 We thank Jonathan Weinberg for this point.
19 At this point we join Goldman (2007), Paul (2010), and Schaffer (forthcoming) in thinking that
cognitive science can prove relevant to real metaphysics, if only to teach us which intuitions should
be ignored. As Goldman (2007: 2) explains: ‘Cognitive organs or mechanisms play a critical role in
the causal production of appearances, including metaphysical appearances (whatever exactly we take
that to connote). In considering whether such metaphysical appearances should be accepted at face
value or, alternatively, should be superseded through some sort of metaphysical reflection, it obviously
makes sense to be as informed as possible about how these mechanisms of cognition work. That is
why cognitive science is relevant.’
20 Our discussion of reactions is not intended to be exhaustive. For instance, we will not consider
the reaction of attempting to revive teleological thinking. See Hawthorne & Nolan (2006) for further
discussion, as well as Bowers (manuscript) for a more optimistic attempt at revival.
21 See Bennett (2009) and Kriegel (2013) for defenses of skeptical views on the composition debate.
Both Bennett and Kriegel accept that there is a meaningful special composition question, and merely
recommend withholding belief as to which is the right answer. Though of course there is also room
for a skeptical view that denies that the special composition question is even meaningful.
22 We follow Kahane (2011: 106) in associating undermining defeaters and debunking explanations:
‘Debunking arguments are arguments that show the causal origins of a belief to be an undermining
defeater.’ See Mason (2010) for a useful overview of the structure of debunking arguments.
23 Thanks to Jason Bowers, Andrew Higgins, Joshua Knobe, Dan Korman, Uriah Kriegel,
Jonathan Livengood, Ned Markosian, David McElhoes, Shaun Nichols, Laurie Paul, Angel Pinil-
los, John Turri, Jonathan Weinberg, audiences at Buffalo and Arizona State, and an anonymous Noˆus
referee.

268
NO ˆUS
References
Allen, Colin and Marc Bekoff 1995. Function, Natural Design, and Animal Behavior: Philosophical
and Ethological Considerations. Perspectives in Ethology, Vol. 11: Behavioral Design, ed. N. S.
Thompson: 1–47. Plenum Press.
Aristotle 1984a. Physics. The Complete Works of Aristotle, Vol. 1, ed. Jonathan Barnes: 315–446.
Princeton University Press.
—— 1984b. Metaphysics. The Complete Works of Aristotle, Vol. 2, ed. Jonathan Barnes: 1552–728.
Princeton University Press.
Atran, Scott 1998. Folk Biology and the Anthropology of Science: Cognitive Universals and Cultural
Particulars. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21: 547–609.
Bacon, Francis 1996. Collected Works of Francis Bacon, vol. 4: Translations of the Philosophical Works,
eds. James Spedding, Robert Leslie Ellis, and Douglas Denon Heath. Routledge/Thoemmes
Press.
Bennett, Karen 2009. Composition, Colocation, and Metaontology. Metametaphysics: New Essays on
the Foundations of Ontology, eds. David Chalmers, David Manley, and Ryan Wasserman:
38–76. Clarendon Press.
Bloom, Paul 1996. Intention, History, and Artifact Concepts. Cognition 60: 1–29.
—— 2007. Religion is Natural. Developmental Science 10: 147–51.
Bloom, Paul and Csaba Veres 1999. The Perceived Intentionality of Groups. Cognition 71: B1–B9.
Bowers, Jason manuscript. A Teleological Answer to the Special Composition Question.
Charles, David 2001. Matter and Form: Unity, Persistence, and Identity. Unity, Identity, and Explana-
tion in Aristotle’s Metaphysics, eds. Theodore Scaltsas, David Charles, and Mary Louise Gill:
75–106. Clarendon Press.
Cummins, Robert 1975. Functional Analysis. Journal of Philosophy 72: 741–65.
Dawkins, Richard 1995. River out of Eden. Basic Books.
Ellis, Paul 2010. The Essential Guide to Effect Sizes: Statistical Power, Meta-Analysis and the Interpre-
tation of Research Results. Cambridge University Press.
Galli, Leonardo, and Elsa Meinardi 2011. The Role of Teleological Thinking in Learning the Dar-
winian Model of Evolution. Evolution Education Outreach 4: 145–52.
German, Tim and Susan Johnson 2002. Functions and the Origin of the Design Stance. Journal of
Cognition and Development 3: 279–300.
Goldman, Alvin 1993. Philosophical Applications of Cognitive Science. Westview Press.
—— 2007. A Program for ‘Naturalizing’ Metaphysics, with Application to the Ontology of Events.
The Monist 90: 457–79.
Gregory, T. Ryan 2009. Understanding Natural Selection: Essential Concepts and Common Miscon-
ceptions. Evolution: Education and Outreach 2: 156–75.
Guthrie, Stewart 1993. Faces in the Clouds: A New Theory of Religion. Oxford University Press.
Hawthorne, John and Daniel Nolan 2006. What Would Teleological Causation Be? Metaphysical
Essays: 265–84. Clarendon Press.
Heider, Fritz and Marianne Simmel 1944. An Experimental Study of Apparent Behavior. American
Journal of Psychology 57: 243–59.
Hirsch, Eli 2002. Quantifier Variance and Realism. Philosophical Issues 12: 51–73.
Hoffman, Joshua and Gary Rosenkrantz 1997. Substance: Its Nature and Existence. Routledge.
Jenkins, C. S. and Daniel Nolan 2008. Backwards Explanation. Philosophical Studies 140: 103–15.
Kahane, Guy 2011. Evolutionary Debunking Arguments. Noˆus 45: 103–25.
Kaiser, Mary, Michael McCloskey, and Dennis Proffitt 1986. Development of Intuitive Theories of
Motion: Curvilinear Motion in the Absence of External Forces. Developmental Psychology
22: 67–71.
Kampourakis, Kostas and Vasso Zogza 2008. Students’ Intuitive Explanations of the Causes of
Homologies and Adaptations. Science and Education 17: 27–47.
Keil, Frank 1995. The Growth of Causal Understandings of Natural Kinds. Causal Cognition: A
Multidisciplinary Debate, eds. Dan Sperber, David Premack, and Ann James Premack: 234–
62. Oxford University Press.

Folk Mereology is Teleological
269
Kelemen, Deborah 1999a. The Scope of Teleological Thinking in Preschool Children. Cognition 70:
241–72.
—— 1999b. Why are Rocks Pointy? Children’s Preference for Teleological Explanations of the Natural
World. Developmental Psychology 35: 1440–52.
—— 2004. Are Children ‘Intuitive Theists’? Reasoning about Purpose and Design in Nature. Psycho-
logical Science 15: 295–301.
—— 2012. Teleological Minds: How Natural Intuitions about Agency and Purpose Influence Learn-
ing about Evolution. Evolution Challenges: Integrating Research and Practice in Teaching and
Learning about Evolution, eds. Karl S. Rosengren, Sarah K. Brem, E. Margaret Evans and
Gale M. Sinatra: 66–92. Oxford University Press.
Kelemen, Deborah and Cara DiYanni 2005. Intuitions about Origins: Purpose and Intelligent Design
in Children’s Reasoning about Nature. Journal of Cognition and Development 6: 3–31.
Kelemen, Deborah and Evelyn Rosset 2009. The Human Function Compunction: Teleological Expla-
nation in Adults. Cognition 111: 138–43.
Kelemen, Deborah, Joshua Rottman, and Rebecca Seston 2013. Professional Physical Scientists Display
Tenacious Teleological Tendencies: Purpose-Based Reasoning as a Cognitive Default. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General 142: 1074–83.
Korman, Dan 2008. Unrestricted Composition and Restricted Quantification. Philosophical Studies
140: 319–34.
—— 2009. Eliminativism and the Challenge from Folk Belief. Noˆus 43: 242–64.
Koslicki, Kathrin 2008. The Structure of Objects. Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, Uriah 2011. Two Defenses of Common-Sense Ontology. Dialectica 65: 177–204.
—— 2013. The Epistemological Challenge of Revisionary Metaphysics. Philosopher’s Imprint 13: 1–30.
Lewis, David 1986. On the Plurality of Worlds. Basil Blackwell.
—— 1991. Parts of Classes. Basil Blackwell.
Lombrozo, Tania and Susan Carey 2006. Functional Explanation and the Function of Explanation.
Cognition 99: 167–204.
Lombrozo, Tania, Deborah Kelemen, and Deborah Zaitchik 2007. Inferring Design: Evidence for a
Preference for Teleological Explanation in Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease. Psychological
Science 18: 999–1006.
Machery, Edouard 2012. Power and Negative Results. Philosophy of Science 79: 808–20.
Markosian, Ned 1998. Brutal Composition. Philosophical Studies 92: 211–49.
—— 2014. A Spatial Approach to Mereology. Mereology and Location, ed. Shieva Kleinschmidt:
69–90. Oxford University Press.
Mason, Kelby 2010. Debunking Arguments and the Genealogy of Religion and Morality. Philosophy
Compass 5: 770–8.
Matan, Adee and Susan Carey 2001. Developmental Changes within the Core of Artifact Concepts.
Cognition 77: 1–26.
Merricks, Trenton 2001. Objects and Persons. Clarendon Press.
Millikan, Ruth 1989. In Defense of Proper Functions. Philosophy of Science 56: 288–302.
Moore, Rob, Gill Mitchell, Rod Bally, Margaret Inglis, Jennifer Day and David Jacobs 2002. Un-
dergraduates’ Understanding of Evolution: Ascription of Agency as a Problem for Student
Learning. Journal of Biological Education 36: 65–71.
Paul, L. A. 2010. A New Role for Experimental Work in Metaphysics. Review of Philosophy and
Psychology 1: 461–76.
Pollock, John 1987. Defeasible Reasoning. Cognitive Science 11: 481–518.
Rea, Michael 1998. In Defense of Mereological Universalism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Re-
search 58: 347–60.
Rips, Lance 1989. Similarity, Typicality and Categorization. Similarity and Analogical Reasoning, eds.
Stella Vosniadou and Andrew Ortony: 21–59. Cambridge University Press.
Rose, David 2015. Persistence through Function Preservation. Synthese 192: 97–146.
Rose, David and Jonathan Schaffer forthcoming. Folk Mereology is Teleological. Experimental Meta-
physics, ed. David Rose. Bloomsbury.

270
NO ˆUS
Rosen, Gideon and Cian Dorr 2002. Composition as a Fiction. The Blackwell Companion to Meta-
physics, ed. Richard Gale: 151–74. Basil Blackwell.
Sanford, David 1993. The Problem of the Many, Many Composition Questions, and Na¨ıve Mereology.
Noˆus 27: 219–28.
Schaffer, Jonathan 2009. On What Grounds What. Metametaphysics: New Essays on the Foundations
of Ontology, eds. David Chalmers, David Manley, and Ryan Wasserman: 347–83. Clarendon
Press.
—— forthcoming. Cognitive Science and Metaphysics: Partners in Debunking. Goldman and his Critics,
eds. Hilary Kornblith and Brian McLaughlin. Wiley-Blackwell.
Sider, Theodore 2013. Against Parthood. Oxford Studies in Metaphysics 8, eds. Karen Bennett and
Dean Zimmerman: 237–93. Oxford University Press.
Simons, Peter 1987. Parts: A Study in Ontology. Clarendon Press.
Thomasson, Amie 2007. Ordinary Objects. Oxford University Press.
van Inwagen, Peter 1990. Material Beings. Cornell University Press.

