
 From Psychology to Phenomenology  

This page intentionally left blank

 From Psychology to 
Phenomenology  
 Franz  Brentano’s   Psychology from an 
Empirical Standpoint and Contemporary 
Philosophy of Mind  
 Biagio G.   Tassone  
 
 

 © Biagio G. Tassone 2012 
 All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this 
publication may be made without written permission. 
 No portion of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted 
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the 
 Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence 
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 
Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS. 
 Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication 
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages. 
 The author has asserted his right to be identified as the author of this work 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 First published 2012 by 
 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 
 Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited, 
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke, 
 Hampshire RG21 6XS. 
 Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC, 
 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010. 
 Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies 
and has companies and representatives throughout the world. 
 Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States, 
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries 
 This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully 
managed and sustained forest sources. Logging, pulping and manufacturing 
processes are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the 
country of origin. 
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
 A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress. 
 10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 
 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 2012 978-1-137-02921-8
ISBN 978-1-349-44007-8          ISBN 978-1-137-02922-5 (eBook)
DOI 10.1057/9781137029225

 To the loving memory of my father, 
Raffaele Tassone (1936–2011) 

This page intentionally left blank

 Meditation on the writings of Brentano is one of our most 
important intellectual obligations. 
 – Xavier Zubiri 
 El Porvenir de la Filosofia 
 “Prologue”, 1936  
 

This page intentionally left blank

 Contents  
 Acknowledgments  
  x 
 List of Abbreviations  
  xii 
 Introduction  
  1  
 Part I  
 1   Brentano’s Intellectual Background  
  17  
 2   Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle  
  38 
 Part II  
 3   Psychology as a Science  
  77  
 4    “Intentional Inexistence” and the Separation of “Psychic” 
from “Physical” Phenomena  
  108  
 5   Psychic Acts Further Explored: The Unity of Consciousness 
and Brentano’s Classification of Mental Acts  
  136  
 6   Brentano’s Theory of Judgment and the Connection 
of Feelings and Acts of Will  
  158  
 Part III  
 7   From Psychology to Phenomenology: Brentano 
and Contemporary Philosophy of Mind  
  191  
 8    The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology: 
The Relevance of Brentano’s Epistemology 
and Philosophy of Mind  
  221  
 Conclusion  
  247  
 Notes  
  251 
 Bibliography  
  309 
 Index 
  323 
ix

 Acknowledgments 
 I first read Brentano’s  Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt in the early 
1990s as an undergraduate at York University in Toronto, Canada. In 
researching term papers and conducting background reading for the 
philosophy courses of David Jopling and Mildred Bakan, I came across 
the English translation of the  Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint . 
The PES left a lasting impression on me. Nonetheless it wasn’t until my 
graduate studies that I began to devote serious attention to Brentano’s 
work. The seeds of the current work can to a large extent be traced 
back to my formal years of study at the Catholic University of Louvain, 
Belgium. Reading and thinking about Brentano’s theory of judgment 
while preparing my licentiate thesis to complete my M.A. in philosophy 
during 1999–2001 led me to believe that the philosophical contribu-
tions that Brentano’s work has to offer have still not been fully appreci-
ated. However after I completed my licentiate thesis I moved on to other 
topics. It was only in the process of conducting research for my Ph.D. 
dissertation (this time as a doctoral candidate in Ireland) that I began to 
think about the usefulness of a compendium or reader’s companion to 
Brentano’s  Psychology as being a worthwhile undertaking. As the years 
went by and nothing like the above appeared I decided to take the initi-
ative and bring the above commentary on Brentano’s  Psychology into 
existence. The current study began as an attempt to prepare the above 
but soon grew into this somewhat different work. Further thanks and 
gratitude for helping this project take on its final shape are due to the 
following people. First I’d like to thank Dr. Alexander Rosenthal of the 
Johns Hopkins University for providing helpful comments and feedback 
about the first chapter. James D. Nicholson, currently with the Program 
in Neuroscience at the University of Maryland, Baltimore campus, 
deserves thanks both for his editorial advice and for the helpful infor-
mation about the state of contemporary neuroscience that he passed 
on to me in emails and private conversations. Warm thanks also go 
out to Dr. Robin Rollinger at the University of Salzburg for his stimu-
lating e-mail exchanges about Brentano’s unpublished manuscripts. 
Select sections of Chapter 8 have appeared already in the  Journal of the 
British Society for Phenomenology . I thank Dr. Ullrich M. Hasse for kindly 
x

Acknowledgments xi
granting me permission to reuse that material here. Finally, and by no 
means lastly, a very special thanks and immense gratitude must be 
expressed to my wife Isabel Cranz. Her proofreading of sections of the 
manuscript and more importantly her patience and steadfast support 
more than anything helped this project reach completion.  
 

 Abbreviations 
 The following abbreviations will be used throughout for reference to 
the most frequently cited of Brentano’s published writings. See the 
bibliography below for publication details.  
 1 German editions of Brentano’s writings 
 AN 
 Die Abkehr vom Nichtrealen 
 AW 
 Aristoteles und seine Weltanshauung 
 EL 80    Logik-Kolleg – unpublished lecture notes  
 GAE  
 Grundlegung und Aufban der Ethik 
 KL  
  Kategorienlehre 
 MBS  
 Von der Mannigfachen Bedeutung des Seinden nach Aristoteles 
 MLW 
 Meine letzten Wünsche für Österreich 
 PdA 
 Die Psychologie des Aristoteles: insbesondere seine Lehre von nous 
poietikos 
 PES-G    Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt 
 PP  
 Die vier Phasen der Philosophie und ihr augenblicker Stand 
 VDG 
 Vom Dasein Gottes 
 VUSE  Vom Ursprung sittlicher Erkenntnis 
 ZP  
 Über die Zukunft der Philosophie 
 2 English translations 
 AWV 
 Aristotle and His Worldview 
 DP 
 Descriptive Psychology 
 FCE  
 The Foundation and Construction of Ethics 
 OEG 
  On the Existence of God, Lectures given at the Universities of 
Würzburg and Vienna 1868–1891 
 ORW 
 Origin of the Knowledge of Right and Wrong 
 OSS 
 On the Several Senses of Being in Aristotle 
 PA  
 The Psychology of Aristotle 
 PES  
  Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint 
 SNC  
 Sensory and Noetic Consciousness 
 TE 
  The True and the Evident 
xii

List of Abbreviations xiii
 3 Other texts 
 CCB  
 The Cambridge Companion to Brentano 
 SB  
 The School of Franz Brentano 
 TPB 
 The Philosophy of Brentano 

1
 The following book presents an outline and critical reading of Franz 
Brentano’s philosophy of mind focusing closely on the system outlined 
in his  magnum opus  Psychology from an  Empirical Standpoint .  1 In this 1874 
text Brentano articulates a teleological and neo-Aristotelian framework 
for understanding the mental as representational. Brentano’s earlier 
development of Aristotelian metaphysics and ontology in an empirical 
direction set the stage for the articulation of his philosophical psych-
ology and new theory of the mental. Nonetheless Brentano’s philo-
sophical psychology still forms one of the overlooked alternatives in 
contemporary philosophy of mind. This is not to deny that the philo-
sophical system of the PES has not had a strong, albeit indirect, influ-
ence on subsequent philosophy of mind. Many isolated aspects of 
Brentano’s thought have been critically examined and commented on 
in the existing literature, yet the actual position put forth in the PES 
is almost never examined in itself as a whole and within its historical 
context.  2 
 No doubt part of the reason for the neglect of Brentano’s position is 
that the intellectual context in philosophy of mind has changed since 
the PES was published. Consequently, and as a result, the system devel-
oped in the PES has become difficult to understand and appreciate. 
Another serious problem is that the project of descriptive psychology 
introduced in the PES was later appropriated by thinkers whose own 
projects and aims were both opposed and frequently alien to the intel-
lectual outlook and goals of Brentano’s work. The neglect of Brentano’s 
theoretical approach and writings however has led to the strange situ-
ation that still currently holds in contemporary philosophy of mind. 
Namely, although many thinkers frequently cite Brentano’s  Psychology 
or often mention its doctrines, little insight or agreement about what 
 Introduction  

2 From Psychology to Phenomenology
Brentano intended to accomplish in his best-known work can be found. 
The PES therefore presents the contemporary reader with many prob-
lems and difficulties. Yet the project begun by Brentano deserves to be 
re-evaluated if for no other reason than in order to explore and develop 
a better philosophical understanding of the mind. Brentano’s system 
outlined in the PES offers the clues for a coherent way of understanding 
the mind and cognition and therefore escaping current dead ends in 
philosophy of mind.  
 I.1  Brentano’s influence on subsequent thinkers 
 The strong and consistent influence that Brentano’s writings (espe-
cially the PES) have had on subsequent thinkers should of itself justify 
continued interest in his work. If pressed to single out only one work 
from the past 150 years deserving the title “most influential work on 
subsequent philosophy of mind”. Brentano’s PES would certainly be a 
leading candidate. The above claim may sound extravagant to some, or 
perhaps somewhat exaggerated, but it is a claim that can be defended. 
 Although Brentano’s influence on German phenomenology (and 
especially the work of Husserl)  3 is already quite well known, his thought 
also influenced other important intellectual developments and move-
ments. For example, a casual overview of the influence of Brentano’s 
thought will demonstrate that it provided a reference point for many 
subsequent approaches in psychology and philosophy of mind. 
Amongst these can be cited the logical and epistemological studies of 
the “proto-analytic” approach to philosophy pioneered by the Vienna 
Circle. Simultaneously Brentano’s writings and thought also had a 
noticeable influence on the early philosophical thought of Martin 
Heidegger. Other important movements that can be mentioned and 
that were either directly or indirectly influenced by Brentano include: 
philosophical semantics, developments in formal logic and linguistics, 
the development of modern logic, object theory, ontology (both formal 
and material) and gestalt psychology. Psychoanalysis can also be added 
to the above list, as no less important a figure than Sigmund Freud was 
also a student of Brentano’s in Vienna.  4 
 What makes a focus on Brentano’s thought all the more necessary, 
however, is the fact that those thinkers who were most profoundly 
influenced by his work frequently took many aspects of his system and 
either distorted or ignored the underlying context against which it was 
originally articulated.  5 These borrowings and buildings on Brentano’s 
insights eventually developed into some of the still influential models 

Introduction 3
of the mind and cognition actively discussed today. While many of 
these extant philosophical theories and models of the mind are in many 
cases deserving of their influence (and also of the scholarly attention 
they have received), there is still value in examining their underlying 
foundations and original source of influence. Focusing attention on 
Brentano’s immanent or phenomenological realism is therefore of great 
importance in order to arrive at a better understanding of the context 
and content of many theories in modern philosophy of mind.  
 I.2  The intrinsic value of Brentano’s thought 
 The system that Brentano outlines in his  Psychology  from an  Empirical 
Standpoint was developed during a period when quantitative and phys-
icalist/ materialist approaches in philosophy of mind were gaining 
currency. Largely for this reason Brentano’s work was often delegated 
to the fringes of what was, in his own day, the new introspectionist and 
experimental paradigm in psychology and philosophy of mind. The 
way that Brentano’s work was marginalized merits our attention and 
compounds our previous claim that his neglect is largely unwarranted. 
 Brentano’s name is frequently and indelibly linked (mostly in the 
role of antagonistic foil) to that of Wilhelm Wundt. According to 
many mainstream historians of psychology, Wundt is considered the 
founder of “scientific” psychology and Brentano a philosopher who 
discussed psychological matters such as mental acts. There are certainly 
real and significant differences between the psychologies and philo-
sophical systems of Brentano and Wundt. Notwithstanding the philo-
sophical differences between the two, as early proponents of scientific 
psychology, the accounts of their respective projects in the secondary 
literature tend to simultaneously simplify and exaggerate the diversity 
of their approaches in philosophy of mind.  6 In the case of Wundt, it is 
his philosophical and systematic interdisciplinary breadth that is down-
played, while, in the case of Brentano, the adherence of his method to 
experimentation and empirical facts as a source of psychological knowl-
edge often fails to be taken into account. Subsequently, a misleading 
account of the actual use of logic and argumentation in Brentano’s 
system and of the use of experiment in Wundt’s work has become a 
standard narrative. 
 In the early twentieth century, for example, Wundt’s reputation 
was solidified as “the father of experimental psychology” mostly by 
his students, such as E. B. Titchener, who were attempting to estab-
lish the respectability of the new laboratory psychology and distance 

4 From Psychology to Phenomenology
it from the philosophy departments. Therefore, given this posthumous 
reputation, the common assessment of Wundt’s actual contributions 
to experimental psychology were shaped as much by his influential 
students and followers (these also include Titchener’s own student, 
the most important historian of psychology in the English language 
world for many years: Edwin G. Boring), than by his actual writ-
ings.  7 The above, together with Wundt’s prolific output and untiring 
sponsorship, of Ph.D. students to promote his ideas, can be viewed as 
largely responsible for the advancement of the neo-Wundtian intro-
spectionist approach and the downplaying of Brentano’s alternative 
investigation of conscious acts in the early history of psychology. 
 A closer look at the two men reveals some interesting similarities, 
however. Wundt himself was far from being a positivist or reductionist, 
going so far in his writings as to claim that a non-reductionist under-
standing of consciousness and human mental life is defensible (see 
Wundt, [1874], 1909, 2).  8 Therefore the Wundtians, somewhat ironi-
cally given Wundt’s affintity to philosophical approaches to studying 
the mind and the outright philosophical content of many of his writ-
ings, were largely responsible for liberating psychology from the profes-
sors of philosophy departments and promoting it as an autonomous 
science against the spirit of their teacher. Of Wundt, it has been written: 
“His  corpus is riven by tensions and ambiguities, and though his work 
has undergone periodic scholarly reconsiderations, Wundt’s lasting 
importance for the field of psychology remains the topic of lively 
debate among psychologists” (Kim, 2008). But although all the above 
assertions are true, they nonetheless ignore Wundt’s philosophical 
presuppositions and his broad understanding of psychology as focused 
on inner contents thus downplaying the dynamic aspects of mental 
activity. That is, although Wundt’s broad understanding of psychology 
allowed him to expand the role of the discipline to include phenomena 
such as cultural activity and the use of language (these latter aspects 
of experience were discussed in his  Völkerpsychologie , 2 vols, origi-
nally published 1909), consciousness in Wundt’s system, by contrast, 
was identified with the inner world of experience and closely tied to 
“individual psychology”. Wundt’s relegation of conscious processes or 
mental states as amenable to studies of “individual psychology” led him 
to embrace a qualified form of introspection as viable for studying the 
mind. What the “mental” amounts to for Wundt is therefore something 
akin to the immediately perceived contents of awareness; these contents 
are said to be “inner” only in the sense that they cannot be identi-
fied with nervous system or other objective and transcendent bodies 

Introduction 5
or substances. Instead, Wundt introduces a methodological strategy 
for classifying and studying mental contents amounting to a refined 
form of  Selbstbeobachtung (i.e. self-observation). Wundt’s individual 
psychology stressed the psychologist as special observer who could be 
trained to correctly (in a laboratory setting) attain introspective access 
to the activity of the psychologist’s own mental contents. Brentano in 
his PES tellingly mocked this “secret method” as one that produced, not 
psychologists, but rather headaches (PES, 30\PES-G, 37). 
 After Wundt’s death the narrative of “Wundt the proto-structuralist” 
(see Hothersall, 1984, 103–4) came to dominate accounts of his method-
ology. It was therefore this Wundt, the introspectionist and analyzer of 
mental contents, who came under the critical scrutiny of the Würzburg 
psychologists. The latter claimed to be able to identify imageless thoughts 
in the laboratory (see Kush, 1999, who lists Marbe, Ach, and Bühler 
as the significant figures in these studies). Wundt forcefully attacked 
these new studies and methods (see again Kush, 1999, 12ff. 51ff.) and 
this separated his approach and distanced his position even further 
from the study of psychological processes at the heart of Brentano’s 
approach. Finally, however, when the introspectionist paradigm and 
experimentalist or laboratory model of mind (with its focus on meas-
uring “mental contents”) rightly came to be criticized and discredited – 
first by the experiments of the Würzburg school and later by the rise of 
functionalist approaches to understanding the mind (the latter quickly 
superseded by behaviorism) all previous “mental thought” models were 
deemed “unscientific”. 
 This turn of the tide sent not only Wundt and his followers, but also 
Brentano and his own students (such as Meinong and Stumpf, etc.) with 
their very different approaches for understanding the mind, into neglect. 
This brings us to the situation that holds today, i.e. that the system in 
the PES can be viewed as, for all practical purposes, an untried path in 
contemporary psychology and philosophy of mind. Therefore, even if 
Brentano’s quite significant influence on later philosophy and social 
science (outlined above) is ignored, there are intrinsic aspects of his 
thought that render it important. Brentano entered what was known as 
“the psychophysics debate” in late nineteenth century psychology with 
compelling and still valid criticisms of Gustav Fechner’s and Wundt’s 
quantitative approaches to understanding the mental. In contrast to 
the later experimentalist tradition, Brentano viewed mental life as 
dynamic and approached the study of cognition as a philosopher. As a 
consequence Brentano’s thought can provide philosophically rich and 
well-articulated conceptual resources that can help add to and enhance 

6 From Psychology to Phenomenology
our study of philosophy of mind and the mental itself. This stands in 
contrast to the situation that frequently holds in contemporary philos-
ophy of mind, i.e. the uncritical or dogmatic application of categories 
borrowed from other established sciences or disciplines, such as physics 
or sociology, to the study of experience. Otherwise, the conceptual frame-
work for analysis of the mind is dominated by positivist inspired onto-
logical frameworks guided by empirical or logical analyses that ignore 
the concrete and intrinsic richness of immediate experience in favor of 
anemic models of propositional reference determined by linguistically 
patterned intensional states. One of the untapped benefits and intrinsic 
merits of Brentano’s philosophical approach for understanding mental 
life, by contrast, is that it can both be put to use in clarifying existing 
approaches as well as contribute to formulating a more coherent model 
for understanding consciousness or so-called psychic (intentional) acts 
and their correlates. 
 Among other important intrinsic aspects of Brentano’s thought 
are, for example, its tacit demarcation and explication of the differ-
ences between genetic and descriptive psychology.  9 This distinction 
was a major factor in helping to ground the theoretical justification 
of the scientific status of psychology in the late nineteenth century. 
Brentano’s pioneering work in the area of scientific psychology, as 
witnessed especially by his analyses in the system presented in the PES, 
also includes contributions towards theoretically elucidating the foun-
dations of psychology, a topic still of great interest to philosophers and 
psychologists today. Brentano’s attempt at establishing psychology as 
a science should still hold our interest if only because he undertook 
this pioneering endeavor with a sophisticated understanding of the 
epistemological and metaphysical implications of assaying the struc-
tures of experience. Therefore the system of the PES can help high-
light and bring into focus the difficult problem of the elaboration and 
demarcation of the “psychic” or “mental” from the “physical”. In many 
ways the above distinction, as it was outlined by Brentano in 1874, i.e. 
through the reintroduction and reworking of the intentional nature 
of the mental, is one of the most successful attempts at arriving at a 
thematic and compelling way to understand the problem of conscious-
ness and human mental life within modern philosophy. Closely related 
to the theme of the demarcation of psychic and intentional mental 
acts is another aspect of the PES that is also frequently overlooked; 
namely, the importance of Brentano’s text for attempting to articulate 
the problem of the broader relationship and dichotomy between the 
so-called hard, objective and positivistic sciences and the “spiritual” 

Introduction 7
or subjective or qualitative and observer dependent, social or human 
sciences. Although this problem was later popularized and treated in 
greater detail by contemporaries, especially the German philosopher 
Wilhelm Dilthey (in the important first volume of his  Einleitung in 
die  Geisteswissenschaften , i.e. “Introduction to the Human Sciences”), 
Brentano’s original establishing of the problem is still significant. 
 In his study of the human sciences, Dilthey argued that we must avoid 
both the reductionism of the positivists and the speculative excesses of 
the German idealists in order to properly understand psychology and 
history. Dilthey went on to characterize the separation between the 
sciences and the humanities as the gap between the natural ( Natur ) or 
objectivist and humanistic or “spiritual” sciences ( Geisteswissenschaft ). 
Dilthey’s introduction to the above problem, published in 1883, was 
directly influenced by Brentano. It was also Brentano who had already 
clearly thematized that problem, building on insights from his (and 
Dilthey’s) one-time teacher Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg.  10 The distinc-
tion between the immediately grasped truths of experience (the intui-
tive and immediately known non-propositional ground of knowledge) 
and discursive or symbolic and scientific knowledge (characterizing the 
quantitative methods of the so-called hard sciences) as developed by 
Brentano can be seen as an attempt to explore cognition and under-
stand perception and action holistically. Furthermore in attempting 
to clarify the structures of lived experience and to facilitate the above 
explorations into the framework of the sciences, Brentano reduces all 
epistemological frameworks for articulating theoretical activity into a 
unified model based on kinds or categories of science and correlative 
modes of knowing.  11 Brentano’s framework, which grounds objective 
knowledge and articulates the nature of conceptual content in a descrip-
tive or phenomenological foundation, is still relevant today.  12 
 Furthermore Brentano’s broader focus on the themes of intentional 
relations, inherent to psychic acts, also complements contemporary 
philosophy of mind in other significant ways. Contemporary philos-
ophy of mind was given a strong incentive to growth and reform 
with the formulation of new methodological tools developed for the 
most part in the late nineteenth century. Growing out of an explic-
itly anti-psychologistic approach for formulating logical and semantic 
theories, these new conceptual tools were subsequently used to develop 
new doctrines pertaining to the foundations of logic and mental refer-
ence. These doctrines were characterized by a methodological and 
philosophical tendency towards breaking from naïve empiricism and 
direct reference theories of meaning. In many ways these advances were 

8 From Psychology to Phenomenology
welcomed developments in epistemology and philosophy of mind. 
Nonetheless, while the anti-psychology paradigm worked quite well for 
understanding the formal structures and semantic role of language and 
logic (especially in the exploration of how the former, in the guise of 
advancing propositional contents explicitly underlying meaning and 
signification), the exaggerated reliance on formal models and logical 
structures for explaining properly intentional relations was never as 
useful or successful. Moreover, the latter “formal” strategies often went 
hand in hand with a strong reductionism in semantics and an avoid-
ance of metaphysics or ontology in the study of the mind. Brentano’s 
work, by contrast, allows for a sophisticated exploration of belief states 
and conscious acts in the direct analysis of meaning and reference while 
refusing to embrace what can also be called a “strong” psychologism.  13 
Brentano’s writings can be viewed as providing insight that the logicists 
and other anti-psychologists eschew. In applying some of these seminal 
insights to contemporary philosophy of mind, much light can be shed 
on philosophical matters as well as recent thought about (and different 
conceptions of) complex phenomena such as rationality, logic, subjec-
tivity, personhood, and cognition. 
 The current study attempts to show how Brentano, in returning to 
an Aristotelian and qualitative approach for understanding the life 
of the subject, touches on philosophical problems of great relevance 
pertaining to human cognition. In merging a teleological under-
standing of the mental with the results of empirical and experimental 
research for grounding our understanding of the mind, Brentano’s work 
fruitfully expands on earlier approaches in experimental psychology 
and complements other important work in contemporary philosophy 
of mind. The title of the current work  From  Psychology to  Phenomenology , 
attempts to capture something of both the factual development present 
in Brentano’s thought (as he expanded his philosophical psychology 
and developed an elaborate metaphysics of the mental) as well as the 
important philosophical implications that his reform of philosophy 
of mind can still have. Furthermore, all of the aspects of Brentano’s 
work mentioned above are still timely and relevant largely because 
there is still no consensus on how to reconcile the role of the observer 
relative, or subject-dependent, aspects of experience and meaning, 
with symbolic or abstract models articulating the order of mind-
independent objects and entities of cognition. Brentano’s descriptive 
psychology can contribute to understanding the place of conscious-
ness in nature and provide clues for arriving at a credible account of 
mental representation in cognitive science, which is still in need of a 

Introduction 9
coherent philosophical model that can do justice to the reality and 
complexity of human psychic life.  14  
 I.3  Scope and aims of the book 
 In his PES Brentano articulates a framework for grounding thought 
and its objects by exploring what he calls the “unity of consciousness” 
along with its underlying intentional and temporal structure. In what 
follows we will not shy away from applying insights derived from 
Brentano’s system developed in the PES and relating them to current 
positions in philosophy of mind. For the above purpose Brentano 
developed the classic Aristotelian ontology of substance and acci-
dent and related it to mereological categories exploring phenomena 
such as concrete and abstract experiences of things as given to the 
subject. Although the above kind of part/whole model for explaining 
the mind can be shown to have shortcomings, it will be maintained 
that exploring Brentano’s thoughts on these matters and how he 
applies ontology to philosophy of mind will prove useful for helping 
contemporary thinkers in understanding crucial matters pertaining 
to representation and meaning.  15 However, the immediate impact of 
the themes and ideas introduced in the PES must be demonstrated 
before the importance of Brentano’s system can be fully assessed. Only 
after this is done will it be seen how many of the consequences of 
Brentano’s way of conceptualizing the basic problems in philosophy 
of mind are still highly relevant. 
 Nonetheless the terms and categories Brentano’s work makes use of all 
call for background knowledge and, ideally, an integration of disparate 
areas of study in order that the value of his contributions can be prop-
erly recognized. The main areas that Brentano’s project touches on are 
primarily, but not exclusively, linked to ancient philosophy, Scholastic 
thought, modern philosophy, and the early literature that grew out of 
the development of early experimental psychology. This background 
context is not easily available to the casual reader today. 
 Part of the reason for this study is to rectify the current state of 
affairs within mainstream philosophy of mind, wherein there is still 
a great deal of reluctance to study Brentano’s system in any engaged 
and detailed way. Where Brentano’s thought has been appropriated 
in recent philosophy of mind, that is by so-called analytic thinkers 
such as Roderick Chisholm and Barry Smith, emphasis was too often 
narrowly placed on his theory of intentionality and perception with 
the consequence that the wider scope of his thought either fell by the 

10 From Psychology to Phenomenology
wayside, or was downplayed or ignored.  16 In attempting to justify the 
pronounced lack of attention that Brentano’s overall thought receives, 
many recent thinkers have accused Brentano’s thought of displaying a 
lack of rigor or, worse, incoherence and superficiality in delimiting the 
very real problems his work touches upon.  17 Whether the above charges 
are true – and to what extent Brentano’s framework has been rendered 
obsolete or superfluous by later developments – is something that must 
be considered. There are, it can be stated at the outset, problems with 
Brentano’s thought and these are present in his approach to the phil-
osophy of mind both in the PES and in other later writings.  18 
 Amongst the tensions in Brentano’s work it has been pointed out, 
for example, that the terms used by Brentano in the PES can vary in 
meaning depending on context. Even a term of central importance in 
his system, such as “phenomena”, so important a term necessary for 
Brentano’s entire understanding of the sciences (including psychology), 
takes on different meanings throughout the PES. Another central notion 
of great importance,  Vorstellung , (which will be rendered as “presenta-
tion” throughout the following study), is again frequently used ambigu-
ously by Brentano. The latter term is, however, once again central to his 
approach to conceptualizing scientific reasoning and, in fact, neces-
sary in grounding his entire conceptualization of epistemology and 
therefore directly concerns the viability of his philosophy of mind. 
The problems with attaining a coherent reading of Brentano’s influen-
tial doctrine of “intentional inexistence”, which has likewise been the 
subject of much critical commentary, have not escaped scrutiny either. 
Does Brentano mean that every object of a mental or psychic act is 
an immanent correlate of the act? Or is he rather putting forward the 
weaker claim that only an intentional object is immanent to the act, 
while in veridical perception the object transcends the act? Readings 
for both positions have been given. Although progress was made by 
Brentano on the topic of intentional relations in his later writings, 
these changes and modifications – it will be argued – were not always 
improvements. In writings after the PES, for example, any reading of 
the content as an immanent object, dwelling somehow “in” the act, is 
rejected outright and the primary correlate of the psychic act, as well 
as the central locus of the intentional relation, is always held to be a 
concrete or individual thing (see TE, 77). Nonetheless certain impli-
cations of this later and so-called reistic view have been heavily criti-
cized and rejected by many subsequent thinkers.  19 We will follow suit 
and attempt to embrace and engage with the ontologically more robust 
system of the PES as it applies to philosophy of mind. 

Introduction 11
 It seems safe to say that any critical reading of the PES must address 
the above criticisms as well as take into consideration the fundamental 
problems at the core of Brentano’s doctrines as formulated there and 
in other writings. Furthermore, by directly addressing these problems, 
the real value of engaging with Brentano’s writings in a serious manner 
can be better appreciated. For this reason thinkers with an interest in 
early phenomenology as well as non-phenomenological philosophers 
and psychologists (and in fact anyone with an interest in consciousness 
and philosophy of mind) should find Brentano’s system of value. The 
following study can serve as an introduction to the thought of Franz 
Brentano and provide a commentary on his PES. Simultaneously, this 
work will explore current philosophy of mind and its problematic rela-
tionship to both philosophical and “objective” or scientific psychology 
(including cognitive science). Finally, the current study engages in a 
critical interaction with Brentano’s thought that, in turn, can suggest 
the application of certain Brentanian notions to existing problems in 
philosophy of mind and related matters in semantics and ontology.  
 I.4   Structure and outline of the book 
 The first part of the study explores Brentano’s historical background 
and the intellectual context of his thought (Sections 1.1–2). Brentano’s 
lecture topics and some of the important metaphysical doctrines he 
maintained during his Würzburg period are outlined in Chapter 1 
(Sections 1.3–5) in order to show how they anticipate and prepare for 
the mature doctrines in his descriptive psychology. Chapter 2 explores 
Brentano’s relation to Aristotelianism in greater detail with the focus 
placed on his earliest published writings on the philosophy of Aristotle. 
The purpose of these two chapters is to promote the proper under-
standing to facilitate assessment of his mature doctrines, and also to 
present the subsequent system developed in the PES in a clearer light. 
 The four chapters constituting Part II primarily provide a critical 
reading and overview of the system of act psychology as it is given 
in the PES. Chapters 3 and 4 focus on the PES itself and explore the 
doctrines contained therein by outlining and assessing them for both 
clarity and coherence. Chapter 3 starts with an initial elaboration of 
Brentano’s empiricism and philosophical understanding of science. 
This enables an examination of PES as both a philosophical source for 
resurrecting the intentionality doctrine as well as a foundational work 
in the history of scientific psychology. The relationship of the doctrines 
contained in the PES, as they relate to Brentano’s earlier philosophical 

12 From Psychology to Phenomenology
activity and overall thought, is deemed necessary for evaluating the 
real worth and depth of his philosophical contributions. In this way 
the doctrines of the PES can be related to later traditions that developed 
both as a result of its central teachings, and through the methodolog-
ical reintroduction of intentionality it accomplished. In Chapter 3 we 
also examine important conceptual points such as Brentano’s use of the 
term “phenomena” (Section 3.5) and his understanding and articula-
tion of a “phenomenalist” theory of knowledge along with the induc-
tive model he formulates for grounding his philosophical empiricism to 
establish the foundations of his philosophy of mind (Section 3.6). 
 The larger importance of Brentano’s philosophy of mind is demon-
strated starting with the exploration of his doctrine of intentional inex-
istence (Sections 4.2–3). The exploration of his system of classification 
of mental phenomena, and a focus on the unity of consciousness marks 
the central theme of Chapter 5. The unity of consciousness will be seen 
to make possible the classification of mental acts (Section 5.3), which 
will, in turn, be seen to be important for how the separation of modes 
of relation in consciousness help determine both modes of knowledge 
and non-cognitive relations of the subject to the world. This is followed 
(throughout Chapter 6) by the explication of Brentano’s theory of 
judgment and its relation to the attainment of objective knowledge. 
This model for attaining knowledge will be seen to connect Brentano’s 
doctrine of intentional reference to the earlier ontological studies of the 
different senses of being focused on the immediate giveness of concrete 
objects in experience (Sections 6.2–3). Because epistemology is also 
about principles and the inductive apprehension of laws explaining 
the behavior of facts in the world, Brentano’s examination of judg-
ment will be seen to be intimately related to logic and reason (Sections 
6.4–7) Finally, the direction of mental acts to objects in which different 
mental energies of pleasure and displeasure are directed, will be seen to 
form the basis of Brentano’s ethics and the analysis of mental causation 
and will that underlie theoretical forms of cognition (Sections 6.8–9). 
The overview of Brentano’s system presented in Part II will serve as a 
guide that can contribute to placing contemporary positions in philos-
ophy of mind into sharper focus. In this way, by measuring contem-
porary doctrines against Brentano’s, many of these positions can be 
better evaluated; while at the same time a more objective and critical 
reading of them can be made. In the case of Brentano’s own position, 
however, which is the main focus throughout, I will attempt to achieve 
the objectives stated above without succumbing to the tendency of 
either oversimplifying Brentano’s system or obscuring the original 

Introduction 13
meaning and intention of the  Psychology text. Throughout Part II it is 
subsequently presupposed (largely following Chrudzimski and other 
recent commentators)  20 that Brentano’s most fruitful and influential 
doctrines in philosophy of mind were formulated by him during the 
period that coincided with the publication of his PES. My stronger claim 
in these sections, however, is that a study of Brentano’s PES can accom-
plish the objectives mentioned above and more. In Chapters 5 and 6, 
for example, the modern phenomenological perspective and theory of 
mind and truth can be traced and linked directly to Brentano’s theories 
of the unity of consciousness and of existential judgments as inten-
tional acts. Unlike some recent studies, however, later developments 
will not be imposed onto Brentano’s intentions, unless for highlighting 
important shortcomings or obvious errors. 
 Part III begins with Chapter 7, which shows how the  Psychology text 
is more than a mere historical curiosity but, in fact, a milestone both 
in philosophy and in the history of psychology. Although Brentano’s 
thought eventually moved beyond the doctrines outlined in the PES, it 
is maintained that in many ways the system and overall position that his 
thought takes in his 1874 text should be seen as containing compelling 
insights and doctrines (even if not without certain inherent tensions 
and theoretical ambiguity) that are still worth paying serious attention 
to today. After a brief overview of contemporary philosophy of mind, 
(Section 7.1) we explore Brentano’s analysis of mental and physical 
phenomena and intentionality as a form of dualism. Distinguishing 
between traditional forms of dualism, Brentano’s version is classified as 
an intentional dualism that presupposes the irreducibility of intentional 
relations to purely physical laws (Section 7.2). After this we examine 
Brentano’s one-level theory of consciousness more closely and defend it 
from recent criticisms (Section 7.3). A closer look at the structural map 
for mental life as described by Brentano is presented (in Sections 7.4–5) 
and we explore the core insights of the system in the PES. Throughout 
Part III it will be shown how, in many cases, Brentano’s writings (and 
especially the system of the PES) can still highlight current impasses 
and tensions in the philosophical trends within philosophy of mind 
today. Brentano’s writings have more than a passing bearing on the 
physicalism versus functionalist debate while also providing valuable 
resources for better understanding the implications of dualist and 
monist positions in philosophy of mind. In Chapter 8 we explore some 
of the above insights in order to help to demarcate the so-called problem 
of conscious experience or phenomenal consciousness. This begins by 
examining different kinds of representationalism in philosophy of 

14 From Psychology to Phenomenology
mind (Section 8.1). Chapter 8 then presents a critical appropriation of 
various aspects of Brentano’s act psychology. In these critical sections 
Brentano’s epistemology and semantics are taken up (Sections 8.2–3) 
and problems therein pointed out. The critical evaluation of significant 
aspects of Brentano’s philosophy are made in order to show how these 
aspects of his thought can be used to develop and build on existing posi-
tions in semantics and mental reference (Section 8.4). In this way the 
relevance and ongoing value of Brentano’s philosophical psychology 
can be demonstrated. 
 The “invisible” aspect of Brentano’s influence and its role in the trans-
mission of his ideas, as mentioned above, may have been largely due 
to the strange place Brentano has maintained in German philosophy. 
Although certain of his doctrines, such as his reformulation of the 
“intentionality” doctrine in the philosophy of mind, became central 
to continental philosophy of mind, nonetheless, the particular meth-
odological approach Brentano made use of – with its mixing of classical 
metaphysical doctrines and ontological concerns with a refined logical 
and analytic rigor – was neither overwhelmingly popular in his own day 
nor is it currently as widespread or dominant as certain other modern 
alternatives.  21 Furthermore, although Brentano was clear enough about 
his own aims and goals, even within his published writings, it is unfor-
tunate that the same goals and theories were too frequently distorted 
and/or simplified in subsequent philosophy of mind.  22 Nowhere is this 
more the case than in the position he held in PES. Subsequently, and 
from a strictly philosophical perspective, it is argued that Brentano’s PES 
text presents a still relevant way of conceptualizing important problems 
in epistemology and philosophy of mind while also linking psychology 
to philosophy in a fruitful way.  

 Part I 
 

 The intellectual influences behind the nascent descriptive psychology 
that underlies the PES can be more properly understood by placing 
Brentano’s thought in context. The historical context of Brentano’s early 
thought and work will first be considered with a focus on his thought 
and activities before he undertook the project of the PES. This will 
require a brief account of Brentano’s background with a special focus 
on his early development and the intellectual context of his thought. 
After a brief presentation of the necessary biographical information, 
the current chapter outlines and summarizes how ideas stemming from 
Brentano’s early schooling and initial teaching period at Würzburg 
contributed to the theories that later emerged as the theoretical frame-
work for the PES.  1 
 1.1  Biographical information, personality, and 
early intellectual activity 
 Franz Clemens Honoratus Hermann Brentano was born in Marienberg 
near Boppard am Rhein on 16 January 1838. The events leading towards 
German national unity formed the social and political background of 
Brentano’s youth.  2 The Brentano family, originally from Italy, are said to 
have arrived in Germany from the Lombardy region of Northern Italy 
circa the end of the seventeenth century.  3 They settled in Frankfurt and 
eventually became absorbed into German society. It was into this artis-
tically accomplished and aristocratic family (a coat of arms was appar-
ently bestowed on the Italian Brentanos in the thirteenth century, cf. 
Puglisi 1924, 414) that Franz Brentano was born. His paternal grand-
father Peter Anton Brentano married Maximiliane von La Roche, a 
close friend of the poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.  4 Many of the 
 1 
 Brentano’s Intellectual Background  
17

18 From Psychology to Phenomenology
Brentanos were involved in the German Romantic movement. For 
example, Clemens (1778–1842), the first son of Peter and Maximiliane, 
would go on to a notable career as a poet and writer compiling, with 
his wife (Sophie Mereau), a collection of traditional German folk 
songs collected as  Des Knaben Wunderhorn (1805–8). Clemens’ sister, 
Brentano’s aunt, Elisabeth (Bettina) von Arnim, was known for her 
wit, eccentricity and her own talents as a writer and intellectual; her 
personality being colorful and striking enough to hold Goethe’s atten-
tion. The phrase “mad as a Brentano” was one that had gained circula-
tion in German literary circles mostly due to the activities and beliefs 
of Clemens’, his wife and his sister. Clemens’ younger brother (Franz 
Brentano’s father) Christian (b. 1784), apparently inherited the family’s 
literary bent, and until his death (in 1851) he wrote books arguing in 
support of the Catholic German ultramontanist cause (cf. Albertazzi, 
2006, 9). Brentano’s mother Emilie (neé Genger) was also a cultured 
woman and herself a devout Catholic. 
 Brentano had four siblings: three sisters, Maria Ludovica (known as 
Lulu), Sophie and Claudine, and a brother Lujo. Accounts of Brentano’s 
youth and upbringing provide evidence that he received a great deal 
of creative stimulation as a youngster. Claudine, the youngest sister, 
would later join the Church and become a nun while Lujo would 
later go on to become a highly influential social theorist successfully 
contributing to German intellectual and political life through his 
writings on economics. Of all the four Brentano children it is recorded 
that Franz was the only one not sent away to Catholic boarding school 
(Albertazzi, 2006, 10). Receiving his initial education from his mother 
at the family residence in Aschaffenburg (the  Haus  Brentano in north-
west Bavaria), Franz Brentano’s early upbringing in what was evidently 
a lively and socially engaging environment may have contributed to 
developing some of his later intellectual qualities. Amongst these 
can be noted his dedication to study and learning, and his interest 
in language and music as well as his contemplative or religious bent. 
Brentano’s uncle Clemens was a regular visitor to the Aschaffenburg 
residence from Frankfurt. Other notable visitors to the Brentano home 
included politicians and poets, writers, philosophers and scientists. 
The number and frequency of these guests was high and we can 
deduce that the environment of intellectual and artistic discussion 
that resulted would have made an impression on the young Brentano. 
It would be to Aschaffenburg that Brentano would later retreat to write 
the majority of his  Psychology from an  Empirical Standpoint . 

Brentano’s Intellectual Background 19
 Brentano only began his formal education at the age of seventeen by 
taking up studies at the Aschaffenburger Gymnasium. There he read 
the works of Aristotle for the first time under the supervision of the 
philologist Joseph Merkel. After his studies at Aschaffenburg, at the age 
of eighteen, Brentano enrolled in the University of Munich where he 
remained for three semesters starting in the autumn of 1856. It was 
at Munich that the young Brentano began his mature studies in the 
faculty of philosophy. Brentano subsequently attended the universities 
of Würzburg, Berlin and Münster. During his early period of univer-
sity studies, while in Berlin, Brentano attended the lectures of Friedrich 
Adolf Trendelenburg (1802–72). He followed Trendelenburg’s lectures 
on Aristotle’s psychology and theory of knowledge (see Section 2.2). 
After studying with Trendelenburg for only a month, Brentano went 
to Münster to improve his knowledge of scholastic philosophy by 
taking classes at the  Münster  Academie under the tutelage of Franz Jacob 
Clemens (1815–62) preparing to write a doctoral dissertation on Suárez. 
Although Brentano remained in Münster until the age of 24 (he left 
only in 1862), he completed his doctoral degree in philosophy not at 
Münster or Berlin but at Tübingen. His PhD, awarded for a disserta-
tion on the  Metaphysics of Aristotle was dedicated to Trendelenburg.  5 
Immediately after receiving his PhD, in 1862, Brentano also entered 
a Dominican monastery in Graz for several months before leaving for 
a seminary in Munich with the goal of studying theology in order to 
become a priest and teach at a German University. 
 Although raised in a religious Roman Catholic household (one mostly 
managed by his mother after his father’s death), the claim that Brentano 
was from early youth being explicitly groomed for a religious vocation 
has been contested.  6 The true motivations for Brentano’s joining the 
priesthood, therefore, can most likely be traced back to the influence 
on the young Brentano of figures like Clemens in Münster and the 
Church historian Ignatius Döllinger (who was later excommunicated) 
in Munich. The strongest motive for joining the church seems to stem 
from Clemens’ influence on Brentano during his time at Münster. The 
charismatic personality of Clemens, as well as the personal example 
he provided through his role as priest and teacher, has been noted as a 
major factor in Brentano’s later pursuit of a clerical career.  7 Clemens was 
interested in the thought of Thomas Aquinas, an enthusiasm commu-
nicated to Brentano, and Clemens’ approach to philosophy was that 
it should retain its autonomy and not be reduced to a mere adjunct of 
theological doctrines. In this sense Clemens orientation was similar to 
that of other German Catholics under whom Brentano studied, such 

20 From Psychology to Phenomenology
as Ignaz von Döllinger and Johannes Kuhn. Opposed to this German 
Catholic tradition was the growing Ultramontane movement in the 
German Universities. The latter movement stressed close adherence 
to Thomism as an end in itself and the subservience of philosophy to 
Church dogma. The clash between liberal and conservative positions 
would later affect Brentano directly when the doctrine of papal infal-
libility was declared in 1870. 
 On top of his early philosophical studies there is evidence that 
the young Brentano was interested in the arts in general. Although 
Brentano’s intellectual interests and focus on science and episte-
mology seem to have been dominant throughout his life, he was 
not one-sidedly focused on philosophy alone but intellectually well 
rounded. Brentano’s interest in and curiosity about a variety of matters 
in the sciences and mathematics (especially geometry) have been noted 
(Albertazzi, 2006, 10–11). These interests would remain with him his 
whole life, and while they complemented his philosophical interests 
well, Brentano’s youthful passion for religion and theological matters 
cannot be downplayed. As was noted, both of Brentano’s parents were 
devout Catholics and he undertook a serious study of Catholic theology 
and Church history early on in his schooling. These theological inter-
ests would eventually lead to his serious studies of Thomism and medi-
eval Scholastic philosophy, which would continue more intensely after 
the completion of his dissertation in Tübingen. On 6 August, 1864 
Brentano joined the priesthood. Shortly thereafter, on 15 July 1866, he 
completed his twenty-five  Habilitationsthese composed in Latin.  8 These 
writings, prepared as a first requirement for holding the position of 
paid lecturer [ Privatdozent ] in Würzburg (cf. ZP, 137ff.), are of special 
interest for gaining insight into Brentano’s early intellectual frame-
work and mindset (and cf. Section 2.5). 
 Only after taking his vows did Brentano begin his teaching activity, 
as a  Privatdozent or private lecturer in Würzburg. However, in order to 
take up a full professorship, a second  Habilitationsschrift was required. 
This second thesis,  The  Psychology of  Aristotle :  In particular  His Doctrine 
of the  Active Intellect , was published as his second book in 1867 with 
a dedication to Merkel his teacher at the Aschaffenburg Gymnasium. 
This text is of great importance for understanding Brentano’s philos-
ophy of mind because it outlines the psychophysical paradigm against 
which Aristotelian psychology developed and lays out the founda-
tions for Brentano’s own later work on mental activity. This early work, 
as we shall see, also served as the central backdrop to almost all his 
philosophical thought (see Section 2.4). Brentano’s investigation of 

Brentano’s Intellectual Background 21
Aristotle’s active intellect marks the first expansion of his studies from 
metaphysics into philosophy of mind. Protestant scholars, such as 
Eduard Zeller, had challenged the coherence of Aristotle’s psychological 
and metaphysical writings. Brentano defends the systematic unity of 
Aristotle’s work in both areas.  9 In this way Brentano showed himself 
influenced by the Catholic Aristotelian revival that had been spear-
headed by his teachers, including Clemens. Brentano’s dedication to 
“Catholic Science” was complemented by his programmatic statements 
expressed in his Latin habilitation theses that philosophy and science 
should be continuous (cf. Schaefer, 2007). After the completion of his 
second  Habilitationsschrift , therefore, Brentano increased his lecturing 
duties at the Bayerische-Julius-Maximilians-Universität-Würzburg by 
focusing on developing this program to scientifically establish meta-
physics in the Aristotelian sense. 
 Brentano remained at the University of Würzburg for seven years 
(1866–73). In May of 1872 he was appointed  professor extraordinarius at 
Würzburg, a position he was to hold until he resigned his professor-
ship for personal reasons in 1873. By 1874, after officially transferring 
to the University of Vienna in Austria, Brentano would again be made 
a full professor. The same year, Brentano’s  Psychology from an  Empirical 
Standpoint was published (although for the most part, as we shall see, 
that work was composed at the very end of the Würzburg period).The 
year 1874 was, in fact, a momentous one in the history of psychology, 
witnessing the publication of Wilhelm Wundt’s textbook on  Physiological 
 Psychology and the groundbreaking work in the field of sensation and 
psychology by William James at Harvard Medical School in the United 
States (cf. Boring, 1950; Heidbreder, 1961 & Wertheimer, 1986). 
 At this point, having presented a picture of his early education and 
intellectual development, we can say something about Brentano the 
man. Available sources and accounts of Brentano’s personality reveal 
that he was an enigmatic figure. Alternatively described as a genius 
and a spoilt eccentric he was, later in life, to encounter many prob-
lems brought on both by his intellectual independence and his strong 
will. In between the move from Würzburg to Vienna, for example 
and largely as a result of his “religious crisis”, Brentano broke with the 
Catholic Church and left the priesthood. His abandonment of his faith, 
according to available records (mostly private letters) stemmed from the 
1870s. It has been described as motivated by purely intellectual factors 
and primarily an inability to continue to accept what he perceived as 
contradictions in Catholic Church doctrine (cf. Stumpf, 1919/1976, 
23–5 & Brentano, 1922). Much like another notable German speaking 

22 From Psychology to Phenomenology
Catholic intellectual, the Bohemian philosopher Bernard Bolzano (1741–
1848), Brentano’s intellectual outlook during his break from the priest-
hood was one of a pro-Enlightenment and liberal Catholic thinker.  10 In 
Brentano’s case this was certainly partly inspired by his upbringing in 
Bavaria where the anti-Prussian and liberal (pro-English and French) 
background of the region was, especially following the failed revolu-
tions of 1848, dominant but largely repressed by authorities. Although 
true that, after the mid- to late-nineteenth century, liberalism was 
hardly the main strand of thought on the European continent (nor in 
Germany as a whole) nonetheless Brentano frequently cited and gained 
inspiration from British and French thinkers and there is no reason to 
believe that his liberalism was not motivated as much by deeply held 
philosophical convictions as by his cultural background. 
 Intellectualism and rationalism constituted two very dominant 
strains of Brentano’s psychological makeup and these qualities were 
evidently seminal to how he decided practical matters relevant to his 
life. His break with the Catholic Church, for example, was clearly not 
a spontaneous act or a political gesture meant to amount to any kind 
of overt statement. In the preface to a posthumously published work 
dealing with the life of Jesus Christ and Christianity (published as  Die 
Lehre Jesu und ihre bliebende  Bedeutung , Leipzig: Meiner, 1922), Brentano 
recounts how the tensions between Rome and selected areas of the rest 
of the Catholic world, especially after the newly announced doctrine of 
Papal Infallibility was approved, was only one among many factors in 
his decision to leave the Church. Therefore, while the new dogma was 
certainly an important factor in Brentano’s break with the Church,  11 it 
seems not to have been the exclusive reason for his decision to leave the 
priesthood. Brentano recounts,  
 My sole reason [for leaving the Catholic Church] was to serve the 
higher interests of mankind ... . For me research has always been a 
vital necessity; and from the very first I tried, again and again, to 
resolve, in a satisfactory way, certain apparent contradictions of 
reason and what is called supernatural revelation. The failure of 
every effort to resolve these contradictions gave rise, little by little, 
to grave doubts regarding the truth of religious dogmas. (Brentano 
cited in Puglisi, 1924, 416)  
 After examining the validity and intellectually weighing the coher-
ence of the doctrines such as those of, for example, the Trinity, the 
Immaculate Conception etc., Brentano broke, first with Thomism and 

Brentano’s Intellectual Background 23
subsequently, with the Catholic Church. It has been noted by both 
students and friends how Brentano’s break with Catholicism did nothing 
to diminish the religious seriousness that formed another important 
aspect of his makeup. In later years, that same sense of mission and 
religious temper that led him to the Catholic Church would be appar-
ently transferred into his teaching work and philosophical thought. 
Edmund Husserl, one of his many influential and talented students, 
would later record the sense of mission underlying Brentano’s philo-
sophical activity. According to Husserl,  
 My first impression of [Brentano] was rather striking. This lean figure 
with the powerful head framed by curly hair, the manly, prominent 
nose, the expressive lines in his face which bespoke not only mental toil 
but deep spiritual conflict as well – these lay wholly outside the scope 
of common life. In every feature, in every movement, in his soulful, 
introspective eyes, filled with determination, in his whole manner, was 
expressed the consciousness of a great mission. (TPB, 47–8)  
 Philosophy was, therefore, more than a profession for Brentano and 
its practice approached something very much like a religious calling. 
Brentano’s philosophical proofs for the existence of God, for example, 
would remain central to his writings and intellectual outlook well into 
and long after, his Vienna days. 
 This merging in Brentano’s intellectual activity of scientific rigor 
with desire to reform philosophy led to conflicts with colleagues 
at Würzburg. In 1872, on being made a full professor of philosophy 
at Würzburg, Brentano was also required to present an address. A 
colleague from this period, Franz Hoffmann (a former student of Franz 
von Baader, the one-time professor of speculative dogmatics at Munich) 
seems to have suggested the philosophy of Schelling as Brentano’s 
topic.  12 Hoffmann was active in teaching courses on German idealism at 
Würzburg from before Brentano’s arrival and his courses kept alive the 
spirit of Schelling’s idealism. Hoffmann’s goal, both in his teaching and 
research, seems to have been to utilize the idealistic system of Schelling 
(who had earlier himself taught at Würzburg) and develop an alternative 
philosophical basis for Catholic theology. Brentano’s talk on Schelling’s 
philosophy was, needless to say, critical. Brentano attacked both the 
vague use of “intellectual intuition” as well as the non-scientific nature 
of Schelling’s idealism. And these ideological conflicts were apparently 
merely the outward expression of deeper tensions between Brentano 
and his professional colleagues at Würzburg. 

24 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 We know from his personal letters as well as from independent sources 
that Brentano had a problematic relationship not only with Hoffmann 
but with many other of his academic colleagues.  13 Although his intellec-
tual and teaching ability was recognized by most of the faculty, as well 
as the students who packed his lecture courses, others were suspicious 
of the priest Brentano. Hoffmann, for example, was from the beginning 
suspicious of Ultramontanists and, it is reported, regarded Brentano as 
both a supporter of the Vatican cause as well as a “Jesuit in disguise” 
(cf. TPB, 29). After 1872, the other Catholic faculty members were 
also convinced that Brentano was both an anti-papist and an atheist, 
and therefore against Christianity in general. Some of the Würzburg 
Catholics furthermore later began to resent that Brentano had, after his 
appointment to full professor, usurped an ultramontanist post (TPB, 32). 
On top of all this, there were colleagues (both liberal Protestant and 
conservative Catholics) who were hostile to him. The charges of the 
mysticism and scholasticism surrounding his philosophical approach 
were later thrown around freely and this lack of respect from colleagues, 
along with the general misunderstanding surrounding his thought and 
character, certainly contributed to motivating Brentano’s resignation of 
his professorship in Würzburg. 
 Although Brentano continued with his priestly duties until at least 
1873, his decision to abandon the priesthood (culminating in April of 
1873)  14 was quickly followed by his resignation from Würzburg and 
his taking up of the position of full professor with teaching duties in 
Vienna commencing in January of 1874. This conversion to a more 
worldly and less actively religious and clerical daily routine therefore 
formed the background to Brentano’s composition of the PES. In the 
period between the writing of the PES and taking up of his new position 
in Vienna, Brentano travelled widely throughout Europe and England. 
In 1872 he met with William Robertson Smith, Herbert Spencer, John 
Henry Newman, and the anti-Darwinian Christoph Mivart during a trip 
to England. Brentano wanted, but was unable, to meet with John Stuart 
Mill with whom he had been in correspondence since March of 1872. 
Later a meeting with Mill was scheduled in France but never took place 
due to Mill’s sudden death (cf. Albertazzi, 2006, 17). In the following 
year Brentano visited Paris, Luxemburg and Leipzig. During these travels 
he met and engaged in debates with some of the leading intellectuals 
of his day. In Germany Brentano met and discussed philosophical and 
scientific matters with Wilhelm Windelband (the neo-Kantian philoso-
pher and historian of philosophy), Gustav Fechner (the experimental 
psychologist), Moritz W. Drobisch (Herbartian psychologist at Leipzig), 

Brentano’s Intellectual Background 25
the one-time assistant to Helmholtz and physicist Heinrich Friedrich 
Weber, and the Herbartian Ludwig Strümpell (Albertazzi, 2006, 19). The 
meetings were all closely related to Brentano’s project of composing the 
 Psychology . The trip to Leipzig, in fact, was originally undertaken with 
the intention of making use of the library facilities for composing his 
book (Leipzig, at the time, being a center of psychological studies). With 
the appearance of the PES, and after obtaining a new professorship in 
Vienna in 1874,  15 the foundations for Brentano’s mature thought and 
philosophy of mind were established.  
 1.2  Later life 
 After teaching in Austria for a time as  professor ordinarius , in 1880, 
Brentano decided to marry. Brentano had met and fallen in love with 
Ida Lieben, the sister of Adolf von Lieben a professor of chemistry and 
a colleague of Brentano’s (from 1875–83) at the University of Vienna. 
An aspiring artist from an important Austrian family, Ida Leiben soon 
caught the eye of the 42-year-old philosophy professor, who decided to 
make her his wife. According to the Austrian laws of the day, however, 
it was illegal for ex-priests to lawfully marry. To circumvent the hurdles 
blocking his avenue to a valid marriage Brentano obtained Saxon citi-
zenship and went with his bride to Leipzig to marry. The marriage took 
place on September 16. To obtain Saxon citizenship, however, Brentano 
had to give up his Austrian citizenship and renounce his professorship 
in Vienna. This he did but, so he believed, only provisionally and on 
the verbal guarantee of the State and University authorities that his citi-
zenship (along with his position) would later be reinstated. Returning 
in 1881 as  Privatdozent (lecturer) he was subsequently quite embittered 
when the University officials refused to reinstate his previous position 
as  professor ordinarius . The consequences of his marriage, in effect, 
amounted to restrictions on his academic activities and an ever growing 
hostility to his influence and presence in Austria. The entire incident 
resulted in a polemical exchange between Brentano and the University 
of Vienna, which was later outlined in various newspaper articles in the 
 Neue Frei Press and collected and published by Brentano as  Meine  letzten 
Wünsche für Österreich (“My final wishes for Austria”) in 1895. Among 
the other problems cited by Brentano in his decision to leave Vienna 
was the University’s refusal to allow him to open his own laboratory of 
psychology (MLW, 33ff.). 
 The following years were ones filled with a fair share of sorrow and 
loss. The year 1882 saw the death of Brentano’s mother and, although 

26 From Psychology to Phenomenology
his wife gave birth to a son (Johannes) in 1888, not long after this, on 
18 March 1894, she also died. Nine months later he left Austria and 
his professorship for good to take up residence first in Switzerland for 
a time before obtaining Italian citizenship and relocating there. In 
1896 he lived for a stretch in Palermo and then moved to Rome and 
finally settled in Florence. He remarried in 1897 to Emilia Rueprecht, 
like Brentano’s first wife also Viennese Austrian. Emilie would remain a 
constant companion until his final years. These last years, spent mostly 
in Italy with seasonal relocations to a villa at Schönbühel (in Austria) 
during the summer months, saw Brentano keeping intellectually active, 
publishing, dictating notes and corresponding with other philosophers 
and scientists. Although his final years were marked by blindness  16 he 
nonetheless continued his research activity in both psychology and 
philosophy. During this period, with the help of his wife, who taught 
herself ancient Greek in order to be able to read to him, Brentano worked 
on revisions to his thought and his earlier positions. Brentano’s middle 
period and later writings (from c.1875–1917) developed his earlier intel-
lectual interests, which were therefore in some cases transformed and 
augmented by his ongoing thought. Brentano also kept his intellectual 
development alive by attending conferences (again in both philosophy 
and psychology) and through his abundant correspondence and intel-
lectual exchanges. When Italy became involved in World War I as a 
belligerent power and with its adoption of an imperialistic foreign 
policy, Brentano left (in protest) and went back to Switzerland where he 
died from appendicitis in Geneva, 17 March 1917. 
 With the above (brief) overview of the formative events and influ-
ences that shaped Brentano’s intellectual background completed, we 
can turn to investigating his doctrines in greater detail. The first topic 
upon which we can focus our attention is Brentano’s early work in 
metaphysics.  
 1.3  Early intellectual activity and Würzburg writings 
 Brentano’s tenure at the University of Würzburg (starting in 1866) 
coincided with the widening embrace of new work in the natural 
sciences there, especially in medicine. At the time Brentano joined 
the faculty, both the professors of science as well as the so-called 
philosophical-historical faculty were all part of the large “faculty of 
philosophy”.  17 As the newest professor affiliated with the philosophy 
faculty, the environment at Würzburg was conducive to the topics 
that informed Brentano’s early writings. His early lectures and the 

Brentano’s Intellectual Background 27
book length studies of Aristotle’s metaphysics and psychology (and cf. 
Chapter 2 below) are the origin of Brentano’s later philosophical psych-
ology. Among the lecture topics taken up by Brentano in Würzburg, 
other than psychology, were courses on metaphysics, the history of 
philosophy, inductive and deductive logic, and positivism (& cf.  Table 
1.1A  for a full listing). Judging from the Würzburg lectures, it is evident 
that most of Brentano’s attention before he composed the PES was 
devoted to metaphysics, logic and the history of philosophy. Brentano’s 
focus on these metaphysical topics is already evident in his first book 
and dissertation written under the influence of Trendelenburg, and 
focusing on the metaphysics of Aristotle (cf. once again Section 2.3). 
These philosophical interests, we will demonstrate, remained prom-
inent to Brentano’s thought throughout his life and shaped both his 
psychological writings and his philosophy of mind. 
 Many portions of the above mentioned lecture courses have, in 
varying forms, been preserved with enough excerpts making their way 
down to us to allow the essential contours of Brentano’s thought at this 
time to be outlined.  18 Reference to these lectures and notes are vital for 
accurately representing Brentano’s early positions in philosophy and 
psychology before the publication of the PES.  19 In some cases we are in 
possession of complete and unedited manuscripts of the earlier lecture 
courses. These come down to us mostly in the forms of student copies 
of notes, but also, in certain cases, copies of Brentano’s own lecture 
notes. 20 Some of Brentano’s earlier views, such as those dealing with the 
history of medieval philosophy, were also organized and published by 
Brentano himself.  21 Finally we are lucky to still possess first hand reports 
by Brentano’s students from Würzburg of the content and outline of his 
lecture courses and the doctrines he expounded there. 
 From available sources we know that in his early lectures on meta-
physics Brentano divided philosophy into three main branches. The 
first of these, in seemingly Wolffian fashion, was ontology or special 
metaphysics (subdivided, however, according to Brentano, into the 
study of the several senses of being, closely followed by a mereological 
study of the parts and wholes of existing entities and, lastly, an exam-
ination of causes and fundamental principles). After metaphysics and 
ontology came theology, which according to the early Brentano is the 
study of the first cause of being (i.e. “God”), whose existence can be 
determined by the principle of sufficient reason applied to the given 
facts. For example, no contingent being can determine or bring itself 
into existence, we can therefore infer that contingent being requires 
a cause or source for its being, with this chain of causes eventually 

28 From Psychology to Phenomenology
leading to a first cause or non-contingent origin. Finally, completing 
Brentano’s early system is the study of cosmology, or the unity of the 
world. Cosmology was said, at this early stage, to complete metaphysics 
(cf. Brentano unpublished manuscript MS M96, cited by Antonelli, 
2002, 18). Psychology, in 1866, was therefore a secondary concern for 
Brentano. In this regard Carl Stumpf writes of how,  
 [M]etaphysics was the beginning and end of [Brentano’s] thought. 
This, of course, would not keep psychology from at times assuming 
a place in the foreground of his work, and this was in fact what 
happened. (TPB, 16)  22 
 In his metaphysics courses in the late 1860s and early 1870s, for example, 
Brentano complements the study of ontology and the principles of first 
philosophy or the philosophy of being with a strong emphasis on logical 
analysis and clarification of terms. Later the same topics are treated with 
a stronger emphasis on psychology and language and with a sharper 
focus on how linguistic terms can mislead us into attributing actual 
being to entities that are merely “synsemantic”. This later position, 
influenced by correspondence with his one-time student Anton Marty, 
would lead Brentano to adopt a kind of nominalistic position with 
respect to ontological categories and valid subjects of prediction versus 
his earlier neo-Aristotelian view. The above division of metaphysics into 
a special and general branch, however, (or ontology versus theology 
and cosmology) supports the noted difference in approach between 
his earlier views as opposed to his later thought. The science of being, 
denoted by ontology, marks the distinction Brentano holds at this time 
between the conceptual study of being delimited into categories versus 
theories about modes of existence. Being (and its categories) are treated 
separately from what can be called the metaphysical examination of 
how the categories are manifested. This was an approach that was quite 
popular after Thomas Aquinas, with the distinction between grades of 
being (with God as pure act or  Ipsum esse ) an important foundation 
of metaphysics and speculative philosophy. Nonetheless as for Thomas 
and Aristotle so for Brentano, metaphysics and knowledge of any kind 
begins with the facts of experience. Abstracting from the immediately 
given facts of experience we account for the facts by formulating our 
theories so that they correspond to the things themselves. 
 Where the lecture course titles (as listed in  Table 1.1A ) describe tran-
scendental philosophy, the reader should not presume that Brentano 
was at any point a Kantian or lecturing from the perspective of Kant’s 

Brentano’s Intellectual Background 29
critical philosophy. Brentano seems to have used this term, as in, for 
example, the title of his “History of Philosophy and Metaphysics” from 
the Winter Semester of 1868–69, to designate the subject of transcen-
dental philosophy in the classic sense of metaphysics as knowledge 
of the supersensible thus “transcending” the (Aristotelian) categories 
of traditional ontology (and see chapters 2 & 3 below). At Würzburg 
Brentano’s lectures on metaphysics were complemented by his epis-
temological theories, as developed in his lectures on logic. These logic 
lecture notes (a complete text of which survives) treat of logic broadly 
conceived and understood as the epistemological preparation for 
Brentano’s early metaphysical system. These logic notes should there-
fore be read side by side with the lengthy discussions Brentano under-
takes in his metaphysics lectures of the universal principles of reason as 
elaborated by Aristotle in Book Four of his  Metaphysics (and see Stumpf’s 
testimony on this in TPB, 17). To a large extent therefore, and in many 
of these early lecture courses, Brentano is concerned with Aristotelian 
themes and their development. According to Stumpf,  
 [Brentano] knew that authority, as such, may play no role in phil-
osophy, and he maintained that with regard to Aristotle too, but he 
had found so much truth and profundity in the Aristotelian doctrines 
that he granted them a certain  prima facie probability, a certain right 
to be heard, which did not rule out examination and rejection. (cf. 
Stumpf 1976, 16)  
 An important factor in this reading of Aristotle is what Brentano consid-
ered the critical establishment of a neo-Aristotelian foundation for the 
sciences in a metaphysical context. In this respect, he believed that 
Aristotle’s framework needed to be supplemented by modern sources. 
However, Brentano was disappointed that these supplementary sources 
could not be found in Germany. Brentano’s disillusionment with the 
state of German philosophy in the late nineteenth century is made 
clear, for example, in a letter sent to J. S. Mill from 1872. There Brentano 
writes of how,  
 [P]hilosophy as taught and practised in Germany for quite some time 
seems to have gone astray. ... From the first I have been speculating 
how it could be reformed in the way the natural sciences have been 
reformed; and I am happy to say that my own ideas conform to yours 
in more than one point regarding the character of inquiries as well 
as certain doctrines. After I became acquainted with your writings I 

30 From Psychology to Phenomenology
began a series of new studies which, though I had given a good deal 
of serious thought to them, I had not felt ready to publish because 
of what I felt to be their premature nature. (Brentano cited in Mill, 
1972, 1876n2)  
 The above evaluation of contemporary German thought is repeated by 
Brentano two years later in the public inaugural speech  Über  die  Gründe 
der  Entmutigung auf philosophischen  Gebiete delivered just after the publi-
cation of the PES and upon the granting of his professorship at the 
University of Vienna. There Brentano writes,  
 In the first decades of our century the lecture halls of the German 
philosophers were overcrowded; in more recent times, this flood 
has been followed by an ebb tide. One often hears that gifted men 
accuse the younger generation of lacking the sense for the highest 
branches of knowledge. That would be a sad but also an incompre-
hensible fact. How could it be that the entire new generation should 
be inferior to the earlier one in spiritual momentum and mobility? 
It was in reality not a lack of talent but ... lack of confidence that had 
the effect of decreasing philosophical studies. If the hope for success 
had come back, the highest honors in this field would be waiting in 
vain to be conquered.  23 
 Some of the features of Brentano’s later thought are already present 
here but the emphasis within these earliest lectures is only rarely expli-
citly psychological. That metaphysics and philosophy of science or 
epistemology were Brentano’s stated focus and main preoccupation 
during his Würzburg period is also evident from the content of his 
1866 habilitation theses. There Brentano announces his well-known 
but perplexing declaration that the true method of philosophy is the 
same as that of the natural sciences (ZP, 133). In the 1866 habilitation 
Brentano also treats of methodological, metaphysical, psychological, 
logical and semantic (as well as ethical and aesthetic) topics respect-
ively. However, the primary focus is on metaphysics and the trans-
formation of philosophy into what Brentano called “rigorous science”. 
Sections of the metaphysics lectures, the basic outline of which were 
noted above, can also be found in Brentano’s posthumous publications, 
such as  Vom Dasein Gottes (1929)   24 ,  Über  die  Zukunft der  Philosophie 
(1929) and  Geschicte der  Griechischen  Philosophie (1963). Brentano’s scien-
tific program is one built upon a very Aristotelian emphasis on imme-
diate first principles of knowledge. These principles, in turn, form the 

Brentano’s Intellectual Background 31
evidence that is grasped intuitively. As for Aristotle these principles are 
not the result of reasoning but rather tautologies abstracted from our 
most basic experiences- such that to deny them is to undermine the 
coherence of any scientific or explanatory project. It is in order to better 
understand how the immediate ground of knowledge is made evident, 
and linked to universal covering laws, that Brentano undertakes the 
study of psychology or the philosophy of mind. Thus, the early writings 
lead to a framework that is implicitly maintained in Brentano’s thought 
and present in his early and later writings. 
 The broad philosophical foundation of interests from the Würzburg 
period (promoted in his metaphysics lectures) is, as was mentioned, 
closely supplemented by Brentano’s examination of evident versus 
non-evident kinds of knowledge. Brentano’s exploration of axiomatic 
foundations for rational knowledge and his distinction between judg-
ments and presentations stems from his lectures on logic. Where today 
“logic” is frequently characterized as a special discipline with a very 
narrow focus on purely formal deduction of truth and the validity or 
invalidity of argument structures, Brentano’s logic lectures present 
us, in nineteenth-century fashion, with the outlines of an elaborately 
developed epistemological system. It is, in fact, in the logic lectures 
rather than within his lectures on metaphysics, that the seminal role 
of psychology as essential to clarifying both metaphysics and natural 
philosophy is initially developed. The most important of these early 
logic lectures are almost certainly the notes collected in manuscript 
under the code of EL80. First delivered in the Winter semester of 1869 
(cf.  Table 1.1A ), these notes were then titled “Deductive and Inductive 
Logic”.  25 In these lectures a psychological basis for the foundations of 
philosophical concepts is elaborated. 
 Brentano begins his logic lectures with a definition of the topic, tenta-
tively defined as both the art of judgment and the art of drawing correct 
conclusions (EL80/12957ff). Brentano then proceeds to outline the rela-
tion of evidence to correct judgments (distinguished here from mere 
presentations) as well as to present his theory of induction and the role 
of language in the collection of facts and the formation of theories. The 
psychological aspect of grounding knowledge and attaining objective 
truth is here seen to be an important part of Brentano’s early epis-
temology. This aspect of his system is highlighted where he discusses 
the importance of laws of reason or concepts in philosophy as closely 
related to the facts of “inner experience” (cf. Brentano, EL80/12965). 
The important notion of inner experience or inner perception is articu-
lated already, more or less as it will be presented in his PES, as a kind of 

32 From Psychology to Phenomenology
immediate or intuitive source of knowledge (although Brentano never 
uses the term  Anschauung [intuition] to describe it). The above notion 
of “inner experience” [ die innere Erfahrung ] is also described in his early 
Würzburg lectures on metaphysics. Nonetheless, the logic lectures 
make more evident the centrality of the above doctrine to philosophy 
of mind. 
 Brentano writes, for example, of how all central concepts of phil-
osophy depend on inner perception or immediate experience, which 
“distinguishes the essential features of entities” (EL80/12965). In the 
PES Brentano notes how his reform and radical critique of Aristotelian 
deductive logic stemmed from his time at Würzburg: “In preparation 
for my lectures on logic which I gave during the winter of 1870–71 
at the University of Würzburg, I systematically and completely worked 
out an elementary logic built upon [a] new basis” (PES, 230). Brentano’s 
lectures on logic dating from this period are therefore of great value in 
understanding the theory of judgment and the epistemological context 
of the PES, and they clearly show the sources of these later develop-
ments. Most importantly, the initial reform and reduction of categorical 
forms of predication and their translation into existential judgments, 
prominent in the PES, is first presented here. John Stuart Mill confirms 
that the above innovations were already developed by Brentano by 1873. 
In a letter dated December, 1872, Mill outlines how Brentano’s innova-
tions in logic stem from his new theories on “the mental operation of 
judgment”. These psychological views on intellectual judgment, Mill 
writes, account for Brentano’s holding that “ one idea [presentation] is 
a sufficient prerequisite for a judgment”. Finally, from the above, Mill 
concludes that Brentano takes the position that “practical alterations in 
the rules of the syllogism” are viable (Mill, 1972, 1928). If the reform 
of syllogistic deduction is the final aim of the logic lectures, the means 
of arriving at that goal is reached through a close analysis of names 
and meaning as well as the distinction between individual or concrete 
particulars and universals and abstract concepts as these relate to epis-
temology and the scientific method (cf. EL80 manuscript). 
 Also developed at this time, and later closely related to philosophy of 
science and the establishment of scientific psychology, are Brentano’s 
theories on probability and induction. The mathematical connection 
of an elaborate probability calculus to the examination of causality 
and causal connections is a modern addition to Aristotle that guides 
Brentano’s revision of the former’s understanding of efficient and formal 
causation (cf. Section 6.7 below). From 1868–70 Brentano also articulates 
his initial theories of spatiality and temporality, along with the logical 

Brentano’s Intellectual Background 33
and metaphysical framework of categories and substance that support 
these theories (cf. TPB, 20). The world we perceive, Brentano will say in 
the PES, is not itself the origin and constitutive source of spatiality or 
temporality. The latter are effected by our perceptions and conscious-
ness. Brentano is, to borrow a term from William James, a nativist 
regarding perception of space and time and holds that the world we 
experience is analogous to the real world that can in turn be described 
as quasi-spatial and quasi-temporal (PES, 98–99). These theories would 
be developed in later years (and see below, Parts II and III). However, 
many of the fundamental tenents of Brentano’s later thought, such as 
the probabilistic basis for grounding inductive inferences, stem from 
these early Würzburg lectures (cf. EL80 13357–92). 
 What is missing from the logic and metaphysics lectures but what later 
becomes central to Brentano’s articulation of philosophy of mind is the 
doctrine of the spiritual nature of mental activity. For understanding 
the intellectual context for Brentano’s articulation of mental activity 
 The  Psychology of  Aristotle (which will be treated below) is of central 
significance. However, another equally important source is Brentano’s 
notes for his Psychology lectures. The psychology lectures delivered 
at Würzburg prove especially valuable for tracing the development of 
Brentano’s understanding of the differences between the physical and 
the mental. 26 As early as 1869 Brentano had begun to take up questions 
of the nature of the soul and articulate his philosophical psychology 
around the philosophical problem of the soul’s immortality. During the 
Würzburg period Brentano’s context for understanding the “psychic” is 
grounded on a comparison of animal with human psychological func-
tions. This can be seen in the final sections from the psychology course 
lectures from the winter semester of 1871 (and delivered again Winter 
1872–73: collected in MS PS62). Brentano begins this early summary of 
“psychophysics” by holding that mental and physical are very closely 
connected in a living organism, including the case of human beings. 
This connection is said to be a metaphysical (i.e. reductionist) one by 
materialists. However, although the materialists may be correct in the 
case of primitive organisms, Brentano is unwilling to grant a complete 
reduction of mental to physical in the case of human beings. The possi-
bility of the immortality of the human soul, or our psychic phenomena, 
are therefore closely connected to proofs for the existence of God (cf. PS 
62 54001–11). In other manuscripts dealing with psychology, a detailed 
engagement with the writings of Wundt is presented and experimental 
or empirical study of psychological functions called for (cf. Ms. PS25). 
This is interesting if only for discrediting the belief that Brentano’s 

34 From Psychology to Phenomenology
approach to psychology was opposed to or avoided experimental and 
quantitative approaches. In this regard it can once more be noted that 
at this time Würzburg was a hotbed for empirical scientific activity, in 
both biology (medical students were plentiful) and other fields in, and 
related to, the natural sciences. 
 At the time of Brentano’s teaching period at Würzburg there is a 
furthermore great deal of evidence that he actively and closely followed 
the development of doctrines in the positive sciences (cf., for example, 
OEG, 147, 238, etc.). However, Brentano, from early on, refused to 
subsume his philosophical conclusions, or the articulation of the 
principles that form the basis of metaphysics, to the conclusions of 
the most recent results of the positive sciences. Regarding specifically 
the development of his psychological theories there is a dispute about 
how early the centrality of psychology comes to dominate Brentano’s 
thought. We know that by 1874 psychology would occupy a central 
position in his philosophical system. How early the explicitly psycho-
logical foundation for epistemology and metaphysics was consciously 
articulated is debatable.  27 Nonetheless it is certain that by 1871 a direct 
engagement with psychological themes and issues was prominent in 
Brentano’s lectures and explicitly connected to his metaphysical frame-
work. According to Carl Stumpf, who was one of his first students and 
would remain a good friend, Brentano’s lectures on psychology did 
not really constitute a central place in his teaching until the spring of 
1871. Themes that would later be taken up in his PES, however, were 
frequently originally presented in these earlier philosophical lectures 
(and cf. Rollinger, 2011). 
 Other important and controversial theories and themes worked out in 
the Würzburg period, and in place before the PES was composed, relate 
to Brentano’s philosophy of history and his views on meta-philosophy. 
Stumpf tells us of how Brentano’s theory of the rise and decline of 
philosophical research in four phases (one of ascent and three of 
decline) stems from 1860, well before his teaching period at Würzburg 
began (TPB, 11). Although the doctrine of phases of intellectual life 
and its content would later be published in 1895 as  Die vier  Phasen der 
 Philosophie und ihr augenblicker  Stand , it obviously stems from very early 
period of his thought. Although important topics to which Brentano’s 
thought would later contribute in significant ways, such as ethics, 
would not be elaborated and fully developed in detail until his Vienna 
years. 28  
 The ethical doctrines Brentano outlines in both his Würzburg and 
early Vienna period are both largely derived from John Stuart Mill 

Brentano’s Intellectual Background 35
and Aristotle – blending Mill’s utilitarian approach with a form of 
virtue ethics and natural law theory of objective moral good that is of 
Aristotelian and Thomistic origin. Although very little direct attention 
was devoted to ethics in his Würzburg lectures, some of the foundations 
for his ethical thought were articulated during this earlier phase.  29 It 
has also been noted how, in his final years at Würzburg, on turning 
away from Catholic theological concerns and after his renunciation 
of the priesthood, Brentano’s interest in philosophy and psychology 
seems to have intensified. Nonetheless, in matters both philosoph-
ical and psychological, the dominant influence, as mentioned, was 
always Aristotle (cf. Stumpf, 1976). As we will see, Brentano’s reading of 
Aristotle is one that is strongly influenced by both the Catholic medi-
eval intellectual tradition and contemporary philosophy of science, 
including Comte’s positivism and British empiricism. A necessary step 
in his attainment of the Viennese post was the composition of the 
PES. Before we can explore the PES in detail, however, we should first 
examine Brentano’s published Aristotelian writings from before and 
during the Würzburg years.  
 1.4  Summary of early influences 
 A proper understanding of the PES can be greatly facilitated by taking 
into account the culmination of studies and systematic thinking 
and writing about metaphysics and psychology that form the back-
ground to Brentano’s most fruitful professional activity as a thinker, 
that is, his Würzburg years from 1866–73. The Würzburg period in 
Brentano’s development is usually passed over or viewed as a merely 
transitional stage in his intellectual development before his thought 
peaked during his teaching period in Vienna (where he would remain, 
first as professor, and later as lecturer, from 1874 to 1895). Although 
much has been written about the influence of Brentano’s writings on 
subsequent philosophy, it is not an exaggeration to say that much of 
this scholarship and commentary is also concerned with Brentano’s 
later Viennese period.  30 Thus, even if Brentano’s Vienna period can 
arguably be counted as his most fertile in terms of his influence on 
subsequent philosophy (as well as in terms of the sheer number and 
quality of students in his intellectual orbit at the time) this does not 
justify ignoring these earlier writings. Giving attention to Brentano’s 
earlier writings becomes especially pressing if an understanding of the 
system outlined in the PES and its relation to philosophy of mind is of 
interest.  31  

36 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 To summarize, the most important and evident characteristic of these 
early writings is Brentano’s amendment of classical Aristotelian meta-
physics in the form of closer study of the epistemological grounds for 
attaining knowledge of nature and reality. The latter originates in the 
Würzburg period after the publication of his first book and can be found 
in both his metaphysics lectures and lectures on logic. Above I have 
focused on the largely overlooked studies of the Würzburg period. One 
of the accomplishments of the PES, as will be shown, was in its colla-
tion and articulation of the (sometimes disparate) ideas and themes, 
characterizing Brentano’s earlier thought, into a more coherent system. 
In the early Würzburg lectures the subject of psychology can be seen 
to be treated from a strictly philosophical perspective. The essential 
features of mental classes or acts are already present. For example, the 
distinction between presentations and judgments in Brentano’s logic 
lectures, and there is also already an implicit and pronounced connec-
tion between mental or psychic acts as the basis and methodological 
tools for clarifying logical and metaphysical insights. However, there is 
not yet an attempt developed to clarify these notions or show how they 
are essential as foundations for the articulation of the study of cogni-
tion and experience. In other words, we are not yet presented with a 
philosophical attempt to understand the mind and its role in cognition 
for its own sake. Brentano would attempt the latter in the published 
sections of the PES, which, in turn, enhanced his understanding of 
philosophy of mind. 
 The psychophysical interests displayed in his published writings on 
Aristotle’s psychology, and their development in his psychology and 
metaphysics lectures, furthermore clearly demonstrate Brentano’s broad 
interest in psychology during the Würzburg period. However, as will be 
argued below, the beginnings of the project to establish a scientific basis 
for psychology, and to place the new science of psychology within a satis-
factory theoretical framework, would sharpen the focus on Brentano’s 
ontological and epistemological concerns (undertaken in earlier studies), 
helping to articulate them into a more systematic whole, which he would 
largely achieve by amending the earlier Aristotelian foundations.  

Brentano’s Intellectual Background 37
 Appendix 
 Table 1.1A  Lecture courses offered by   Brentano at Würzburg, 1867–73  
 Semester year of   lectures 
Summer 1867
Metaphysics
Winter 1867
History of Philosophy
Summer 1868
Metaphysics
Winter 1868
History of Philosophy and Metaphysics I 
(Transcendental Philosophy and Ontology)
Summer 1869
 Metaphysics II 
 (Theology and Cosmology) 
Summer 1869
Comte and French Positivism
Winter 1869
Deductive and Inductive Logic*
Winter 1869
History of Philosophy I (ancient)
Summer 1870
Metaphysics
Summer 1870
History of Philosophy II (modern and contemporary)
Winter 1870
Deductive and Inductive Logic
Summer 1871
Psychology
Winter 1871
History of Philosophy from Antiquity to the 
Contemporary Age
Winter 1871
Doctrine of Society
Summer 1872
Metaphysics
Winter 1872
Psychology
Winter 1872
On the Existence of God
Winter 1872
Doctrine of Society
Summer 1873
Deductive and Inductive Logic (with particular regard 
to the natural sciences and the sciences of the spirit)
 Notes: Compiled from reports given in Carl Stumf’s “Reminiscences” originally 
“ Erinnerungen an Franz Brentano ” first published in Kraus 1919, 85–149 & translated and 
reprinted in TPB, 10–46. See also Rollinger, 1999 for insights into the relationship of 
Stumpf to Brentano as well as a thorough account of the relationship between Stumpf and 
Brentano’s talented and influential pupil Edmund Husserl.  
 * Albertazzi notes how “It was during this period [The Winter Semester Course in Logic 
of 1869] that [Brentano] developed the concept of ”content of judgement” ( Urteilsinhalt ), 
which Stumpf translated as “state of affairs” ( Sachverhalt )”, cf. Albertazzi, (2006), 18 n 56. 
See also Ierna, 2008, 57. Parts of the 1869 lectures are preserved in MS EL (Erkenntnisse und 
available online Franz Brentano:  Logik (Spring 2011 edition), Robin Rollinger (ed.), URL = 
http://gandalf.uib.no/Brentano/texts/el/logik/norm/, I thank Robin Rollinger for pointing 
the above out to me.  

38
 Brentano’s initial area of interest and primary subject of study in phil-
osophy, as was shown above, was the difficult topic of metaphysics. For 
Brentano metaphysics, and more precisely what he frequently referred 
to as “scientific metaphysics”, generally meant Aristotelianism. The 
influence of Aristotle on Brentano cannot be underestimated. Later 
in his life Brentano would write of how his philosophical career only 
began after he apprenticed himself to Aristotle (AN, 291).  1 This claim 
can also corroborated by examining Brentano’s writings. In his life-
time Brentano published seven books and/or monographs on Aristotle 
including,  Von der Mannigfachen Bedeutung des Seienden nach Aristoteles 
(1862),  Die Psychologie des Aristoteles (1867), and the late work  Aristoteles 
und seine Weltanschauung , a summary and overview of Aristotelian phil-
osophy (1911). The above works were supplemented by lecture courses, 
essays and dictations – along with other works of “Aristotelika”, many 
of which remain unpublished but can be found in the manuscripts 
available in Brentano’s  Nachlass. 2 
 In order to complete the background context and better understand 
the origin of his  Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint , in what follows 
we will closely examine Brentano’s earliest writings on Aristotle. It will 
be seen that many of the doctrines that eventually become the basis of 
Brentano’s system in the PES find their initial expression in these earlier 
writings. More importantly, the underlying framework of the PES can, 
in outline, be traced back almost directly to Brentano’s earlier engage-
ment with Aristotelian metaphysics and psychology.  3 Therefore, it is 
essential to show how, and for what reason, Brentano amends Aristotle 
to arrive at the system that emerges in the PES.  
 2 
 Brentano’s Aristotelianism 
and Early Writings 
on Aristotle  

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 39
 2.1  Aristotle in late nineteenth-century Germany 
 That Brentano chose to ground his early and mature philosophical 
thought on Aristotelianism is not surprising. A monumental edition 
of Aristotle’s works, sponsored by the Prussian Academy, was issued 
between 1831 and 1870 marking the highpoint of what is today known 
as the “Aristotle Renaissance” in nineteenth-century Germany. The 
Prussian Academy collection became “the basis for almost innumerable 
critical editions of individual works” of Aristotle.  4 While it is clear that 
Aristotelianism was far from being the dominant paradigm in main-
stream nineteenth-century German philosophical circles, for reasons 
of clarity it is important to briefly assess the precise status that clas-
sical metaphysics did hold in German philosophy of that time.  5 This 
will allow an examination of how (and why) the influence of classical 
philosophy and of Aristotle was deemed in need of active restoration. 
By the late nineteenth century, the new science departments arising in 
the German universities became stages in a struggle for approval and 
influence that, in effect, amounted to what can be described as an ideo-
logical battle within academia. These mounting changes in the curric-
ulum were frequently thematized as debates regarding the precise role 
of philosophy and its relationship to other humanistic and scientific 
disciplines. Furthermore, these academic wrangles in the philosophy 
departments (including debates regarding the relationship of German 
idealism to classical philosophy), help illustrate the origins of psych-
ology and its rise as an independent science. 
 The ideological conflicts in the German universities were compli-
cated by the fact that support for indigenous German thought was, for 
most of the nineteenth century, often opposed to classical Latin (and 
especially French) intellectual traditions.  6 The above changes and the 
Aristotle revival movement were happening at the same time as many 
philosophy departments in German universities were also becoming 
influenced by the so-called back to Kant movement or as it would later 
come to be called “neo-Kantianism” (cf. Köhnke, 1991). The relation-
ship between the Aristotelians and the neo-Kantians is, of itself, an 
interesting and significant development of which something should be 
said to better understand the context of Brentano’s early philosoph-
ical writings. For most of the neo-Kantians, Aristotelianism represented 
a pre-critical mode of thought which for the most part amounted to 
the position that anything of value in Aristotle had to be either: a) 
amended or b) corrected by the insights of the Kantian philosophy. 
The later neo-Kantian domination of German philosophy departments 

40 From Psychology to Phenomenology
(especially after the 1830s and predominantly in the Protestant univer-
sities) would eventually spread to the newly created departments of 
psychology.  7 The initial competition between philosophers and experi-
mentalists for chairs in the new psychology departments, for example, 
was a battle that would be fought primarily between different groups 
of philosophers and later between the philosophers and the experimen-
talists or the exclusively scientific and empirically-oriented thinkers. 
Among the philosophers, however, the internal battle taking place at 
the inception of academic psychology between the neo-Kantians and 
the neo-Aristotelians must be our focus here. 
 Like the Aristotle revival the return to Kant movement also concerned 
itself with the explicit goal of separating the method of philosophy, 
which can be described as radical or systematic reflection, from the 
experimental explanation of facts characteristic of the explanatory laws 
of the positive sciences. The emphasis on reflection and critical focus on 
epistemology (by both neo-Kantians and Aristotelians) was stressed, for 
the most part, in order to show how the working of the sciences was, at 
the deepest level, still dependent on (or continuous with) philosophy.  8 
The historical and sociological context relevant to understanding the 
tensions between the Aristotelians and (neo-) Kantians, therefore, can 
be summarized as follows:
 A consolidation and grounding of knowledge and of the sciences was 
1. 
undertaken by both Aristotelians and Kantians with a critical reform 
of philosophy deemed necessary to separate its aims and method 
from the speculative excesses of German idealism (especially the 
Hegelian system).  
 The rise and expansion of the methods of the empirical sciences led 
2. 
proponents and supporters of the latter to seek nothing less than 
the complete autonomy of science from philosophy. These “positiv-
ists” or anti-metaphysicians and anti-philosophers were encouraged 
by the progress of knowledge and growth in the various branches of 
the sciences.  
 Both of the above listed factors, which recognized the inability of 
idealism to fruitfully support the empirical sciences and the rise of 
positivism or what can be called “scientism”, would subsequently influ-
ence both the course of modern philosophy and academic politics 
profoundly in German universities during the late nineteenth century. 
The resulting shift in attention to the natural sciences, furthermore, 
along with the loss of influence that resulted for traditional disciplines 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 41
such as theology and philosophy, would also eventually lead to what 
can be described as an ideological battle between the naturalists and 
the philosophers.  9 
 In short, both the neo-Kantians and neo-Aristotelians wanted to chal-
lenge the speculative idealism and historicism that was dominant (even 
if quickly losing ground) in German academic circles. In this regard 
the “back to Kant” movement was in agreement with the neo-Aristote-
lian agenda but neo-Kantianism had a higher status in Germany as it 
directly engaged with the idealism it criticized (and for this reason the 
neo-Kantians would attain greater influence both in German university 
philosophy departments and on contemporary philosophy as a whole). 
However in both the neo-Kantian revival and the Aristotle renaissance 
a major strategy, utilized by the respective proponents, was to chal-
lenge the dominance of German idealism by opposing its presupposi-
tions, conclusions and speculative assumptions with cases of provable 
objective knowledge attained by the positive sciences. Paradoxically in 
many cases, this strategy eventually led to the elimination of traditional 
philosophy and the suppression of reflective or systematic thought in 
the form of the subordination of philosophy to science. The latter was a 
trademark of much twentieth-century philosophy, such as logical posi-
tivism, and can still be found in much of so-called analytic philosophy 
and philosophy of mind today. The relationship and tensions between 
positivism and philosophy in Brentano’s own thought will be taken 
up in Chapter 3 below. Here we can turn to a seminal influence in the 
history of both the Aristotle revival and the “back to Kant” movement, 
the philosopher Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg.  
 2.2   Brentano’s studies with Trendelenburg 
 The first serious step in Brentano’s study of Aristotle’s psychology (as 
well as an important boon to his own early work on metaphysics) was 
his decision to transfer from Würzburg to Berlin and to study under one 
of the leading neo-Aristotelians in Germany, Adolf Trendelenburg.  10 
During this period (1858–59) Trendelenburg was focused on further 
developing the philosophical thought he had already proclaimed 
with his two published and (for our purposes) most important works 
 Commentary on Aristotle’s De Anima (1833) and  Logical Investigations 
(1840).  11 The second of these two major works attempted to formu-
late critiques of Kantian, and especially Hegelian, idealist modes and 
systems of thought.  12 In both cases Trendelenburg’s work was marked 
by the strategy of turning back to classical sources, most notably Plato 

42 From Psychology to Phenomenology
and Aristotle, for inspiration while simultaneously reforming German 
idealism by attempting to curb its speculative excesses (cf. Kohnke, 
1991, 5ff). Trendelenburg’s interest in Aristotle was matched only by 
his project of formulating a theory of knowledge or “philosophical 
psychology” that could provide an empirical and factual foundation 
for logical categories (which was attempted by Trendelenburg, once 
again, in reaction and as an alternative to Hegel’s metaphysical “logic”). 
Trendelenburg’s pronounced belief was that epistemology should be 
grounded on a rationally clarified psychology and that psychology 
in turn must rest on a philosophical basis, that is, a scientific  philo-
sophia prima of Aristotelian origin. In this spirit Trendelenburg sought 
to establish a ground for understanding logic, epistemology and psych-
ology in a metaphysics of nature with philosophy acting to ground the 
individual sciences. Trendelenburg writes:
 ... if the sciences now all point to logic, now to metaphysics, as to the 
universalized form of knowledge which they presuppose, then that 
form of knowledge which desires to understand the nature of science 
as such and to be  theory of science will have to embrace both logic and 
metaphysics. (Trendelenburg, quoted in Köhnke 1991, 22)  
 This “theory of science” eventually came to be established on the appro-
priation of Aristotelian psychology and logic. Trendelenburg’s concep-
tion of empirical psychology subsequently (much like Brentano’s after 
him) can be seen as based, not strictly on any kind of experimental 
psychology or an attempt to quantify “contents of consciousness”, but 
rather as one stemming from immediate experience and influenced 
by distinctly philosophical sources. Therefore, in mediating between 
the natural sciences (such as physics) and the human sciences (such as 
ethics) Trendelenburg viewed psychology as essential. And even though 
he never published a textbook or study dealing exclusively with the 
topic, Trendelenburg frequently expounded the position that a philo-
sophical psychology and theory of judgment clarifying conceptual 
knowledge would help explain experience and promote philosophy 
better than deductions from pure reason in speculative systems ever 
could. Psychological study therefore, formed the necessary precondi-
tion for epistemology, science, and philosophy itself.  13 More precisely, 
according to Trendelenburg, psychology had to perform the role of 
grounding the objective structures of nature and the categories of all 
epistemology and metaphysics, which, in turn, were grounded on 
principles derived directly from experience. Although the principles 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 43
of natural philosophy are to be properly studied by metaphysics they 
are also said, by Trendelenburg, to be grasped by concepts that can be 
reduced to psychological or subjective factors.  14 We will later see how 
echoes of this view would remain in Brentano’s thought both in the PES 
and in his later writings. 
 Other themes explored by Trendelenburg in his lectures, and rele-
vant to an analysis of Brentano’s thought, are the ideas and general 
approach the former articulated relating to philosophizing and the 
proper philosophical method. On these topics Trendelenburg drew 
largely from his critical expositions of Aristotle and Kant. Among the 
matters he discussed in depth in this area were: the differences between 
self-observation and introspection, the role of imagination and percep-
tion (inner and outer) to the attainment of knowledge, and the relation-
ship between conceptual thought and reality. In maintaining a fruitful 
relationship between, and stressing correspondence with, some of the 
most prominent natural philosophers and physiologists of the day  15 , 
Trendelenburg set out to engage in a sustained and lifelong dialogue 
with other thinkers in an attempt to elucidate the understanding of 
the psychic or mental aspects of experience and their interrelation with 
the physical. Trendelenburg’s writings and lectures explored what later 
came to be called the problem of psychophysics, while simultaneously 
attempting to articulate how the organic and teleological context of 
underlying physiological processes in rational living beings relate to 
psychic activity.  16 All these themes have their origin in Aristotle’s writ-
ings and, as we shall see, are developed and treated by Brentano in his 
own writings. Brentano’s most sustained mention of Trendelenburg is 
within the pages of his doctoral dissertation (and later first book). In 
this first work focusing on the  Metaphysics of Aristotle, much of what 
Brentano says about Trendelenburg is critical. Nonetheless it should 
be remembered that the early Brentano is focusing not on psychology 
exclusively but on metaphysics and metaphysical concerns such as the 
nature of being and the categorical properties of substances and acci-
dents. With this in mind let us turn our attention to Brentano’s earliest 
work on Aristotle.  
 2.3   On the several senses of being in Aristotle 
 An overview of his first book shows how Brentano is already in posses-
sion of a deep and philosophically mature grasp of the philosophical 
system of Aristotle. While he is more or less faithful to the Aristotelian 
texts, Brentano’s interests (unlike some other German Aristotelians of 

44 From Psychology to Phenomenology
the time) were not merely philological. Engaging philosophically with 
Aristotle and attempting to ground coherent doctrines in metaphysics 
and epistemology is the most evident feature of this, Brentano’s earliest 
book. The book begins with a setting of the stage and the presentation 
of an outline of the importance and centrality of the topic of being. 
Brentano follows Aristotle in maintaining that “being” is the proper 
subject of metaphysics, “[f]or being is the first which we grasp intellec-
tually, since it is the most general; in intellectual cognition, the more 
general is always the prior” (OSS, 1). First philosophy or metaphysics 
must therefore always begin with a focus on being, and it was also for 
this reason that Aristotle claimed that the subject of metaphysics was 
nothing less than “being  qua being” (cf. Met. IV. 1. 1003a21). 
 Thus we see here the foundations of Brentano’s Würzburg meta-
physics lectures, however the answers to the question of what being 
is, and how proper categories of being can be articulated, will push 
this early metaphysical orientation into a more critical epistemological 
examination of the origin of conceptual thought, of our ideas and 
of scientific knowledge. In his first book Brentano takes on the diffi-
cult question of being with an examination of how being or existence 
seems to be at once presupposed in the study of metaphysics and yet 
so essentially abstruse and obscure that it can only (if ever) be properly 
and coherently understood after prolonged and careful reflection. A 
large part of the problem in coming to know being or existence intel-
lectually seems to arise because everything that exists or can be (and 
also therefore can be conceived) must somehow  fall under the category 
of “being”. On the one hand, we want to say that everything that 
exists somehow has being. On the other hand, approaching the ques-
tion of being in this way can lead to the belief that being is, in some 
way, the highest possible genus, or at the very least not a species in 
which one can distinguish genus and difference.  17 Nonetheless, for 
Aristotle and thinkers who follow his lead, being is not and cannot be 
the highest genus because there is no possible specific difference that 
can be pointed to outside of the being of everything that can deter-
mine individual entities as existing. To put it another way, whatever 
exists, at least within the context of a realist metaphysics, has and must 
have being.  18 Now unless everything is one unchanging whole (an idea 
going back in western philosophy at least to the time of pre-Socratic 
Greek philosophers such as Parmenides) we have to account for the 
existence of individual changing things and also for how they share 
or “participate in” being  qua being (although, as we shall see below 
the term “participation” is one that, for various reasons, is avoided by 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 45
Brentano). In his text on Aristotle’s metaphysics Brentano goes on to 
formulate a position which maintains that being is “something” shared 
by all entities, but simultaneously is not literally something’ or some 
quality or quantity that can be predicated of itself. Being rather is the 
condition for all that exists as existing, as well as what makes possible 
all conceptual categories and categorical properties. But being is not 
itself in any way merely a concept, nor does it have, primarily, any kind 
of conceptual mode of subsisting. 
 According to Brentano, Aristotle first arrives at an understanding 
of the above, that is, of the problem of being, “by distinguishing the 
various senses which he found the name of being to comprise” (OSS, 
2). While the different natures that compose the universe (in classical, 
Aristotelian metaphysics, a hierarchy of forms) can be clearly classified 
and categorized, the concept of being – which is said to be shared by 
all of nature – is intrinsically equivocal. Brentano follows Aristotle’s 
lead by keeping in mind that “the possibility of deception must be 
greatest with being itself since, as we have already seen, it is the most 
general predicate” (ibid). Chapter 1 of Brentano’s study begins with an 
introduction of the Aristotelian fourfold distinction of being. A large 
part of Brentano’s thesis is the claim that in order to understand the 
Aristotelian notion of being we must grasp that being can be asserted in 
many ways. However, even if being manifests itself according to several 
significations, and is therefore not a synonymous term, the various 
senses of being are, nonetheless, not infinite. The sense of being can 
subsequently be reduced to four main groups. Brentano, once again 
closely following Aristotle, focuses on the various ways that being can 
be expressed. The relevant textual evidence is gathered for the most 
part from the  Metaphysics (Books Four, Six and Seven) as well as other 
writings of Aristotle (OSS, 3). The various sorts of being can subse-
quently be reduced to:
 (1) Being which has no existence whatever outside the understanding 
(privation, negation;  stereseis ,  apophaseis ), (2) The being of movement 
and of generation and corruption (process toward substance, destruc-
tion;  hodos eis ousian, phthora ); for though these are outside the mind, 
they do not have complete and perfect existence (cf. Physics III. 1. 
201a9); (3) Being which has complete but dependent existence (affec-
tions of substance, qualities, things productive and generative;  pathe 
ousias, poietika, genetika ); (4) The being of the substances ( ousia ). 
(OSS, 3–4)  19 

46 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 At the beginning of  Metaphysics Book Seven we find Aristotle making 
the following fourfold distinction:
 1)    being as “what a thing is” [ ti esti ] as something determined 
(also called the “essence” of a thing) and;  
 2)    a “this” [ tode ti ]; along with  
 3)    being as a quality [ poion ]; and  
 4)    being as a quantity [ poson ] (cf. OSS, 4).  
 Brentano notes that this later grouping is really just a subset or logical 
deduction from the third kind of being mentioned in  Metaphysics Book 
Six above, that is, being in the sense of the categories. According to 
Brentano, this fact makes the fourfold distinction given in Books Four 
and Six of the  Metaphysics the decisive grouping. It also alerts us to 
the role of being in the sense of the categories and how this merits 
close attention. There is a good reason for agreeing with Brentano here 
and arguing that Aristotle himself maintains this intimate connection 
between the (logical) categories and existence. In the  Metaphysics , Book 
Ten, Chapters 3–4 (1005b7–35) Aristotle can be (and has been) read as 
declaring that the law of non-contradiction (i.e. A is B and A is not B 
cannot both be true) is one that pertains to both being and logic.  20 
Historically the principle or law of non-contradiction was frequently 
linked to the principle of sufficient reason in traditional metaphysics 
(i.e. for everything that happens, x, there must be sufficient reason 
for why x is so or exists or else for why x is false or impossible). The 
above principles, taken together, were then conceived as fundamental 
for granting intelligibility to all experience and to being itself. For this 
reason these principles were frequently made the basis of any study of 
being or reality. Claimed to have universal scope, these a priori and 
metaphysical principles are the foundation of both classical or Greek 
metaphysics as well as later formulations of the principles of causality 
and the regularity of experience that formed the basis of many scien-
tific theories.  21 
 In his first book Brentano is working within the same tradition of 
classical metaphysics and developing a coherent systematic ontology 
of Aristotelian origin. He differs from later rationalists in that the role 
he places on pure conceptual analysis is limited as a guide to deter-
mining the structures of existence. For example it is not by concep-
tual analysis alone that the non-logical categories and concepts, such as 
those of substance or the part-whole basis of material relations, can be 
attained. In keeping with the Aristotelian emphasis on psychological 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 47
and empirical evidence to determine the categories necessary for 
grounding our knowledge of being, Brentano’s rationalism is tempered, 
even at this stage, by the empirical method. 
 However, the lengthiest chapter of Brentano’s study (chapter 5) takes 
up the very important problem of analyzing “Being According to the 
Figures of the Categories” and so the relationship between conceptual 
thought and existence is very much the focus of this early study. Later 
on in Brentano’s text the three other major groups or classes of being 
are taken up: accidental being (covered in chapter 2 of Brentano’s book), 
being in the sense of being true (Chapter 3), and potential and actual 
being (taken up in Chapter 4). The point of devoting so much space to 
the class of being in the sense of the categories is said by Brentano to 
be necessary for a special reason. That reason is not, Brentano main-
tains, because all the Aristotelian categories are to be considered the 
most important or primary kinds or modes of being, but rather because 
being in the sense of the categories is said to bring us closest to under-
standing the primary mode of being. This primary mode of being is, 
in turn, said to be nothing less than being in the sense of substance, 
which Brentano interprets as paradigmatically a concrete actual thing. 
Only the category of substance holds the honor of central or primary 
mode of being. Other categories, such as “quantity,” and “quality”, for 
example, are also of central importance, but some of the remaining 
categories such as, “relation” (or what Aristotle calls “ pros ti, ”) are said 
to be almost completely dependent and parasitic on actual or substan-
tial being. Subsequent supplementary categories most closely related to 
substance (quantity and quality) are also said to be further in centrality, 
and therefore in importance, from the highest mode of being (i.e. being 
in the sense of substance). Brentano devotes the most space in his study 
to “being in the sense of the categories”, for two reasons: 1) because 
these are said to comprise a great multiplicity of senses themselves 
and also contain “rich difficulties as well as results” (OSS, 49); and 
2) because a survey of other German neo-Aristotelian positions has 
led Brentano to deliberate carefully on how the categories of Aristotle 
relate to and manifest an interrelationship between language, logic 
and metaphysics.  22  
 Brentano’s approach at this stage is still influenced, even if negatively, 
by Trendelenburg (the latter’s  Geschichte der Kategorienlehre , for example, 
is cited frequently). Nonetheless Brentano’s approach to understanding 
Aristotle displays an independence of thought that will go on to 
characterize his mature thought. The most important aspects of this 
study of being to his subsequent philosophical development are the 

48 From Psychology to Phenomenology
following: 1) The mereological substance/accident framework under-
lying the examination of being given by Brentano in his first book. 
2) The hierarchical framework of being, articulating a sense of lesser 
or lower levels of being that rises to a sense of the highest or proper 
kind of being (known as substance).  23 Here we can also note that what-
ever substance ultimately is, its place in Brentano’s system is that of 
unified whole to distinct parts (which it is frequently, at this stage, 
described as containing). There is therefore a pronounced notion of 
mereological essentialism (i.e. a part-whole framework for articulating 
ontological matters) introduced at this stage in his thought. Brentano’s 
mereological essentialism can be described as forming the basis for a 
part-whole ontology that will, however, only be developed in later writ-
ings. At the most basic level, according to the early Brentano, there are 
wholes (e.g. “substances”, such as: a horse, a man etc.). These “wholes” are 
composed of parts or properties (e.g. “accidents”, such as the individual 
horse’s tail or mane, the individual man’s arms, legs, hair, etc.). And 
finally there is clearly an asymmetrical relationship holding between 
the whole (the individual existing entity with a unified and individu-
ated body) and the parts or accidents. Ontologically we can say that the 
horse can exist without a tail or without one of its legs, but neither the 
removed tail nor the removed leg can itself be called a proper horse. In 
other words, the whole is greater than the parts and contains (in various 
ways and senses) the parts in a manner that if all the existing parts 
were completely removed from the substance, the whole itself would be 
completely dissolved (in a process that Aristotle called “corruption”). 
Thus, on the above framework, part and whole stand for very general 
relations that hold (formally at least) with a seemingly immediate and 
evident logical necessity.  24 
 What is not clear in this early study is how the objectivity of the 
categories, said to be grasped in proper judgments, are to be guaranteed. 
Brentano follows Aristotle in dividing being into manifold senses. One 
of these senses, the most important, in fact, is said to be the objective or 
categorical sense of the predication of quantity and quality and other 
attributes that follow from the categories. Brentano writes that “being 
is the first [correlate] which we grasp intellectually, since it is the most 
general; in intellectual cognition, the more general is always the prior” 
(OSS, 1). However, for Brentano, thought can predicate various categor-
ical properties through its relation to either objects or its own contents. 
Categorical thought, or presentations, as he soon learned, cannot, 
however, always be taken either to signify existence, nor can they, 
in any straightforward sense, bring with them in an evident manner 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 49
(or deduce the existence of) extra-mental objects. Predication depends 
on thought, but thought depends on an existing thinker (the substance 
and whole of which any thought is a part). Brentano is quite clear that 
“no accidental being is prior to that which is in itself, [and] ... in the 
order of knowing independent being [ on kath “hauto ]is prior”, (OSS, 7). 
In order for an existence claim to be made therefore, the actual object 
or content of the presentation must conform with the true evident and 
affirmative judgment signifying the prior existence of an independent 
being (substance).  Being qua being or existence as all of reality on this 
view is therefore a higher principle than what can be called the collec-
tion of actual entities (and existence as total reality is said to be only 
analogous to the Aristotelian category of substance). However, we are 
most acquainted, not with  being qua being , but with immediate facts and 
more precisely with the factual reality of our own mental activity. To 
resolve these tensions Brentano moves towards a more complete study 
of psychology. This begins with his analysis of Aristotle’s  De Anima . 
 2.4  The psychology of Aristotle 
 Brentano’s next major and sustained work on Aristotle focuses on the 
text known as  de Anima . After publication of the  Psychology of Aristotle 
(in 1867) Brentano directed his attention to the subject matter of 
psychology.  The Psychology of Aristotle is therefore important for effect-
ively establishing the foundation upon which the system in the PES 
will be constructed. The shift from logical and metaphysical to expli-
citly psychological themes is manifest already in the introduction to 
Brentano’s study of  De Anima . Brentano writes, for example, of how 
a “secure yardstick” for the evaluation of any philosophical system 
is the doctrine of cognitive faculties espoused by the thinker under 
consideration (PA, 1). In the  Psychology of Aristotle Brentano posits an 
intimate relation between logic and psychology, stating how “the rela-
tion between psychological epistemology and logic” is held to be of 
central importance to philosophy in general (PA, 181n 1). The assertion 
that an intimate relationship must hold between logic and psychology 
is sometimes called “psychologism”.  25 However, the theme and context 
of the psychologism under discussion at this stage is the foundation of 
knowledge as understood in Aristotle’s philosophical psychology. We 
are told, for example, of how:
 In logic Aristotle was the teacher of centuries. Thus one should begin 
any investigation of his (psychological) epistemology with a favorable 

50 From Psychology to Phenomenology
disposition, and any contribution to its elucidation, in particular 
any attempt at clarifying one of its most important, but at the same 
time most obscure points, ought to be of interest to any friend of 
philosophy. We refer to Aristotle’s doctrine of the  nous poiētikos , the 
investigation of which is the main task of this inquiry. (PA, 2)  
 Aristotle, very briefly and very tersely, discusses the doctrine of the  nous 
poiētikos or active intellect in  De Anima Book Three, chapter 5: 
 [T]here is an intellect characterized by the capacity to become all 
things, and an intellect characterized by that to bring all things 
about, and to bring them about in just the way that a state, like light, 
does. (For in a way, light also  makes things that are potentially colors, 
colors in actuality.) Now this latter intellect is separate, unaffected 
and unmixed, being in substance activity. 
 For in all cases that which acts is superior to that which is affected, 
and the principle to its matter. And while knowledge in the state 
of potentiality, though temporally prior in the individual case, does 
not in general even have temporal priority. Nor is it the case that the 
intellect is now thinking, now not. It is further, in its separate state 
that the intellect is just that which it is, and it is this alone that is 
immortal and eternal, though we have no memory, as the separate 
intellect is unaffected, while the intellect that is affected is perish-
able, and in any case thinks nothing without the other. (Aristotle 
1986, 204–05)  
 Commenting on this passage, John Rist observes:
 Of all the Aristotelian doctrines perhaps the most difficult is 
that concerning the Active and Passive Intellects which we find 
in the short fifth chapter of the third book of the  De anima [ sic ]. 
Interpretations of this chapter have been almost as numerous as inter-
preters, and it would be naïve to expect at this stage to be definitive. 
(Rist 1971, 505)  
 It is certainly true that the doctrine of the  nous poiētikos in Aristotle 
(and more precisely what it is and how it relates to the “ nous pathe-
tikos” or “passive intellect”) is highly problematic. In his study Brentano 
takes the position that the active intellect is a consistent and coherent 
aspect of Aristotle’s philosophy of mind. Nonetheless Brentano imme-
diately points out various hermeneutic difficulties involved in making 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 51
a coherent reading of the Aristotelian  nous poiētikos possible. For 
example, the active intellect is simultaneously described by Aristotle as 
both “separated ( chōrison )” and “capable of being separated” ( chōricest 
hai ) ( ... as Brentano elucidates “ ... evidently in the sense of a separation 
that does not yet exist”, PA, 2). The active intellect is also said to be 
unaffected but to have an affection ( paschein ) ascribed to it [“evidently 
in another sense of affection” (ibid)]. It is called something immaterial 
( aneu hylēs ) but also said to have a matter ( hylē ). Finally Aristotle uses 
the term  nous (or thought) to understand or describe the actuality of 
the active intellect, but the same term according to Brentano is used by 
Aristotle [in various texts] to denote:
 a)  a disposition that can be acquired,  
 b)  a cognitive power we have by nature allowing for the generation of 
knowledge,  
 c)  something substantial,  
 d)   a faculty of (a) substance,  
 e)   an active principle,  
 f)  that which receives the effect thereof,  
 g)   a thing impassable and spiritual,  
 h)  a thing that is subject to affection and corruption,  
 i)   a sensory thing, i.e. a being with sensation,  
 j)   sensation itself (cf. PA, 2–3).  
 Obviously some sense must be made of the above ambiguous claims. 
And it can be noted that to this very day there are commentators who 
think that the entire doctrine of the active intellect in Aristotle is 
either an afterthought (and therefore essentially an  ad hoc addition to 
the rest of his system) or else some remnant of Platonism from which 
Aristotle could never successfully extricate himself. One strategy for 
dealing with these interpretative problems is to conclude that Aristotle 
did not really mean what he says about the active intellect in  De Anima 
to apply to human beings.  26 Brentano, however, takes the opposite 
approach. 
 Brentano starts his  Psychology of Aristotle with an examination of the 
views of earlier Aristotelians.   27 The rest of Brentano’s study outlines his 
own reading of Aristotle’s philosophy of animated life and cognition 
and then presents a solution to the problem of attaining a coherent 
and holistic understanding of the active intellect in relation to both 
the passive intellect and the living body. Before giving an outline of the 
exegetical solution that his reading proposes, Brentano points out that 

52 From Psychology to Phenomenology
there are no extra or previously unexamined writings of Aristotle that 
can clarify the matters at hand. That is, the same textual passages that 
lead to the variety of historically incompatible interpretations all stem 
from the same source: the brief and enigmatic mention of the active 
intellect in the fifth chapter of the third book of Aristotle’s  De Anima . 
“But although we have nothing new” Brentano writes, “it is perhaps 
possible to make use of some of the source material in a new way” (PA, 
26). According to Brentano, this can be accomplished by focusing on the 
available textual evidence and refraining from suggestions or unsub-
stantiated claims that there is any kind of direct and explicit mention 
of the active intellect in Aristotle’s logical writings or in the  Metaphysics , 
even if, according to Brentano, many have been tempted to explicitly 
introduce that doctrine into these other works. The logical writings, 
and more precisely Aristotle’s  Prior and  Posterior Analytics , contain 
passages wherein Aristotle writes about the origins of intellectual or 
scientific cognition. These will be both helpful and important, we are 
told, because many aspects of the conditions for intellectual cognition 
that do not explicitly mention the active intellect nonetheless point to 
a proper understanding of Aristotle’s doctrine. Brentano maintains that 
the framework developed by Aristotle for the understanding of cogni-
tion (and intellectual thought as a whole) must have been undertaken 
with both deliberate intent and with the ultimate goal of arriving at a 
systematic, coherent and holistic account of the phenomena of mental 
life. 
 Scholars of Aristotle are divided on the purpose and intention of the 
 De Anima . A commonly accepted reading of Aristotle’s psychological 
works holds that the soul is best understood as a principle of life (and 
more precisely a unifying principle granting to living substances the 
capacity for self-movement or internal motion). In fact, in  De Anima 
Aristotle considers not only human souls but, importantly, those of 
all living things in order to better arrive at an understanding of this 
“life-principle”. Although this vitalist starting point is never criticized or 
subjected to scrutiny, several methodological or investigative problems 
are nonetheless raised immediately by Aristotle at the beginning of  De 
Anima . For example, Aristotle asks: Should the investigation of the soul 
start with the whole soul or its parts? Thereafter, Aristotle immediately 
brings up the important question of whether the soul even has parts (cf. 
Aristotle 1986, 127/  De An . 403a). Aristotle also immediately presents his 
conception of the soul as that of a “substantial being”. More precisely, 
the soul is said to be the first active principle of a living substance [in 
Brentano’s words it is the “ground of a substantial distinction”, PA, 28]. 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 53
This leads to the question of what kind of substance the soul can be? 
To ascertain the above we can turn to Brentano, who writes of how, to 
determine the latter, we must direct our attention to the movements 
and operations (the effects) of the soul itself (ibid, 29). Another major 
presupposition of Aristotle’s thought about the soul, and pointing to 
another important factor for attaining a proper understanding of his 
natural or biological writings, is his presupposition that nature does 
nothing in vain. This teleological tenet can be seen to underlie both 
Aristotle’s understanding of natural science (or philosophy of nature) 
and metaphysics.  28 For Aristotle there is a  teleological structure present 
in nature. Nature always acts towards an end and for a purpose. The 
process of classification that Aristotle undertakes in his description and 
analysis of the parts and functions of the soul therefore, is one that 
takes for granted this teleological and purposeful aspect of reality. On 
the Aristotelian framework every material body is, in fact, an informed 
body connected to efficient and what are called final and material 
causes [ aiton ]. In the case of the tripartite soul present in all rational and 
living human beings (i.e. all human souls  qua human, and therefore 
containing vegetative, sensitive and intellectual powers), each special 
activity is said to manifest a distinct manner of participating in the 
likeness that is the living individual agent. 
 Each “part” of the soul manifests its own distinct form of striving 
or actualization of latent power. The unity of human life, on the 
Aristotelian view, dictates that each part or division of the soul depends 
on the others in its drive to fulfill its activity. The subsequent “depend-
ence relationship”, however, is far from simple. For example, the vege-
tative soul is said to build the organs and nurture the body. In allowing 
for the sensitive part to actualize its nature, the vegetative soul simul-
taneously becomes the necessary condition for the latter to arise. The 
intellectual powers of appropriate souls, insofar as they are connected 
with the body and cannot operate without the simultaneous activity 
and support of both the sensitive and vegetative powers, (cf. PA, 43) 
are nonetheless called the highest and most noble. We are, in effect, 
presented with what can be called Aristotle’s principle of psycho-
physics. The above understanding of the mind and body is, further-
more, based on Aristotle’s part-whole relation between different general 
or basic capacities and powers. These conceptual distinctions will also, 
in a transformed and reinterpreted way, become an important aspect 
of Brentano’s own psychology. After the introduction and preliminary 
discussion of the scope of his work, the rest of Book One of Aristotle’s 
 De Anima focuses almost exclusively on presenting a historical survey of 

54 From Psychology to Phenomenology
earlier thinkers’ views on what the soul is or could be. In our attempts to 
gain insight into the philosophical and analytical content of Aristotle’s 
text, we can therefore follow Brentano’s own commentary and analysis, 
which focuses on the claim made early in Book Two of  De Anima that 
the body and soul are (in no unequivocal way) one and the same entity 
(and cf. Aristotle, 1986, 157/  De. An. 2.1. 412b 5–15). 
 Because the soul is not an improper or removable and distinct part of 
the body  29 it must, according to Aristotle, be viewed as an essential “inner 
principle” of the living thing. As such, the soul is intimately related to 
the substance it actualizes and keeps alive. A large part of the strategy 
employed by Aristotle seems to first critically take aim at the doctrine 
of Plato. In presenting a tacit criticism of Platonic dualism of body and 
soul (although Brentano does not dwell on this) Aristotle simultaneously 
develops his own position. Nonetheless this presents a tension in his 
text because the soul is effectively said to be both identical to the exist-
ence or the actuality of what makes a living body what it is, that is, the 
body as living organism, while simultaneously described as something 
“immaterial”, that is, a principle not connected to the material compo-
nents of the body in any direct way. The soul for Aristotle, therefore, can 
be read to be one substance with the body as its material aspect. This 
introduces the doctrine of hylomorphism (literally matter-form unity), 
which once again underlies both Aristotle’s metaphysical and scientific 
doctrines. Everything that exists in the “sublunary” sphere of nature 
is, for Aristotle, a form and matter compound. In a metaphysical sense 
the material and the formal aspect of things are called “principles” and 
as such are best viewed as intangible and not interchangeable with the 
concrete or quantitative properties of things, for example, aspects or 
parts of things that we can perceive through the senses (even if we 
can, arguably, perceive their effects). Nonetheless, according to later 
Aristotelians, matter and form are better viewed as the potential and 
the actual aspect of any existing thing or substance.  30 Aristotle writes of 
how “[t]he soul is the first actuality [ entelechy ] of a natural body which 
potentially has life” (cf. Aristotle 1986, 157/ De An . 2. 1. 412 a27). As the 
first actuality of a living body, Brentano notes in his study, this means 
that the soul is not separate or properly separable from the individual 
body in which it inheres: “it is in it and is one with it, just as accidental 
forms and accidental matters are one and the same with the latter” (PA, 
34). This reading is borne out by the analogies Aristotle himself gives in 
 De Anima for elucidating the relationship between soul and body.  31 
 Although it is true that Aristotle does not explicitly mention the 
active intellect anywhere outside the  De Anima treatise, nonetheless, 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 55
“ ... the intellectual [for Aristotle] is directly related to the sensory 
in the nature of man” (PA, 28). Based on the analogous relationship 
between intellectual and sensory processes, Brentano thinks we are 
in a good position, theoretically, to better understand the doctrine 
because, regarding discussion of the latter [sensory powers], we luckily 
possess many detailed and lengthy passages in the Aristotelian corpus 
to refer to. 
 According to Brentano’s reading of Aristotle’s psychology, the soul 
is said to be the form of the whole in all its parts. The mereological 
framework of Brentano’s earlier study (outlined above) is clearly not 
abandoned here. Brentano’s first work on psychology, however, adds a 
qualification to his earlier ontological framework by articulating how 
a multiplicity of parts can be distinguished in the soul (PA, 37). Using 
the analogy of “parts of the body” (organs, eyes, fingers, etc.) – that is, 
physical parts of the whole – we are told here of how we can also speak 
of “parts of the soul” which are described as “logical” or “conceptual” 
rather than physical. In the latter case the part-whole distinction can 
be viewed as twofold. In examining the operations of the soul, we can 
distinguish between i) powers and ii) levels of powers, both of which 
can be viewed as parts of the whole (i.e. of the soul). Within the domain 
of powers Aristotle distinguishes logical parts ( differentia ) of the soul’s 
nature and within the same domain of powers there are also said to be 
levels of activity among the powers. The main levels of the soul’s activity 
or bodily “ensoulment” are three: the vegetative, the sensible and the 
intellectual.  32 Because appetite is found in all parts of the soul,  33 each 
part is said to possess its own teleological activity but also to be driven 
by and dependent on the “blind drive” manifested in the vegetative 
part, “directed toward the preservation and perfection of the individual 
and the species” (PA, 44). The vegetative power (manifesting this vital 
striving) is the only manner of life activity possessed by plants and it is 
thus called an “unconscious natural inclination” by Brentano. However, 
“ ... [i]n this case the form through which the cause is like the effect is 
contained in the cause in the same way in which it will be contained 
in the affected object (after it has been affected)” (PA, 44). This is an 
important point for the discussion of “modes” or “kinds” of affection 
that will be outlined in dealing with both the intellect and sensitive 
soul in Brentano’s later writings. For example, according to Brentano’s 
reading of Aristotle, the sensitive part of the soul (in contrast to the 
vegetative) is said to manifest motion but, in contrast to the former 
activity, a “conscious striving” here directs the motion. The motion of 
a life-form possessing both a vegetative and sensitive soul therefore, 

56 From Psychology to Phenomenology
is one that is: “ ... altogether different from the inclination that gener-
ates the activity of plants and lifeless bodies” (ibid). In the former case, 
“the form toward which the movement is directed is  in the causing agent 
as a representation [ Vorstellung ]” (PA, 44, with my emphasis).  34 We shall 
see below why the importance of this placement of representations or 
what are later called “presentations” [ Vorstellungen ] are important to 
Brentano’s understanding of human cognition and mental activity in 
general.  35 
 After a brief discussion of the sensitive soul, Brentano moves on to 
an analysis of the intellectual soul. He writes of how, within the intel-
lectual soul, a general concept (e.g. of a house) can exist in the intellect 
of an agent (e.g. a builder). The concept in this case can “awaken” an 
inclination of will and can do so in a completely different manner from 
how the vegetative drives or sensory affections affect life functions or 
movement in beings without rational intellects. Although it is true that 
in the case of the intellect, the general concept or idea stands in an 
analogous relationship as the representation or the “form” that directs 
the sensitive soul to movement stands to the desiring soul, nonetheless, 
in the case of the intellect, the act of will is brought forward through 
a higher-level  rational planning. In rational wills, subsequently, intel-
lectual desire often leads to purposeful action of a higher kind (e.g. in 
the above case the holding of the concept of “house” in mind by the 
builder can result in the building of a house). Although these higher 
types of action, involving thought and deliberation, are fundamen-
tally different from the desires of the lower parts of the soul they are 
nonetheless still very much dependent on the sensitive and vegetative 
desires. This is because both the energies and desires of the vegetative 
and sensitive soul are needed to a) sustain movement, b) mediate the 
motion of the limbs, and c) actualize (as efficient causes) the intelligent 
goal consciously held by the agent (cf. PA, 44). We witness in the above 
analysis a very early attempt to treat of what was called the “problem of 
psychophysics” in early experimental psychology. Brentano therefore 
reads Aristotle’s text as both differentiating between, and attempting 
to account for, the different but dependent levels of physiological and 
mental processes. 
 The highlight and focus of Brentano’s study, of course, is the active 
intellect. In Brentano’s overview of the latter, the various articulations 
of the interaction between the different powers of the soul and his 
description of cognitive activity and affection/sensation can be listed 
as being of the greatest importance for us. The mode in which the intel-
lect is distinguished from sensation is seminal to Brentano’s reading 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 57
of the active intellect. It is also essential for demarcating, at this stage, 
Brentano’s understanding of the unity or separate modes of psycho-
logical activity delimited by thought and sensation respectively. 
 Perception in general, notes Aristotle, can be spoken of in two ways: 
as a potential perceiving (e.g. the power to see of a closed but healthy 
and fully functioning eye) and as actual perception (when the same 
eyes are open and the activity of seeing occurs). For Aristotle, being 
affected [being moved and being active] are in a sense all analogous. 
Sense perception depends on sense objects, and each sense (Aristotle 
writes in  De Anima , Book Two, Chapter 6) has its own sense object(s). For 
Aristotle these sense objects can be spoken of in three ways and, subse-
quently, perception can be conceptualized in two different manners:
 What is called sensible in the first and second ways is sensed as 
such, but what is sensible in the third way only  per accidens . Of the 
first two, one is the proper object of each individual sense, the other 
is common to all senses. (Aristotle  De An . 2. 4. 416b3 as quoted in 
PA, 56)  
 And again, perception can be of objects in themselves or of the process 
of seeing obtaining and holding incidentally “on the side”. Of things 
perceived directly and in themselves – some objects are special to the 
individual senses that perceive them; others are called common. A 
special sense object, for Aristotle, is one that does not admit of being 
perceived by another sense. It is impossible for the agent to be deceived 
about the immediate perception of special sense objects. As examples, 
Aristotle lists “color” for the sense of sight, and “sounds” in the case of 
hearing. By claiming that we cannot be deceived in the above cases, 
Aristotle means that while we are seeing some color – any object – we 
know that an act of sight is taking place, and likewise for hearing a 
sound; smelling a smell, etc. But we cannot “hear” colors and we cannot 
“see” sounds with the same immediacy (and again, for Aristotle, we 
only hear the sounds from the same object we see as mediated through 
the above mentioned “special common sense” which will later be 
called “perception of perception” by Brentano). For Aristotle there is 
also a difference between the two different kinds of so-called “common 
senses” that further distinguishes them from the special. An example of 
a “common” sense is touch. We can touch a wide range of objects. Even 
so, the sense of touch is said to be a common sense in a very different 
manner than the general common sense later known as the “ sensus 
communes ”. Although the common senses must take as their objects 

58 From Psychology to Phenomenology
“common”, that is, non-specific objects, these common objects (more 
properly qualities or phenomena common to all senses) can be listed 
as: movement, rest, number (or quantity), shape and size. The general 
common sense also takes the above along with the common sense of 
touch and the information obtained from all of the special senses into 
account. It is, in effect, the general common sense that Brentano will 
later call “inner perception”. 
 For our purposes another significant aspect of the study of Aristotle’s 
 De Anima that should be mentioned is how Brentano articulates the 
special role of intellectual or rational activity that must take place in 
order to establish objective knowledge. The intellectual part of the soul 
is discussed by Brentano in Book Two, Part Four of his study (PA, 74–161). 
The first question raised in the discussion of the intellectual soul is that 
of whether there: “[is] ... in man a cognizing faculty of sensory cogni-
tion, if not in subject, then at least in being?” (PA, 74). The subsequent 
procedure adopted to arrive at an answer to the above is said to have 
been the same one used by Aristotle to delimit the number and kinds 
or unity and multiplicity of the cognizing faculty. Placing our focus on 
acts and objects, there is said to be no detectable or existing organ (i.e. 
dependent sensible faculty) that can grasp general concepts. This being 
the case, Brentano infers that there exists a separate faculty that can 
grasp concepts. Brentano writes:
 We have in us the concept of color and the concept of tone in general, 
and these representations cannot possibly be counted among the 
sensory images of sight and hearing. For sight does indeed cognize 
white and black and each particular color, but color as such it does 
not cognize. (PA, 74)  36 
 We do not “sense” general concepts – or abstract objects such as meta-
physical and mathematical concepts that is, number, substance, surface, 
line, square, circle, etc.). This begs the question: with what faculty do 
we apprehend these general concepts? We must have another faculty for 
cognizing them and this faculty is nothing less than what we call the 
intellect (PA, 75). The intellect is described as both different from and 
similar to the senses. Aristotle noted how earlier thinkers even tried to 
reduce the first to the second; a strategy still very much alive in modern 
philosophy of mind. Thinking – insofar as it is similar to sensing – is, 
and must be, an affection by the intelligible in what is an improper 
sense. Here we come once again to the important distinction, made by 
Aristotle and highlighted by Brentano, between affection as proper and 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 59
affection as special or improper. In the first case (proper affection) the 
agent and the thing affected have a genus in common. In the second 
case (improper affection) the sustaining perfection of what is potentially 
the agent is said to be only potentially but not actually the thing (PA, 
89). In other words in cases of proper affection we are dealing with what 
Aristotle calls an alteration in the proper or authentic sense of the term. 
Thereafter Brentano writes “[Aristotle] maintains the spiritual nature 
of the intellectual soul with the same conviction with which his great 
teacher had asserted it”. And the intellectual soul is also described by 
Brentano as something spiritual [i.e. immaterial:  geistig ] of which the 
intellect is a proper faculty (PA, 76). It is said to be in virtue of this “spir-
itual” nature that the intellectual soul can take in (through its essen-
tially non-material activity) the formal aspect, or intelligible formula, of 
things without their matter. In making the intellectual soul non-material 
but nonetheless somehow tied to an embodied subject, Aristotle avoids 
the mystical doctrine of anamnesis or learning as recollection that Plato 
relied upon in order to explain the origin of conceptual thought.  37  
 According to Aristotle, by contrast, the forms are said to be in the 
things actually and immanently but only potentially in the intellect.  38 
This explanation is complemented by the Aristotelian doctrine of the 
soul as embodied; a direct implication of this doctrine being that an 
intimate connection must be presupposed between higher-level rational 
thought and the sensual activity of the body. That this proves to be the 
case is evident, for example, where Aristotle describes in his  Posterior 
Analytics how the “connate discriminating capacity” (perception) leads 
in some animals to retention of perceptual data (i.e. memory).  
 [F]rom perception comes memory, as we call it, and from memory 
(when it occurs often in connection with the same thing), experi-
ence; for memories that are many in number form a single experi-
ence. And from experience, or from the whole universal that has 
come to rest in the soul ... there comes the principle of skill and of 
understanding [i.e. principles of practical and theoretical reason]. 
(Aristotle 1984, 165–66/ Anal. Post . 2. 19, 99b 35–100a 10)  
 According to Aristotle, there is no intellectual activity without sensa-
tion and no concepts without experience, which again require sensa-
tion and memory (i.e. retention of sensory data) to be actualized. The 
full implications of the above are many. For example, the qualities that 
objects of sensation possess are not (and cannot be) objectively present 
in the intellect. They are rather said to be subjects [in the sense that they 

60 From Psychology to Phenomenology
contain properties] upon which the intellect and body, and the latter 
with or more precisely through the organs, acts. The action of sensa-
tion thereafter produces “images” in the intellect and allows us to grasp 
concepts, and these again have no underlying physical medium. For this 
reason, as Aristotle says, the intellect can potentially know all things (as 
intelligible, however, and not as sensible). In  De Anima we are told: “the 
soul is in a way all the things that exist” (Aristotle 1986, 210/  De. An. 
3.8. 431b 20). Brentano, in his study, will follow Aristotle in emphasizing 
how concepts are not like sensible qualities. For one thing, concepts are 
devoid of representations – by which seems to be meant that the act 
or mental concept in the mind is not itself material or reducible to the 
content of a mental image or bodily activity. As Brentano writes: “The 
intellect ... becomes all intelligible things and is therefore not by nature 
any of its objects in actuality” (PA, 80). The implication here, once again, 
being that the objects in the intellect are not sensible but, rather, intelli-
gible objects, which can subsequently be called general concepts. 
 Here we are moving into a theoretical understanding of mental acts, 
an area that will be of special importance for a proper conceptual eluci-
dation of the same topic in Brentano’s  Psychology . Brentano writes:
 ... the intellect does not by nature have a single thing actually within 
it [ nicht ein einziges der Dinge wirklich in sich ], and ... its operation is an 
affection [ ein Leiden ]; ... it comes to know corporeal things, but ... it 
also knows itself; that it is itself mental [ er selbst sei geistig ], that it is 
free of all corporeal characteristics; finally, that, although it knows 
itself, it does not know itself either always or in the beginning, but 
only secondarily. (PA, 88/PdA, 136)  
 All of the themes expressed in the above passage are later taken up and 
developed in the  Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint . The above 
points can be divided and elucidated as follows:
 The intellect actualizes (acts) to bring about what it perceives and 
1. 
therefore contains only in potency. Namely, The forms or actuality 
of things.  
 In receiving corporeal things in the above way the intellect “also 
2. 
receives itself” (ibid, 89).  
 In knowing or attaining knowledge or reception of the unintelligible 
3. 
aspect of things (i.e. Aristotelian matter) the intellect nonetheless 
immediately and accurately has knowledge of itself as knowing or 
acting.  39 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 61
 How can the intellect accomplish the above? Brentano answers:
 [T]he intelligibility of the apprehended body and of the intellect can 
be of one genus, even though the body has no property in common 
with the intellect. For that is intelligible whose mode of being is 
intellectual; and the intellect as well as the corporeal objects are 
contained in the intellect in the mode of intellectual things when it 
thinks them. (PA, 90)  
 Presupposed above, therefore, are very strong ontological commit-
ments (specifically the articulation of different modes of being) as well 
as metaphysical principles or causes. For example, substance as indi-
vidually determined and existing as a “hylomorphic” unity, as well 
as species or form intentionally “existing” [as Brentano will later say] 
in the intellect. As a self-reflexive and non-physical unity, Brentano 
holds that, “the intellect can become known as it is; its absolutely last 
difference is also its last specific difference”, that is, its last intelligible 
difference. For this reason we have not only a general concept of our 
intellect but an immediate intellectual self-consciousness of the intel-
lect as individual. “We grasp the “I think” with the same evidence 
with which we recognize that there is thought in general; our own 
individual being is just as clear to us and certain as being as such, 
which is the first principle of metaphysics” (PA, 90). This Cartesian 
reading of Aristotle is of interest and foreshadows both his descrip-
tions of “psychic phenomena” (cf. Chapter 4 below) and what will 
be called their accompanying “inner perception” later articulated by 
Brentano as the epistemological basis of his empirical or descriptive 
act psychology in the PES. In his study of Aristotelian psychology, 
Brentano adds:
 The intellect is completely and with the highest intelligibility intelli-
gible, while corporeal things permit, as already noted, only an inde-
terminate and general knowledge, and are not equally knowable in 
all their determinations. Our knowledge of them is more certain and 
clear, and we have them within us in a more intelligible state, the 
more they have been alienated from their natural mode of existence 
by abstraction. (PA, 90)  
 The thing, as it exists outside the mind (i.e. as it naturally exists), cannot 
be known in its proper mode of being. As a physical thing, and there-
fore – within the Aristotelian framework – as containing matter, we 

62 From Psychology to Phenomenology
must abstract the formal aspect from the object in mental acts. But if 
the intellect is supremely intelligible, that is, completely free of matter 
and able to grasp itself completely (allowing Brentano will later say, 
for an infallible mode of “inner perception”), why is it that there are 
aspects of the mental that are hidden from, and so, unknown to us? 
The distinction between potential and actual knowledge is pertinent 
here. Brentano writes: “the intellect ... is not by nature actual thought, 
but the mere potentiality of thoughts, as the sensitive faculty is the 
mere potentiality of sensations” (ibid, 92). And because the intellect is 
dependent upon the body and sensory representations, (which always 
accompany and ground intellectual activity) this also introduces limita-
tions. “The person born blind not only lacks the sensory color images”, 
writes Brentano, “but also does not have a concept of color and in the 
same way a person deaf from birth lacks not only the sensory represen-
tation of the particular tones but also knowledge of sound in general” 
(PA, 95). 
 At this point we have outlined the basis for Brentano’s empiri-
cism and traced its Aristotelian origin. All knowledge originates in 
the senses and this implies that, “the bodily part of man is somehow 
involved in the activities of the intellect” (ibid). But this should not 
be read to imply a negation of what was earlier determined to be the 
immateriality of the intellect. Although sensory-based cognition is, 
“the necessary precondition for the generation of the corresponding 
thought in the intellect” (ibid), this does not imply, claims Brentano, 
a reduction of the mental to the physical. Although bodily states can 
(and evidently do) disrupt and affect thought, the two phenomena are 
said to be distinct and also claimed to be known with different levels 
of certainty. Nonetheless, peculiarities result from the above position. 
Brentano notes how, according to Aristotle: “we never think a general 
thought that is not accompanied by a particular sensory image” (PA, 
95). In his  De Memoria et Reminiscentia Aristotle writes of how “without 
a presentation, intellectual activity is impossible” (Aristotle, 1984, 
237:  De memor. et remin . 1. 449b 30). Thought and images are there-
fore intimately related, as are sense impressions and external sensible 
objects, but there exists what Brentano calls “an analogical relation” 
between the two (cf. PA, 96). At this point, and in order to better under-
stand the above, we can turn our focus to the distinction between the 
passive and active intellect. 
 In the intellect of the individual man potential thought is earlier 
than actual thought. This is inferred from experience. We are not born 
thinking and have no access to higher concepts or principles without 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 63
first gaining experience.  40 Two objections (called by Brentano “weighty”) 
can be raised against the above theory of mental activity:
 If the intellect can think only that for which the imagination 
1. 
happens to provide a representation this seems to imply that the 
intellect is tied to the imagination in every movement and there-
fore, that it is “a plaything of images” [ ein Spielball der Phantasmen ] 
(PA, 99\PdA, 153). And,  
 “if the intellect receives the intelligible form through the influence 
2. 
of the sensitive part which contains the images, then something 
corporeal would act upon an intellectual thing, as in other cases 
corporeal things act upon other corporeal things” (ibid). Or, we can 
say, one might then accuse Aristotle of materializing the intellect, 
just as much as [on Brentano’s reading] he spiritualizes the living 
body.  
 To overcome the above objections, Brentano examines the intellectual 
soul in its role of controlling the sensitive and bodily sphere. He also 
takes into consideration the proper active principle of thought, that is, 
the  nous poiētikos . As active and initiating activity we are dealing with 
that aspect of the intelligible soul known as the will or the intellec-
tual faculty of desire (that leads human beings to actualize free choices) 
[discussed in Brentano, cf. PA, 100ff].  41 It should be recalled that the 
soul is said by Aristotle to rule or make use of the body (much as a 
builder uses tools, cf. Aristotle, 1986, 166/ De. An. 2. 4, 415b 20ff.), but at 
the same time the body is said to have its own mode or kind of desire. 
According to Brentano, rather than introduce a tension or dualism 
(intellectual versus sensible desire in antagonistic opposition, a position 
that was held in various dialogues by Plato for example) the different 
modes of desire simply point to the fact that the non-rational part of 
the soul is both intimately connected to and removed or separate from 
the sphere of reason. Intellectual desire is therefore at once connected 
to bodily desire; insofar as it can be led by and directed to action by the 
rational soul, but the sensible is also removed from the rational sphere 
in that it is essentially passive and only takes the lead when the balance 
between reason and the body is corrupted (cf. PA, 103). The mediating 
factor between reason and sensibility, Brentano stresses, is the imagin-
ation [Greek:  phantasia ]. Brentano writes:
 [E]very sensory desire and passion [ sinnliches Begehren ] that is governed 
by reason– as we find it in the courageous, the moderate, and the 

64 From Psychology to Phenomenology
continent man–as well as every movement governed by reason refers 
back to the imagination, which stands under the immediate influ-
ence of the intellectual part. (PA, 104\ PdA, 161)  
 An important point that should be mentioned in connection with the 
above is that, for Aristotle, the soul (as a formal principle of life) does 
not itself undergo [material] change or corruption. The soul is for this 
reason a fitting candidate to become the mover and ruler, that is ruling 
part, of the body (and cf. PA, 132–33). In viewing the mediation of the 
sensory and the intellectual by the imagination we can point out that, 
according to Aristotle, there are two broad ways in which something 
can produce an effect in something else. “(1) The effect can proceed 
from the endeavor of the thing itself, ... (2) the appropriate impulse can 
be imparted to it from the outside” (and cf. PA, 106). The appropriate 
impulse in the case of the intellectual will is the active intellect.  42 This 
active power in the intellectual part of the soul is not the activity of will 
(it is called an unconscious [ unbewusst ] activity by Brentano)  43 , rather 
this power is said to be nothing less than the  nous poiētikos as productive 
agent for the intellect. This gives the active intellect a “supercorporeal” 
[ Üeberkörperliches ] character (PA, 108\ PdA, 165) and makes it the origin 
of thought and so in itself actual, “an actual property of the intellec-
tual soul, an actuality of our minds” (ibid). By analogy the receptive 
or passive intellect is the material principle of thought or connected 
with the material principle of the body. The active intellect, by contrast, 
is “an accidental form of the intellectual soul ... a property of our own 
soul” (PA, 112). 
 Brentano notes that the ambiguity of the term  nous [outlined at 
the beginning of his study] has led to other readings of the passive 
and active intellect, for example, of the two as separate and distinct 
from one another.  Nous , Brentano informs us, can designate homono-
mously both that which has thoughts within it and the consequences 
of thinking (such as intellectual desire) as well as a principle of thought 
(PA, 114). Brentano focuses on Aristotle’s term  hexis (literally a state or 
habit) to describe the active intellect it points to the  nous poiētikos being 
an actual property or “accidental form” of the soul. In  De Anima Book 
Three, Chapter 5 Aristotle says that the  nous is like light, which makes 
potentially existing colors into actual colors, but the analogy is called 
inaccurate by Brentano,  
 The  nous poiētikos is active in the proper sense when it makes the 
images that are, properly speaking, active, while the light is not, 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 65
properly speaking, active but is operative merely as a necessary prep-
aration of the medium whenever colors become visible. (PA, 115)  
 Brentano therefore reads the above passage of  De Anima as holding 
the active intellect to have a direct connection to metaphysical causes. 
The above is explained as holding through what Brentano calls “the 
universal character of the law of synonymity between cause and effect” 
(PA, 127). This law can, in turn, be described as a quasi-Aristotelian 
version of what Leibniz later calls the law or principle of sufficient 
reason. Linking the unifying factor or purely active quality between 
the always actual  nous poiētikos to the Divine Intellect of Aristotle’s 
 Metaphysics Lamda (Book Twelve), Brentano describes how, “in all of 
nature ... a synonymous actual thing must already be present so that 
something potential can become actual” (PA, 128). Obviously there 
is a profound difference between the conceptual thought of human 
beings and the Divine thought of the Prime Mover, nonetheless the 
law of synonymy, according to Brentano, suggests that a direct act of 
God is what brings forth the higher intellectual part of the soul out of 
the materiality of the act of engendering that brings forth the material 
body (PA, 134–35\PdA, 197–200).  44 
 Thus we see here how the earlier metaphysical system articulated by 
Brentano is connected to psychology. In the  Psychology of Aristotle , the 
earlier and explicitly ontological, points such as the distinction between 
being and reality, along with the doctrine of the categories are now 
explicitly connected to philosophy of mind. This is most evident where 
Brentano writes of how,  
 ... the intellect does not by nature have a single thing actually within 
it, and its operation is an affection; ... it comes to know corporeal 
things, but ... it also knows itself; that it is itself mental, that it is free 
of all corporeal characteristics; finally that, although it knows itself, 
it does not know itself either always or in the beginning, but only 
secondarily. (PA, 88)  
 This description of mental acts will be important for explicating the 
doctrine of intentionality that will be outlined below. There is no 
existing “part” or separable content of consciousness that is somehow 
present in the mind (in any literal sense) that can serve as the extrinsic 
term or correlate of the intentional relation. The mind knows corporeal 
things, through affection (i.e. acts of sensation), but it also simultan-
eously knows itself. However, the latter knowledge is never achieved 

66 From Psychology to Phenomenology
directly. Before we examine the implications of this intentional mode 
of knowledge in any further detail it will be useful to articulate how 
the other characteristics outlined in Brentano’s exegesis of Aristotle’s 
 De Anima (the unity and potential givenness of consciousness) are also 
maintained in the philosophy of mind outlined in the PES. 
 In  the Psychology of Aristotle , the so-called active intellect is called both 
a power of the soul “an  accidens which cannot exist without its subject” 
(PA, 138), and therefore not itself a thinking faculty  per se but rather 
a faculty that produces thought (when working in tandem with the 
receptive intellect and the senses and imagination). The “active intel-
lect” furthermore, is also what accounts for the intentional directedness 
of the mental; the receptive intellect being what forms the substrate or 
basis (i.e. actualizes the contents or objects of what will later be called 
“acts of presentation”), and neither the active nor the passive can be 
reduced to the other nor can either be said to be reducible to the body 
(cf. PA, 139ff). Brentano writes:
 Insofar as the intellect is spiritual it is separate [chōristos], even 
while it is united with the body. Hence it is not contradictory to say 
that the intellect is separate [chōristos] and immediately afterward 
that it becomes separated, namely at the time when death destroys 
corporeal man. (PA, 139)  
 Passages such as these will be important when we examine the rela-
tionship between the physiological and the psychic or properly mental 
aspects of the act psychology of the PES. Furthermore, the active intel-
lect, in the  Psychology of Aristotle , is likened to a bow and the images 
received through the imagination by the passive intellect to arrows (ibid, 
142). Using testimony from Theophrastus and Eudemus to substantiate 
his reading (PA, 148–54) Brentano ends his study by noting the similar-
ities between his interpretation and the earlier reading of  De Anima by 
St. Thomas Aquinas (ibid, 155).  45 Brentano rightly points out, however, 
that Thomas’s view is unclear where it makes the entirety of the soul 
the form of the body. Thomas thus extends the intellectual part to the 
entire body and allows the vegetative and sensitive parts to exist after 
death (PA, 156). 
 In articulating the doctrine of the  nous poiētikos Aristotle is said to 
have been answering a philosophical problem of the greatest import-
ance, namely, “the problem of the moving principle [of] our thought” 
(PA, 157). According to Brentano, Aristotle properly unites the corporeal 
and the incorporeal – the sensory and the intellectual – and in doing 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 67
so, we find in his writings, “an intimation of the profound thought that 
man is a microcosm ... [Aristotle] taught us to recognize in man a unity 
of nature in spite of the distinction among parts; and even though one 
part was much more noble than the others, the highest perfection lay 
in the whole” (PA, 159). These explicitly metaphysical themes, it will 
be shown, will be maintained but moved to the background in the 
published sections of the PES.  
 2.5   Brentano’s neo-Aristotelian empiricism 
 Having presented an overview of the Aristotelian sources for Brentano’s 
metaphysical framework and philosophical psychology, we must here 
point out the sources of tension that led Brentano to distance himself 
from that influential ancient Greek thinker. In his  Psychology of Aristotle 
Brentano had already announced how the logical writings of Aristotle 
[ The Organon ] hold the key to successfully interpreting his philosophy of 
mind and psychology. Psychology, in turn, will later be seen as important 
for clarifying the foundations of both logic and the ontological theory 
of categories utilized by Brentano. We can begin, therefore, by briefly 
outlining tensions in Aristotle’s logical writings that may have led Brentano 
to develop his empirical psychology and existential theory of judgment 
(with its concomitant revision of the syllogistic foundation of scientific 
knowledge held by Aristotle), as well as the focus on mental phenomena 
that emerges in the PES. Brentano’s revisions of Aristotelian logic and 
the foundations of deductive and inductive knowledge, moreover, will 
also later be shown to be the source of his proto-phenomenological 
philosophy of mind, which he believed could serve as a better founda-
tion for epistemologically clarifying the foundations of metaphysics. To 
show where Brentano diverges from Aristotle we must first investigate 
the latter’s theory of judgment as well as the articulation of immediate 
insight and scientific knowledge in his logical writings. 
 Aristotle develops a theory of judgment that connects sensible affec-
tion with intellectual cognition in an attempt to account for how we 
attain objective knowledge (epistemē) leading us to truth and science. 
This theory is clearly articulated in various works, the most important 
being  De Interpretatione and the  Prior and  Posterior Analytics . In  De 
Interpretatione , for example, Aristotle maintains that intellectual judg-
ment is closely linked to language and semantics. Spoken words are said 
to be “symbols of spoken sounds” ( De Int. 16a 3, Aristotle, 1984, vol. 1, 
25.). However, while the spoken and the written languages can differ, 
what they are in the first place signs of (i.e. the actual existing things 

68 From Psychology to Phenomenology
that cause the “affections of the soul”, ibid) are said to be “the same for 
all”. We are also referred to the psychological treatise  De Anima , as in 
 De Interpretatione Aristotle is more concerned with propositions and acts 
of judgment than with grammatical or psychological doctrines exclu-
sively.  46 For Aristotle language reflects an ontological reality “outside” of 
the mind (or  psuchê ). On this view truth is the saying or affirming of what 
is that it is, and of what is not that it is not. Subsequently the affirmation 
or negation made in the judgment is only true if the ontological “state of 
affairs” actually holds or does not hold in reality. This last point forms 
the basis of what can be called Aristotle’s realist and “representative” 
theory of signification. Language and thought, in effect, represent the 
“things” they are about and these things reside outside of the mind. 
 In  De Interpretatione nouns or names [ onoma ] are said to be symbols 
(16a 26). In the  Categories nouns are described as the grammatical devices 
we use to designate something as an individual substance [ ousia ] (cf.  Cat . 
Chapter 5, 2a15, Aristotle, 1941, 9). This trend also seems to be continued 
in the  De Interpretatione , for there we are told that “names” tend to mark 
off particular entities. It is most likely that this close relationship between 
grammar and reality that prompts Aristotle to write: “ ... a name always  is ” 
( De Int . 16a 32). Aristotle also points out that while the noises of animals 
can signify or refer to something they cannot be names in a proper sense 
(16a26). Names or nouns have a higher order form of mental reference. 
Names possess what can perhaps be described as a “supersensible” or 
symbolic significance that allows them to designate “things”, however, 
nouns alone would be of limited value. The verb [ rhema ], for Aristotle, is 
“ ... what additionally signifies time no part of it being significant separ-
ately; and it is a sign of things said of something else” (16b 6).  47 A verb by 
itself is said to be a name, however, taken alone it signifies nothing concrete 
but, “it additionally signifies some  combination ” (16b 19, my italics). The 
combination would appear to be one of ideas [ eide ] (again taken to reflect 
things outside of the soul), which in the  De Interpretatione text are what 
the verbs and nouns are both tokens of and refer to. Ultimately, however, 
as the basis of judgments, Aristotle describes the composition of what we 
he calls  propositions [ protasis ] in the  Prior Analytics . Propositions are simple 
sentences that have or can have a truth value (cf.  Anal. Pr . bk 1, ch. 1, 24b 
23ff, Aristotle, 1941:66). There is no doubt that it is with this theory of the 
proposition in mind that Aristotle writes:
 Every sentence is significant ... but not every sentence is a statement-
making sentence ... only those in which there is truth and falsity. ( De. 
Int. 14, 16b33–17a3)  

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 69
 There is a great deal of evidence that Aristotle understands “statement” 
in the above passage much as Plato defined it in his dialogue the  Sophist 
(cf. 262a ff), where the intelligible statement is linked to the Greek term 
 logos . 48 
 We have noted how for Aristotle a statement must refer to some-
thing in order to become a truth making assertion. The “propositions” 
described above are, on this view, what come to be interpreted by later 
thinkers as “truth bearers”. Nonetheless, this modern propositional 
view is not clearly present anywhere in the surviving Aristotelian texts. 
Instead we are told, in  Prior Analytics for example, how terms [ oron ] can 
be interpreted as the conveyers of truth or, in Aristotle’s words, that 
into which the “premise is resolved”, that is, that into which the prop-
osition is analyzed.  49 Along with basic terms resolving into premises to 
help articulate truth, Aristotelian science also proceeds by establishing 
principles. These “first principles” (as they are sometimes called) are 
said to complement and organize demonstration because they allow 
for recognition of the proper definitions that lead us to objective know-
ledge. The “first principles” establishing Aristotelian sciences can there-
fore be described as dynamic and connected to experience. Although 
not innate, Aristotle writes: “we have some capacity, but do not have 
one type which will be more valuable than these in respect of preci-
sion” (cf.  Anal. Post . 2. 19, 99b30–35: Aristotle, 1984, 165). The capacity 
with which we intuitively grasp the first principles, in other words, 
works in tandem with the senses and the body. The processes of sensible 
affection and concept formation can be described as chronologically 
simultaneous in origin yet logically asymmetrical. This makes mental 
“representation” a product of affection – or at least so closely related 
to it that without the one the other cannot occur. But although this 
account of the acquisition of knowledge highlights the soul’s essential 
dependence on the body (and its acts of sensation), as we have seen, the 
 nous poetikos is nonetheless said by Aristotle to be a higher level and 
non-sensible faculty. 
 In the  Posterior Analytics Aristotle describes how the “connate 
discriminating capacity” (perception) leads, in some animals, to reten-
tion of perceptual data (i.e. memory): “for memories that are many in 
number form a single experience. And from experience, or from the 
whole universal that has come to rest in the soul” ( Anal. Post . 2. 19, 
99b35–100a10: Aristotle, vol. 1, 1984, 165–66), originates objective 
knowledge. From the above description we see the origin and source 
of knowledge in the relation of our thoughts to the world that they, for 
want of a better term, represent. The descriptions (in sections 16b19 

70 From Psychology to Phenomenology
and 19b19 of  De Interpretatione respectively) of the term “is” and how it 
comes to be predicated “additionally”, as a third thing, is also of interest; 
most likely being the origin of the categorical form of predication (the 
“ S is P ”) of the tradition – which (as we shall see) Brentano’s theory of 
judgment in the PES takes critical aim at. Finally, it can be emphasized 
that only with the appearance of sentences [which Aristotle describes 
as a combination of ideas] can we begin to make affirmations or denials 
( negations ). Through the formulation of sentences (use of language) 
the act of judgment comes to the fore: truth or falsehood for Aristotle 
resides in the judgment and its correspondence to things in the world. 
In forming the most basic affirmation, the true judgment [or the most 
basic negation, the false judgment] we must first formulate a sentence 
in the subject/predicate form. In forming this  assertoric or  declarative 
sentence (a sentence with a truth value [ apophansis ]), we combine ideas 
in a proper and meaningful way and arrive at judgments through 
which we gain knowledge that (if correct) corresponds to reality (and 
cf.  Metaphysics 1011b25 &  Categories 12b11 and 14b14). 
 Brentano amends the above in his logic lectures at Würzburg by 
focusing on terms rather than propositions and classifying mental 
acts, as well as the fundamental intuitions they contain, in an attempt 
to better understand the process of concept formation and there-
fore the origin of the insights that lead to the inductive grasp of the 
laws or universal statements needed to establish scientific theories. 
In the  De Interpretatione Aristotle described judgment as a combin-
ation of ideas or a synthesis of terms, on the basis of which affirma-
tions or denials ( negations ) help us arrive at objective knowledge. The 
Aristotelian notion of the affirmation of the object presented in the 
thinker’s mind [ nous ] as actually existing is the origin of Brentano’s 
early theory of judgment. Aristotle’s theory of science, by contrast, 
is closely tied to syllogistic deductions and his outline of the attain-
ment of objective knowledge as presented in the relevant sections 
of the  Posterior Analytics . In  Posterior Analytics Aristotle outlines the 
two essential features of scientific or what we would call “empirical 
science”. These essential features are: 1) existence of the objects it 
studies and 2) the necessity of the truths grasped about the objects 
( Anal. Post , 1.2.71b 10–19). Knowledge that can be counted as science 
is therefore more than just private and subjective or arbitrary; it is 
rather knowledge with an “account” or intelligible causal signature. 
The intelligible account explains why the truth known of the thing 
is in fact true “since what is false ... cannot be known”. Furthermore, 
Aristotle insists that there can be no counterfactual claims making the 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 71
scientific truth, once known to be true, false. Scientific propositions 
therefore, are always true. In short, scientific or objective truth claims 
are verifiable through experience, logically grounded and known to 
be necessarily true such that they can always be re-verified. In the 
 Topics , (Book One, Chapter 5, Aristotle writes of how “a ‘definition’ is 
a phrase signifying [an] essence” ( Topics , 101b 37–8). Another way in 
which Aristotle expressed scientific or objective truth was to say that 
the propositions dealt with by science can be logically demonstrated 
in syllogistic form. The deduction of the premises, however, is not a 
matter of mere consistency and non-contradiction resulting from a 
valid deduction alone. Enigmatically, Aristotle maintained that the 
first or major premise of a correct syllogism must also be immedi-
ately and intuitively grasped as true and necessary ( An. Post I 2, 71a 
21–33). At the very least, it is of the matters above that Aristotle writes 
in his  Posterior Analytics . In actual fact, his treatises on the natural 
world, and those we would regard as dealing with subjects scientific-
ally (such as  Historia Animalium and  Parts of Animals ), are surprisingly 
free of formal syllogisms. Aristotle’s accounts of scientific truths also 
occasionally include things that are true “for the most part” rather 
than always and unchangingly.  50 Nonetheless, although there is 
much made of the fundamental differences between Aristotelian and 
modern science, this search for definitions and the essential proper-
ties of things still characterizes the scientific quest for laws that are 
not just locally but universally valid. 
 However, many tenets of Brentano’s empiricism and philosophy of 
science were inherited not only from Aristotle but also from the writings 
of later philosophers (especially the British empiricists). Empiricism, as 
formulated in the writings of Locke, Berkeley and Hume, for example, 
was also closely associated with psychology. Furthermore, understood 
in a modern context the empiricist method may be viewed as a crit-
ical extension of the “Cartesian” way of ideas. That is, the modern 
empiricists followed Descartes insofar as they maintained that we had 
a greater awareness and more direct acquaintance with our own experi-
ences and the contents of our minds than we did with what was “tran-
scendent” and outside of, or removed from, our immediate awareness 
and sense impressions. Cartesian thought, however, has been frequently 
characterized as featuring an “epistemological turn” We will see that 
in the PES Brentano is also proponent of this epistemological turn or 
philosophy of the subject. To call Brentano a proponent of the epis-
temological turn, however, given his strong reliance on Aristotle and 
Aristotelian metaphysics, seems strange. Nonetheless, there is a great 

72 From Psychology to Phenomenology
deal of evidence that Brentano does indeed support the modern phil-
osophy of the subject and that he places it on an Aristotelian basis.  51 
 One reason Brentano can maintain a bona fide Aristotelian outlook 
and still embrace the Cartesian “epistemological” turn is that he viewed 
the latter as theoretically reconcilable with Aristotelianism. For example, 
in his later summary work on Aristotle’s thought,  Aristotle and his World 
View , Brentano maintained: “with respect to the external objects of the 
senses, [for Aristotle] the external objects are not at all similar to the 
primary sensory phenomena” (AWV, 26–7). This sounds like a strange 
doctrine to attribute to Aristotle. In his writings, Aristotle frequently 
maintained that our perceptions of the external world are not only 
reliable but, he seems to suggest, directly representative of the objects 
they relate to (cf.  De Anima II. 6, 418a 17–18 and  De Interpretatione 16a 
3). Many subsequent thinkers and scholars of Aristotelianism have 
also stressed the direct realism and intimate connection between the 
body and mind (or soul) in Aristotle’s writings (cf. Sorabji, 1993).  52 
By contrast, using distinctions drawn from  De Anima and the essay 
 De Sensu et Sensibili , Brentano maintains that for Aristotle, important 
differences exist between proper objects of perception ( idion aisthēton ) 
and improper or common ones ( koinon aisthēton ). Maintaining that 
both the above must be distinguished from what is called “percep-
tion by association” ( aisthēton kata symbebēkos ) Brentano attributes to 
Aristotle the doctrine that only sensible perception, with respect to 
the proper object of perception, is always reliable. The other kinds of 
perception, Brentano writes, have the status of Descartes’ and Locke’s 
primary qualities (cf. AWV, 27).  53 Our interest here must be restricted to 
Brentano’s own doctrine and not the viability of his interpretation of 
Aristotle (except, of course, insofar as this influences his own thought). 
To this end, however, it can be said that if Brentano will (in the PES) 
move beyond or add to Aristotle, for example, in his understanding of 
empirical method and epistemology, it is important to state why this is 
the case. This latter question can be best answered with some further 
comments about Aristotelian science and the empiricism promoted 
therein. 
 The differences between modern empiricism and that of the 
Aristotelian variety are subtle but pronounced. While both the modern 
empiricists and Aristotle would agree that nothing is in the mind that 
is not first in the senses (and subsequently that experience is the begin-
ning of all knowledge) there are metaphysical and logical distinctions 
separating the epistemological framework of the Aristotelian tradition 
from that of modern empiricism. Brentano, we noted, had already 

Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings on Aristotle 73
taken issue with aspects of the Aristotelian position in his Würzburg 
lectures, and would take issue with others in the PES. Furthermore, 
there were also, as Brentano was well aware, radical differences on what 
can be called “the object side” between Aristotelian conceptions of 
the world and modern empiricist frameworks. These latter differences 
hinge squarely on conceptions and understandings of the structure of 
the natural world. For Aristotle, the natural world is not homogenous in 
substance. The changing world of generation and corruption, which we 
inhabit, is for Aristotle merely the terrestrial level of natural or physical 
reality. Above it, and different in substance than the so-called sublunary 
terrestrial sphere, is the heavenly sphere of immaculate unchanging 
substances moving in perfect circular motions. For Aristotle, as for Plato 
before him, the natural world is viewed as teleological – meaning that 
nature does nothing in vain. In this way nature was also held to be 
organically ordered and striving after what can be described as final 
ends or purposes. The empiricists, by contrast, and especially the British 
empiricists after Hume (including James and John Stuart Mill with their 
development of “associationist” psychology) tended to view nature 
much like Descartes before them as mechanistic. The mechanistic view 
of nature, in contrast to the ancient, viewed the natural world as redu-
cible to impersonal forces organized, in effect, into a closed system of 
physical laws. 
 While still maintaining a framework that is basically Aristotelian, 
in the PES Brentano reads Aristotle through these other later sources 
and accepts the break with many aspects of Aristotle’s cosmology. All 
of these factors should be kept in mind when, for example, Brentano 
announces in the “Foreword” to the PES that, “[m]y psychological stand-
point is an empirical one; experience alone is my teacher. Yet I share 
with other thinkers the conviction that this is entirely compatible with 
a certain ideal point of view” (PES, xxv – translation slightly altered). 
This controversial claim about an “ideal point of view,” coinciding with 
his empiricist methodology, will later be seen to mean that Brentano 
is not a radical or dogmatic empiricist and is in fact preserving aspects 
of the Aristotelian and German a priori approach to grounding know-
ledge. In general, as will be seen, Brentano’s empiricism is closer to that 
of Aristotle or Thomas Aquinas than it is to the versions put forward 
by David Hume or later by Brentano’s colleague in Vienna, Ernst Mach. 
That is, Brentano is confident that all knowledge stems from some 
sensory or immediately intuitively given content or source,  54 but this 
immediately given intuitive foundation will be said to be capable of 
articulation by apprehension of non-sensory “rational” principles that, 

74 From Psychology to Phenomenology
in turn, form the foundation and basis for the methods used by the 
natural or positive sciences (cf. Chapter 6). 
 Science and scientific activity for Brentano, following Aristotle, must 
therefore be theoretically grounded on metaphysics (and see PES, 6\
PES-G, 7 and see Chapter 1 above). Metaphysics, in turn, is said to be 
clarified by the knowledge and the explanations obtained by philosoph-
ical reflection. However, in decoupling metaphysics from the explicitly 
transcendent or theological agenda of Aristotle and the Scholastics, 
there is a difference in emphasis within Brentano’s articulation of the 
philosophical foundations of the sciences. The following positions 
(nos. 2 & 3) from his first habilitation thesis (“ Thesen ”), delivered in 
Würzburg in 1866, can perhaps help establish the proper understanding 
of Brentano’s intellectual outlook in these matters. There he writes:
 Philosophy has to protest against the unacceptable demand to take 
its principles from theology, and against the claim that any fruitful 
philosophizing becomes possible only through the existence of a 
supernatural revelation.  
 This is followed by,  
 Nonetheless it is correct to say that theologically determined 
truths are fit to serve as guiding signs for philosophical research. 
(cf. ZP, 137)  
 The above quotes show a clearly autonomous role for philosophy that 
embraces the epistemological turn of post-Cartesian thought with all of 
its influence from the quantitative or modern hypothetical deductive 
models for understanding the natural world. Nonetheless, although 
Brentano accepts the epistemological turn, he does so without empha-
sizing or embracing the radical enlightenment (and post-enlightenment) 
equation of metaphysics with nonsense or superstition. The positions 
he expressed in 1866, as will be demonstrated, are consistent with the 
views he expresses in the PES eight years later.  

 Part II  
 

 The current chapter addresses the seminal work that introduces the 
framework for Brentano’s dynamic psychology of psychic [ psychischen ] or 
mental acts. A close examination of Brentano’s PES will reveal a sophis-
ticated form of empiricism articulated as the basis for his philosophy 
of mind. In the first Book of the PES Brentano outlines a philosoph-
ical and methodological framework to support the above ‘act’ psych-
ology. Brentano’s theoretical framework for understanding the mental 
can ultimately be viewed as an epistemologically clarified analysis of 
experience centered on a new doctrine of mental reference. 
 In what follows, an overview is presented of the first part of the PES. 
Special focus is placed throughout on the analysis of Brentano’s under-
standing of science. The issues examined include: Brentano’s relation 
to positivism and his understanding of the place of psychology within 
the sciences. Brentano’s stated aim of scientifically establishing psych-
ology is also examined. Finally, comments and observations about both 
the positivistic conception of science as well as, what has been called, 
Brentano’s “phenomenalism” conclude the chapter.  
 3.1  Psychology from an empirical standpoint 
 Psychology was not an independent science in 1874. Brentano notes in 
the “Foreword” to his  Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint how the 
intellectual situation at the end of the nineteenth century was one in 
which there was no existing science of psychology so much as “many 
psychologies” existing side by side (PES, xxviii\PES-G, vi). Nonetheless 
by the late nineteenth century much attention was already being paid 
to topics that would later become the focus of what can be called “scien-
tific psychology”. In chapter 1, above, it was mentioned how the works 
 3 
 Psychology as a Science  
77

78 From Psychology to Phenomenology
of Wundt and James served as pioneering studies in the field of what 
would become experimental psychology. Brentano’s PES must be viewed 
both against the backdrop of these new studies and against the context 
of the philosophical exploration of the mind that was active in the late 
nineteenth century and out of which emerged the new experimental 
psychology. The original German title of Brentano’s text is  Psychologie 
vom empirischen Standpunkte (originally with an archaic “e” at the end 
of the title that was later dropped in subsequent editions). This can 
be translated literally as “Psychology from an empirical standpoint” or 
as “Psychology from an empirical point of view”. From the immediate 
information conveyed by the title of his text we can infer two things: 
1) That Brentano’s text will deal with psychology, and 2) that it will do 
so from an empirical point of view. However, the title does not commu-
nicate what, precisely, empiricism means for Brentano; nor how his 
empirical psychology will differ from the existing systems of the exper-
imentalists and philosophers. The breakdown of the PES is described 
in the “Foreword” as follows: Book One will deal with psychology as a 
science, Book Two, mental or ‘psychic’ phenomena in general.  1 The PES 
is also characterized by Brentano as more of a compendium than an 
encyclopedic overview of psychology. The main purpose of the PES, we 
are told, will be to establish and delimit psychology as a science.  2 More 
than being comprehensive, however, the text –we are told- will be an 
attempt to firmly establish foundations (PES, xxvii\PES-G, v). The most 
urgent need for psychology, as a new science, is said to be nothing less 
than “the unity of ... [its] doctrine[s]” (PES, xxviii\PES-G, vi). (ibid.). 
 Subsequently, Brentano writes of how,  
 [J]ust as there is no specifically German truth, there is no specifically 
national psychology, not even a German one. It is for this reason that 
I am taking into account the outstanding scientific contributions of 
modern English philosophers no less than those of German philoso-
phers. (PES, xxviii\PES-G, vi)  
 This statement reveals a further important insight into Brentano’s 
general strategy and understanding of both philosophy and science. 
Brentano is clearly continuing his earlier Aristotelian approach of 
treating psychology as a theoretical discipline that aims at objective 
truths about the mind. On Brentano’s “Aristotelian” view of these 
matters, knowledge can be said to be something we strive to attain and 
even desire for its own sake.  3 In the system of the PES, true judgments 
will be seen to be such when they conform to reality, and known to 

Psychology as a Science 79
be false when they fail to do so. Brentano takes it for granted that the 
attainment of truth in any scientific sphere is accomplished through 
basic processes and activities such as: perception, observation, clarifi-
cation of what is observed (obtained through concepts) and finally the 
making of judgments based or founded on these prior perceptual and 
cognitive activities. 
 The term ‘science’ [ Wissenschaft ], for Brentano therefore, should be 
understood as both a verb and a substantive term (correlating to a 
collection of practices and institutional activity). As such, ‘science’ can 
be interpreted in a manner that makes it difficult to pin down or simply 
define without ambiguity what is or is not scientific. Nonetheless, the 
foundation of Brentano’s position is the belief that science has, primarily 
and fundamentally, a theoretical character and is only secondarily or 
indirectly capable of important practical and productive applications. 
 Just as Aristotle held that scientific knowledge ( epistêmê ) of the 
highest kind should be of what holds for the most part with a certain 
degree of necessity, Brentano implicitly accepts the above and argues 
in the “Foreword” to the PES that knowledge of essential psychological 
matters can conform to the highest truth about what can be obtained 
through essential insight. Furthermore, as for Aristotle, scientific 
claims must be characterized not merely by the fact “that” a thing is, 
but “why” it is as it is. A description of the facts of experience with 
accompanying explanations leading to definitions will be what char-
acterizes the highest scientific claims. Consequently, Aristotle viewed 
science as an extension of our common sense notions of knowing and 
how we understand the world. Although Brentano originally accepts all 
these fundamental characteristics of the Aristotelian position, in the 
PES he will supplement the Aristotelian position on epistemology and 
scientific methodology by engaging with the writings and theories of 
John Stuart Mill, Auguste Comte as well as other modern empiricists 
and the doctrines of certain modern rationalists such as Descartes and 
Leibniz (the importance of the latter thinkers will reveal itself espe-
cially regarding the essential nature of mind). The position maintained 
in the PES, therefore, can be seen to be one that integrates specula-
tive analysis and logic with an empirical or inductivist method in epis-
temology. Brentano’s approach can ultimately be classified as a species 
of deductive-nomological or informal ‘covering law’ model for scien-
tific explanation. Nonetheless, his empirical method is grounded on 
a metaphysical understanding of the regularity of nature as the basis 
for inductive generalizations and subsequent articulation of scientific 
laws. More will be said about this below where we elaborate on the 

80 From Psychology to Phenomenology
methodological details for understanding the sciences as put forward in 
Book One of the PES.  
 3.2  The concept and purpose of psychology 
 The aims of Brentano’s “act psychology” or “descriptive psychology” 
(as he himself later preferred to call it) are elaborated throughout Book 
One of the PES. There Brentano outlines the goals and purposes of his 
“act” psychology – its concepts, its empirical method and experiential 
basis, as well as how he views the role of induction in attaining to the 
fundamental laws that will form its basis. 
 For Brentano, psychology is said to be an undeveloped branch of 
science that nonetheless carries much promise. At the beginning of 
Chapter 1 of Book One Brentano states, “[t]he other sciences are, in 
fact, only the foundation; psychology corresponds to the crowning 
pinnacle ( gleicht dem krönenden Abschlusse ) of the sciences” (PES, 3, 
translation altered\PES-G, 3). Psychology although said to correspond 
to the “crowning pinnacle” of science can nevertheless only emerge 
after the other natural sciences have been established and developed. 
For this reason, psychology is also said to be “dependent on all of [the 
existing natural sciences]” (PES, 3\PES-G, 3). That is, psychology finds 
itself, as a new science, necessarily borrowing from the results and 
building on the discoveries of the established sciences. This does not 
mean, however, that it should not also exert a powerful reciprocal influ-
ence upon the established sciences. Brentano writes, “[psychology] is 
supposed to renew man’s entire life and hasten and assure progress” 
(PES, 3\PES-G, 4).  4 This fact, according to Brentano, is a measure of 
both the importance and distinctness of psychology. We are also told 
that psychology is destined “to become the basis of society ... and of all 
scientific endeavors as well” (ibid). Accordingly, later on, Brentano will 
write of how “the general theoretical sciences form a kind of hierarchy 
[ bilden eine Art Scala ] in which each higher step is erected on the basis of 
the one below it” (PES, 23\PES-G, 28). 
 The notion of grounding the sciences and subsequently of a hier-
archy within knowledge can be traced in Brentano’s philosophy back 
to the influences of both Aristotle and Comte. We have taken note 
above of how Brentano accepts the progressivist and optimistic vision 
of the social sciences as working to better society. This vision of the 
social sciences is an inheritance of the nineteenth-century positivist 
legacy. However, in contrast to the father of positivism, Auguste Comte, 
Brentano replaces what was considered the fundamental foundational 

Psychology as a Science 81
science – sociology – with psychology. Brentano’s theoretical under-
standing of the sciences also necessitates a general metaphysical context 
against which psychology will be articulated, which again distances 
him from Comte.  5 For example, Brentano writes of how more compre-
hensive principles must be invoked to account for facts that can be 
demonstrated through the use of strict or narrow and rigorous observa-
tions that transcend the object realm of any single science alone. Facts 
that can be accounted for in the same way by both outer and inner 
perception, for example, are said to depend on explanatory principles 
that are far broader than those employed by the positive sciences alone. 
These latter and broader principles are subsequently said to lie outside 
the domain even of a scientifically established psychology, or, for that 
matter, any natural science. The fundamental and most general first 
principles are instead said to rest on the special field of study known as 
 metaphysics (PES, 6\PES-G, 7). 
 For Aristotle, metaphysics formed the basis of all other theoretical 
or intellectual disciplines. Aristotelian science proceeds, as we noted, 
from principles and insights. Starting with description, metaphysics 
then proffers accounts for both why the observed is the case and also 
the ‘what’ or the essential nature of the phenomena under observation. 
The extent of a purely Aristotelian approach to the study of the mind, 
however, is challenged early on in Brentano’s PES. Brentano initially, and 
only tentatively, defines psychology as “the [Aristotelian] science which 
studies the properties and laws of the soul, which we discover within 
ourselves directly by means of inner perception, and which we infer, by 
analogy, to exist in others” (PES, 5\PES-G, 6). The above definition can 
be traced back to Aristotle’s development of Platonic doctrines; however, 
Brentano quickly differentiates his approach from that of his philosoph-
ical forbearers by calling for a “psychology without a soul”.  6 Brentano’s 
adoption of this idea may seem somewhat paradoxical but this new 
definition is preferred because it is said to avoid many presuppositions. 
Amongst these can be mentioned the belief that a substance called a 
‘soul’ subsists and underlies all mental phenomena (often assumed by 
many past thinkers, but admittedly far from a self-evident proposition). 
In this way Brentano also holds true to the empiricist dictum set out 
in the introduction to his text that “experience alone is my teacher” 
(PES, xxvii\PES-G, v). Finally, the above definition, once again, shows 
the influence of nineteenth-century positivism on Brentano’s approach 
(and cf. Section 3.6). 
 However, this does not mean that Brentano was a positivist in the 
strict sense of the term (nor did he disbelieve in the existence of a soul 

82 From Psychology to Phenomenology
for that matter). Although in the PES Brentano accepts, as a propae-
deutic measure, the positivist delimitation of objects of study to only 
‘positive’, that is, verifiable and somehow measurable or observable 
phenomena. Brentano’s approach is nonetheless undertaken in order 
to avoid or bracket unjustifiable metaphysical assumptions and keep 
the latter from interfering with proper discussion of the subject matter 
of psychology.  7 With the above definition, Brentano attempts to move 
psychology closer towards its goal of becoming a credible science. 
Namely, psychology will be the science of  mental phenomena . What 
remains to be investigated is how the phenomena will be accounted 
for, and the thorny problem of whether there is more than a merely 
methodological sense to what can be called Brentano’s ‘phenomen-
alism’ in these matters. The answer to this question is closely related to 
the positivist basis of establishing psychology as the science of mental 
phenomena which, in a rather tangled manner, parallels the philosoph-
ical framework that forms the basis of the philosophy of mind articu-
lated in the PES.  
 3.3  Psychological method with special reference 
to its experiential basis 
 At the beginning of chapter 2 of Book One of the PES Brentano prof-
fers claims as to why the method of psychology has recently begun to 
interest scientists (PES, 28\PES-G, 34). First, Brentano stresses the empir-
ical basis for gaining understanding of psychological laws and doctrines 
by contrasting psychology with what is arguably the least empirical of 
all the sciences: pure mathematics. Psychology and mathematics are 
related to each other “as polar opposites”. The reason for this is that 
mathematics considers the simplest and most independent [of matter?] 
phenomena while psychology the most dependent and complex. This 
is not to understate the importance of mathematics. Mathematics, we 
are told, “reveals in a clear and understandable way the fundamental 
nature of all truly scientific investigation” (PES, 28\PES-G, 34). This is 
a curious concession to what is essentially a Pythagorean and Platonic 
understanding of science; however, in Aristotelian fashion it is also 
maintained that mathematics alone cannot account for psychology 
or psychological phenomena. Furthermore, all sciences are said by 
Brentano to have their basis in perception and experience. 
 It is in discussing perception, however, that Brentano touches on what 
is perhaps the most important doctrine introduced in the first book of 
the PES, namely his doctrine of inner perception. Inner perception is 

Psychology as a Science 83
a controversial aspect of Brentano’s system, but at the same time an 
essential notion for understanding his philosophy of mind and philo-
sophical psychology. In Chapter 2 of the PES treating of “Psychological 
Method with Special Reference to its Experiential Basis”, Brentano 
claims that:
 We would never know what a thought is, or a judgement, pleasure 
or pain, desires or aversions, hopes or fears, courage or despair, deci-
sions and voluntary intentions if we did not learn what they are 
through inner perception [ innere Wahrnehmung ] of our phenomena. 
(PES, 29\PES-G, 35)  
 At this point a sharp distinction is made between ‘inner perception’ 
[ Wahrnehmung ] and ‘inner observation’ [ Beobachtung ] that Brentano 
equates with introspection. Now, in a very obvious sense, act psych-
ology is a form of introspectionism. Mental or psychic phenomena are 
said by Brentano to be immediately grasped by a  clear insight . Brentano 
writes that “our psychic phenomena are the things that are most our 
own” [ was uns am Meisten eigen ist ] (PES, 20\PES-G, 25, translation 
slightly modified). Why then, does Brentano dismiss the notion of 
‘introspection’ and distinguish it from inner perception? To understand 
Brentano’s position clearly, we must take into account some facts about 
the intellectual climate of the nineteenth century and the work of the 
pioneers of experimental psychology. 
 Introspection was the main method of psychology at the time 
Brentano was writing. From Locke and the British empiricists the notion 
of an inner sense or introspective source of knowledge made its way into 
the laboratory of Wilhelm Wundt.  8 Through experimentalists such as 
Wundt (and thinkers like the philosopher J. S. Mill and the psychologist 
Alexander Bain), introspection became a popular source of knowledge 
about the purported contents of consciousness in psychological studies. 
While dealing with psychological phenomena exclusively, act psych-
ology (unlike experimental psychology) is said not to be a form of intro-
spectionism. According to Brentano inner perception takes place only 
with respect to psychical or mental phenomenon. Introspection, on the 
other hand, is described as a second order mental act having always 
what Brentano calls a  physical phenomenon as its object. This aspect of 
conscious life should be stressed. For Brentano all mental acts have a 
primary and a secondary element. Primarily, they are directed towards 
an object or content. Secondarily, they are directed towards themselves. 
This second criterion is borrowed directly from Aristotle who maintained 

84 From Psychology to Phenomenology
in  De Anima that we have an awareness of acts of cognition “on the 
side” so to speak (έν παρεργω), simultaneous with the actual mental 
acts themselves.  9 Brentano’s psychology, as we have noted, is more 
interested in mental or psychic acts exclusively than in the contents of 
consciousness. This emphasis on acts was precisely what distinguished 
Brentano’s approach from that of the experimentalists such as Wundt 
or from Fechner’s outer psychophysics. The latter were far more inter-
ested in analyzing and measuring the contents of consciousness, which 
they attempted to accomplish by breaking consciousness down into its 
constitutive components or elements (i.e., sense impressions, concepts 
etc. ... ). Conversely, consciousness, for Brentano, is synonymous with 
the terms ‘psychic phenomenon’ or ‘mental acts’ (PES, 102\PES-G, 132). 
What Brentano called acts were far from being simple processes. Later 
Brentano will claim that all acts have a double object; for example, 
as already stated, a physical phenomenon and a secondary psychic 
phenomenon (the awareness of the primary or physical phenomenon). 
Consciousness of the secondary object (the act itself), in the PES, is 
described as being three-fold: “it involves a presentation of it, a cogni-
tion of it and a feeling toward it” (PES, 154\PES-G, 203: and see Section 
5.3). Thus, even the simplest mental act has four aspects. According to 
Brentano, “it [a mental act] may be considered as a presentation of its 
primary object, as when the act in which we perceive a sound is consid-
ered as an act of hearing; however, it may also be considered as a pres-
entation of itself, as a cognition of itself, and as a feeling toward itself” 
(PES, 154\PES-G, 203). The immediacy and non-conceptual character 
of the datum of psychic acts (their experiential basis) gleaned through 
inner perception are of fundamental importance of Brentano’s entire 
understanding of psychology as a science. 
 However, in Book One of the PES, we are told that psychology, 
defined as the science of psychic phenomena, is at a distinct disadvan-
tage vis-à-vis other general sciences because it cannot directly observe 
the facts it is supposed to study. Brentano gives the example of anger. 
I cannot observe or perceive myself in a full blown state of anger. In 
order to observe myself immediately experiencing rage, for example, 
the episode and effects of my anger must somehow be diminished 
(PES, 30\PES-G, 36). This insight should be generalized to hold for all 
mental phenomena. As inherently conscious structures beyond the 
realm of direct observation, these intangible mental acts can never 
be objects for themselves. Therefore, the immediately lived experi-
ence of affective disposition towards the world, that is, being directed 
to objects or contents – precisely because it is intimately constitutive 

Psychology as a Science 85
of my immediate mental state and awareness – cannot be prescinded 
from or fully objectified. Nonetheless, we are told that this deficiency 
can be made up for through the observation of earlier mental states 
in memory (PES, 34\PES-G, 42). In this manner, employing what can 
be called a form of ‘retrospection’, we can even say that it is possible 
for us to undertake experimentation on our own psychic phenomena. 
Moreover, memory is said to be necessary for all experimental sciences 
in order to make possible the accumulation and organization of the 
observed facts. Only after facts are observed can general truths about 
them be established in an inductivist approach to science, however in 
psychology there is a caveat. Psychologists who believe they observe 
their own psychic acts as simple facts (such as Wundt and Titchener 
claimed) are really, according to Brentano, observing their own impres-
sions or memorial recollections still fresh in their minds (PES, 35\
PES-G, 43).  10 Observation in memory and retrospection are therefore 
deemed necessary, although neither is fully equivalent to genuine 
observation of immediate events. The reason being, we are told, that 
memory, unlike immediate perception, is subject to error and illu-
sion. Inner perception, however, or the immediate apprehension of the 
activity of our mental life, is said to be infallible and effectively beyond 
doubt (PES, 35\PES-G, 44). According to Brentano, the conflation of the 
above has led to great confusion and incoherence. More importantly, 
he stresses that the denial of any kind of infallible ‘inner observation’ 
[ Beobachtung ] of our psychic acts does not place the scientific status 
of psychology in jeopardy. This is because without the testimony of 
memory there would be no science at all; in this respect psychology is 
no worse off than any other science (PES, 36\PES-G, 45). Furthermore, 
we might add, in order for a philosophically coherent psychology to 
be viable, the ‘first person’ and irreducibly private nature of psychic 
phenomena must be accepted and not explained away. Nonetheless, 
Brentano believes that the problem remains of how any perception 
immediately given is still insufficient for arriving at general character-
istics of psychic or mental phenomena. For one thing, the demarcation 
of physiological processes and their relation to the non-physiological 
or the essentially mental is still unclear. Furthermore, Brentano adds, 
what can be considered our own mental life in the authentic sense, that 
is, our private psychic acts, are never completely given. For example, 
physiological states often accompany or perhaps even make possible 
psychic states, and so-called mental impressions are said to frequently 
tangle into and mix with one another, effectively blurring any clear 
distinction between, for example, a pure state of grief and fear along 

86 From Psychology to Phenomenology
with the anxiety accompanying that state.  11 Add to this, that “the first 
beginnings of our mental life are ... shrouded in an impenetrable mist” 
(PES, 37\PES-G, 46). For all of the above reasons, the established natural 
sciences, such as chemistry and physics, appear to be in a more favor-
able position than psychology (ibid). However, Brentano believes that 
the above assumption would actually be the case only if we did not 
have indirect knowledge of the mental phenomena and other sources 
of evidence for studying the facts about mental life. In the PES, a heavy 
emphasis is thus placed on supplementary sources and methods for 
studying the facts about mental life. Amongst the latter, we are told 
that observing, talking with and consulting with others, is necessary. 
Furthermore reports and studies of behavior (a large and central focus 
of much psychology after Brentano’s time), as well as accounts of how 
the mental lives of different people(s) contain obvious common elem-
ents are all said to be valuable in advancing psychology (PES, 38\PES-G, 
46–47). Individual experience can therefore, for the most part – and 
barring abnormal development or special conditions and certain forms 
of physiological damage – be communicated and understood. Therefore, 
Brentano reasons that language and observation can help us attain to 
the classification of mental states and also help establish relationships 
making up for the shortcomings inherent to directly and objectively 
observing mental acts (PES, 39\PES-G, 48–9). 
 In this regard, autobiographies and even observation of non-verbal 
behavior can serve as signs and clues about the invisible mental states 
underlying psychic life even if the former cannot replace the latter 
(PES, 39–40\PES-G, 49).   12 
 3.4  Induction of the fundamental laws of psychology 
 According to Brentano, the investigation of psychic or mental elements 
must have universal significance for psychology if it aims to become a 
science. Brentano’s philosophy of science is one that is empirical and 
inductive. The word ‘induction’ in modern philosophy brings immedi-
ately to mind the name of Francis Bacon (1561–1626). Baconian induc-
tion was said to proceed by first collecting facts [arranging them into 
what Bacon called “tables of similarities and differences” of which 
there were three: one of positive instances, one of negative, and one of 
varying instances, cf. Bacon, 2000, 110–126] and then patiently exam-
ining particulars and identifying their common features or properties 
(confusingly called ‘forms’ by Bacon). The above method was subse-
quently said to be necessary in order to apply what Bacon described as 

Psychology as a Science 87
a more carefully articulated or critical form of induction by enumer-
ation. 13 Needless to say, Bacon’s actual procedure has not escaped scru-
tiny. It is also fair to say that very few practicing scientists ever followed 
the Baconian method faithfully.  14 Already in the nineteenth century 
criticism of Baconian induction was being raised, and revisions of it 
were proposed by different philosophers. The most notable of these 
amendments of Bacon’s inductivism for our purposes (as they exerted 
the greatest influence on Brentano) were those proposed by John Stuart 
Mill, Alexander Bain and William Whewell.  15 
 In the PES Brentano claims that Bacon’s method has “not withstood 
the test of the history of the natural sciences”, and therefore can have 
“no validity for the psychologist either” (PES, 44, translation slightly 
altered\PES-G, 55). Nonetheless, Brentano broadly agrees with Bacon 
that we should start with particulars and, finding common charac-
teristics and relying on experimentation, only then establish general 
laws. Brentano also agrees with Bacon (and Descartes) that philosophy 
should become scientific in the sense that predictive laws as well as 
rational insight must be appealed to. Brentano’s methodology and phil-
osophy of science is frequently criticized.  16 However, as a sophisticated 
inductivist, and as a proponent of what can be called epistemologic-
ally clarified and foundationalist philosophy of science, Brentano’s 
methodological approach to science merits both closer scrutiny and 
more attention than it usually receives (we will return to this topic in 
Section 7.2). 
 In brief, as was mentioned above, Brentano’s approach to science 
can be characterized as a variety of a deductive-nomological model 
of scientific explanation. All facts, and all properly scientific know-
ledge of phenomena or natural events, can be deduced only after valid 
inferences from what can be called the initial boundary conditions 
of the field or object realm of the given scientific investigation have 
been made. Brentano’s method is empiricist because the evidence and 
essentially inductive grasp of general laws for each science is said to be 
made on the basis of immediately apprehended and intuitively clarified 
grounds or principles. These principles, in turn, both establish norma-
tive claims and are regarded as axioms by Brentano. It is a deductive 
explanation because only from the axioms or laws can corollary prem-
ises be derived, just as the minor premise is deductively inferred from 
the major in Aristotelian syllogistics. Brentano closely follows J. S. Mill 
and Comte; however in that he holds a ‘covering law’ model of scien-
tific explanation and views it as viable for formulating properly scien-
tific explanations. In this view, the observed cases work towards either 

88 From Psychology to Phenomenology
supporting or falsifying the hypotheses being put forward. Book One 
of the PES confirms the efficacy of the above model of scientific theory 
as well as Brentano’s goal of applying it to psychology. Brentano’s later 
explanations of the fundamental facts about mental life subsequently 
depend on the theories formulated in these sections of the first Book. 
 The first step for validating psychology as a science on the above model 
is the observation of particular facts and their placement into classes. 
A principle of subdivision, we are told, will lead to the determination 
of the fundamental classes of psychic phenomena (cf. PES, 44\PES-G, 
55). There should, accordingly, be a ‘natural’ division of phenomena 
into groups or classes, that is, one following the facts as given in order 
to establish the foundation of a scientific psychology. Most of these 
divisions, as they pertain to psychology, have already been prepared for 
us by experience clarified by natural language.  17 Although not entirely 
reliable, language is said to facilitate the discovery of truth for those 
psychologists who utilize its definitions with caution (PES, 45\PES-G, 
56).  18 Ultimately, however, Brentano is convinced that there are good 
grounds, if not conclusive proof, for holding that humans share a struc-
tural similarity in their mental lives that lies deeper than language or 
linguistic categories. Furthermore, Brentano maintains that the number 
of fundamental classes of human mental phenomena is limited. Out 
of basic or particular instances the more complex will arise, nonethe-
less, the beginnings of mental life, Brentano writes, “extend[s] back 
to the pre-natal period” (PES, 46\PES-G, 57) and is therefore beyond 
any attempt or even the possibility of examination by direct percep-
tion. Thus a reliance on other sciences [most pertinently biology and 
physiology] will be necessary. And here an analogy with chemistry is 
made: just as the chemist must separate the constituent elements of a 
compound, so the psychologist too should attempt to separate the elem-
entary phenomena that are said to make up the more complex elements 
of psychic life (PES, 46\PES-G, 57). 
 This is not to say that psychology can follow chemistry, or any other 
objective and positive science as a strict model. Attempting the above 
was considered by Brentano to be the fundamental error of the physio-
logical school (and thinkers such as Gustav Fechner, Henry Maudsley 
and Wilhelm Wundt). As Brentano emphasizes in his PES, the methods 
dependent on external observation are not available to psychology in 
the same manner as they are to the other natural sciences. Nor can the 
quantitative measurement of mental elements alone ever yield fruitful 
results. Brentano mentions both the ‘associationist’ schools as well as 
the atomistic or reductionist measurement of mental contents of the 

Psychology as a Science 89
experimentalists as believing otherwise. Although the experimental-
ists, for example, claim to measure ultimate components of mental life, 
they really are mistaking results of sensation and sensory contents for 
truly ‘psychic’ elements. Sensations by contrast, we are told, “are effects 
of physical stimuli. Their origin is thus a psychophysical process [ ein 
 psycho-physischer Process ]” (PES, 46\PES-G, 58). And physiology and 
psychology, although sharing a common object realm, are nonetheless 
different sciences. 
 According to Brentano the laws physiology depends on can be better 
formulated by paying attention to physics and chemistry. The laws of 
psychology, as the science of psychic phenomena are broader laws and 
therefore not directly reducible to the fundamental laws of physics (PES, 
47\PES-G, 59). Nonetheless, because the mental or psychic phenomena 
to which the true laws of psychology apply, are said to be “entirely 
too dependent on a variety of physiological conditions of which we 
have very incomplete knowledge”, according to Brentano, the laws of 
psychology are “strictly speaking empirical laws”. This means that they 
require extant analysis of the physiological states with which they are 
connected in order for anything approaching a complete explanation to 
be possible (PES, 47\PES-G, 59). The broader laws of physiology, chem-
istry and physics, thus play an indirect role in the study of psychology. 
Nonetheless, the fundamental laws of psychology cannot be directly 
derived from either physiology or chemistry or physics (or, we might 
add, as many believe today, from neuroscience or scientific study of the 
brain and nervous system alone) and the reason seems to be that the 
essence of the mental itself or mental properties are not reducible to 
physical properties (and cf. Chapters 4 and 7 below). In other words, no 
matter how much the disciplines of the natural sciences (or sciences of 
physical phenomena, PES, 99) help shed light on certain fundamental 
psychological facts, we are, in short, limited in our ability to understand 
purely psychological phenomena solely through reliance on these more 
general laws. 
 According to Brentano we are also quite limited in our complete 
understanding of both outer and inner nature. Complete insight or 
perfect knowledge runs up against hurdles, not the least of which is the 
difficulty that can be found when we try to explain how the physical 
interacts with or meets the non-physical (PES, 47–48\PES-G, 58–60). 
And for this reason alone, the physical cannot exhaustively explain 
what can be called the psychic or phenomenological realm. Brentano 
states that any project attempting to explain the one by reducing it to 
the other is both hopeless and unreasonable and it is suggested that 

90 From Psychology to Phenomenology
the laws of physics break down completely when the properly psychic 
or mental sphere is reached (cf. PES, 50–51). Interestingly, however, 
Brentano writes that a completed physiology and exhaustive knowledge 
of the brain, body, and mind would allow us to formulate psychological 
laws that would possess “the same rigorousness and exactitude as the 
axioms of mathematics” (PES, 48\PES-G, 60). Nonetheless these ideal or 
highest possible laws of psychology would still necessitate descriptive 
laws to fully explain and understand the phenomena that they treat. 
Physiology alone cannot be a complete psychology. 
 Chapter 4 of Part One of the PES begins by reiterating the claim that 
the ultimate or fundamental laws of science from which the succession 
of mental phenomena can be derived are merely empirical. As such, 
these laws have a somewhat indefinite and inexact character (PES, 65\
PES-G, 85). After a digression examining the views of Kant and Wundt 
on the applicability of mathematics to psychology, Brentano ends the 
first part of his text by propounding the claim that although “psycho-
logical induction” [ psychische Induction ] cannot discover the genuinely 
basic laws, it can nevertheless arrive at laws of a very comprehensive 
universality (PES, 71\PES-G, 93). More specific laws can then be derived 
from these general ones and what Brentano calls ‘direct induction’ can 
be made immediately from experience in psychology. These direct 
inductions are then to be followed by what can basically be described 
as verification and statistical confirmation by cases. Thus the induc-
tion of general laws in psychology is complemented by the deduction 
of special laws, and the verification of the special laws are in turn said 
to be supported by the immediate facts of experience (PES, 71\PES-G, 
93). Given this probabilistic and law-like model for explaining psycho-
logical theories, the question of the role of mathematics in Brentano’s 
scientific psychology becomes relevant. 
 The German philosopher J. F. Herbart was the first to apply math-
ematical methods of measurement to psychology.  19 Brentano’s reaction 
to Herbart’s method and the light that this shed on his understanding 
of psychology as an empirical science is important. Brentano deemed 
that psychology can be exact and rigorous without mathematics. 
Herbart, following Kant insofar as he claimed that psychology could 
not be experimental, nonetheless refused to accept that it could not 
be mathematical. Instead Herbart maintained that ideas have two vari-
ables, time and intensity, and from this claim worked out what has been 
called a “statics and dynamics of the soul” (cf. Boring 1950, 254). Here 
it is enough to say that most modern psychologists regard Herbart’s 
‘statics and dynamics of the soul’ as a complete failure.  20 

Psychology as a Science 91
 However, the historical influence of this method, and the importance 
of Herbart’s system to the experimental tradition in general, should not 
be underestimated. In Brentano’s day the mathematical method intro-
duced by Herbart was popularized through the work of Fechner and, 
after being adopted modified and utilized by Wilhelm Wundt,  21 soon 
became the dominant method in experimental psychology. Brentano, 
like Herbart, Fechner and Wundt, disagreed with Kant in that he 
believed that, even if mathematics was not always or completely applic-
able to mental phenomena, psychology could still achieve the status 
of an exact science. His dynamic act psychology would be that exact 
science. However, unlike the experimental psychologists relying on 
introspection and returning to Herbartian quantificational methods, 
Brentano’s psychology would be a qualitative science of mental acts. 
Therefore, Brentano maintains that,  
 Mathematics appears to me necessary for the exact treatment of 
all sciences only because we now in fact find magnitudes in every 
scientific field, [and accordingly,] If there were a field in which we 
encountered nothing of the sort, exact description would be possible 
even without mathematics. (PES, 66)  
 3.5  Brentano on ‘phenomena’ 
 This last point brings us to the important question of Brentano’s under-
standing of science, including the science of psychology, which he 
characterizes as the science of psychic phenomena. The ancient Greek 
roots of the term “phenomenon” (from which phenomenalism gets its 
name) stem from the verb “φαίνω” [infinitive: φαίνειν], which means 
“to bring to light, make to appear”.  22 Aristotle uses the term “phenom-
enon” in this original Greek sense in texts where he describes that which 
appears for us as revealed through the senses.  23 To understand the term 
“phenomenon” as Brentano uses it throughout the PES, therefore, we 
must start by saying something about the Aristotelian use of the term. 
In  De Anima Aristotle describes how appearances (phenomena) are 
closely related to both perceptions and their objects – which is to say 
sensations and the common and special sensibles. Light, for example, 
is the medium constituting the phenomena of colored objects; Aristotle 
writes of how, “in a certain way light makes potential colors actual 
colors” ( De An . III, 2, 430a 17). Underlying this doctrine is the assump-
tion that we cannot perceive what does not appear, and that which does 
appear can be said to be brought to light precisely as a phenomenon. 

92 From Psychology to Phenomenology
This implicit phenomenology at work in Aristotle’s writings, however, 
is given an epistemological and ontological twist as the sensible data 
are also described as directly revealing the intelligible structures of the 
world they manifest. Sight, to take the above example, along with the 
faculty of vision on which it depends, is also one of the most important 
stages in Aristotelian science ( episteme ). This is so insofar as it reveals 
substances for us precisely as original appearances or phenomena of the 
things themselves. 
 It is within this explicitly epistemological/ontological context that 
sight is called a ‘higher’ sense by Aristotle, for example, in the  Metaphysics 
when he describes how sight is the sense that best helps us to know 
things and make distinctions ( Met . bk I, ch. 1, 980a 24–25). Brentano 
expanded on and eventually amended this essentially Aristotelian 
starting point by borrowing the definition of phenomena but chan-
ging the role and understanding of the phenomena or appearances in 
relation, not to the subject so much as to how the subject is directed 
to transcendent objects or things in themselves. In the PES Brentano 
develops a more dynamic but also more representationalist account of 
thought and perception, while preserving the Aristotelian directedness 
to reality and being that characterizes cognitive acts. In order to accom-
plish this transformation, Brentano turns to other influences to help 
supplement Aristotle. 
 Brentano’s lectures at Würzburg provide us with many clues as to 
how we should understand his framework for describing these matters. 
In many of his Würzburg lectures Brentano goes into great detail about 
the Aristotelian theory, as well as how it requires critical supplementa-
tion based on an epistemologically clarified account of how perception 
establishes the relation of phenomena (or presentations) to knowledge, 
truth claims and to things in themselves. Both the connections to 
Aristotle’s earlier theory and the amendments are especially evident 
in Brentano’s History of Philosophy lectures of the Winter semester 
1866/67. Other clues are offered in his Lectures on Metaphysics from 
1867 and his Lectures on Logic from 1869 and 1870/71. In all the above 
lecture courses we find Brentano thoughtfully adopting the Aristotelian 
sense of truth as related or corresponding to transcendent objects or 
perceptions that point to an ontological ground revealing itself in 
‘appearances’. Brentano, like Aristotle, agrees that these objects imme-
diately grasped by the senses subsequently allow for statements of fact 
to be articulated. Furthermore, proper or scientific demonstration, in 
the Aristotelian sense, requires the prior articulation of the truth of 
what is, as it is. In other words, truths about the substances manifesting 

Psychology as a Science 93
the ‘metaphysical’ laws of being that make our experiences possible. For 
Aristotle, access to substance or  ousia was said to rest on the mediating 
ground of the perceived effects of the substances as these were revealed 
to us, that is, precisely as ‘phenomena’. These phenomena, the exist-
ence of which were affirmed in judgments and the nature or essence 
of which were circumscribed in statements later taken up (when the 
goal was empirical knowledge) to form the basis of inductive syllogisms, 
led to Aristotle’s attempts to formulate general concepts and principles 
providing a proper understanding of reality. 
 Brentano’s focus on Aristotle’s principles of knowledge (as outlined 
in Book Four of the  Metaphysics ), is referred to by him as the ‘transcen-
dental’ part of Aristotelian philosophy (cf. Tomassi, 2007, 105). This 
expounding of  Transcendental Philosophie as a foundation for science is 
stressed especially in his Würzburg lectures. In strict opposition to Kant 
and the German idealist tradition, however, the term ‘transcendental’ 
in these lectures is said to stand merely for principles or the critical 
epistemological starting point for demonstration (such as the principle 
of non-contradiction).  24 In the above case, Brentano reads Aristotle as 
a phenomenal realist whose system nonetheless requires, as was stated 
above, a more critical epistemological foundation. In this way, the crit-
ical challenge to metaphysics as a science (and the Idealist claims that 
metaphysics rests on intuition and special a priori knowledge beyond 
all sensibility) is answered in these lectures. Brentano takes the position 
that the fundamental principles for a scientific metaphysics can be 
intuitively revealed via the evidence delivered through the proper 
phenomena. The above reading is still Aristotelian in spirit and, to cite 
D. W. Aiken, can be viewed as a natural development of the Aristotelian 
system if we propose that Aristotle holds it:
 ... useless for the wise man to seek any knowledge outside of the 
phenomenal realm as it is impossible for the speculative philosopher 
to argue convincingly for transcendental knowledge [in a Platonic or 
Kantian sense]. Now the substantiality of this thesis is really quite 
evident, and might be easily demonstrated by posing a rather simple, 
almost flippant rhetorical question: Is it possible to have knowledge 
of specific-things (this is the import of the Aristotelian  ti ) that are not 
apperceptually present? (Aiken, 1991, 31 – with my amendment)  
 The above quotation touches on an important point concerning the 
basis of Aristotle’s (and following his lead, Brentano’s) empiricism. We 
cannot conceive or perceive anything with the intellect that is not 

94 From Psychology to Phenomenology
first in the senses. This blocks not only Platonic recollection as a valid 
source of the origins of knowledge, but also any so-called transcen-
dental approach that purports to ground knowledge or phenomena on 
a non-intuitively accessible foundation, such as Kant’s attempt when he 
maintained that the fundamental basis of things and so the world of 
true being or essence ( noumena as objects of thought only), does not and 
cannot appear. Even so, Aristotle is not a radical empiricist in the sense 
of abandoning all non-sensible sources of knowledge. In Aristotelian 
science non-empirical principles, grasped by thought ( nous ) alone, are 
as important as experience. 
 At this point, the position we have attributed to Brentano must be 
clarified, especially regarding the relationship of his neo-Aristotelianism 
to Aristotelian phenomenal realism, positivism and the later forms of 
phenomenalism (which later positivist doctrines helped bring forward). 
The above clarifications are especially important for grasping the precise 
sense of Brentano’s understanding and appropriation of phenomen-
alism in the PES, and subsequently for relating the term ‘phenomena’, 
of which heavy use is witnessed throughout Brentano’s text, to his 
overall philosophy of science. To clarify these matters further there-
fore, something must also be said about the alternative theories present 
in the late nineteenth century regarding the role of ‘phenomena’ in 
science, epistemology and ontology.  25 We can begin by examining the 
epistemological theories of the nineteenth-century positivists. 
 Brentano’s linking of his project for developing a scientific psych-
ology with positivism is evident from early on in his text. For example, 
in the opening chapters of Book One of the PES, Brentano writes that:
 Some [i.e. the positivists] define [psychology] as the science of mental 
phenomena [as against the traditional interpretation of psychology 
as science of the soul  – see above] thereby placing it on the same level 
as its sister sciences. Similarly, in their opinion, natural science is to 
be defined as the science of physical phenomena, rather than as the 
science of bodies. (PES, 9, with my comments\PES-G, 10)  
 Brentano goes on to claim that, “ ... whether or not there are souls, the 
fact is that there are mental  phenomena ” (PES, 18\PES-G, 23). The above 
considerations alone seem to persuade Brentano in his choice for the 
‘modern definition’ of psychology over the traditional. However, since, 
as a philosopher, Brentano wants to avoid dogmatism, he characteristic-
ally adds: “ ... perhaps both [the modern and the traditional definition] 
are correct” (PES, 18\PES-G, 23). What is beyond doubt is that, “ ... the 

Psychology as a Science 95
old definition contains metaphysical presuppositions from which the 
modern one is free” (ibid). Many take this claim to mean that Brentano 
wants to liberate psychology from metaphysics  tout court . 26 
 The elimination of metaphysics from science was the original goal 
of Comtean positivism and later the goal of Comte’s modern-day 
successors, the logical positivists. Since Brentano’s name is sometimes 
associated with the Vienna Circle, it might appear natural to view his 
positivism as similar to these later forms. Particularly as regards the 
influence on his thought of Comte who is perhaps the central figure in 
the birth and growth of positivism as a doctrine and whose influence 
no doubt plays a direct role in shaping the doctrines found in the PES. 
However, the form that Comte’s influence takes is not in persuading 
Brentano to divorce science from metaphysics and adopt a thoroughly 
or radically anti-metaphysical reading of ‘phenomena’, but instead, 
Brentano makes use of Cometean ideas when it come to the adoption of 
doctrines regarding the organization and development of the sciences, 
that is, Comte’s so-called encyclopedic law. 
 The extent of Comte’s influence on Brentano is evident when we 
realize that Brentano elaborated a theory, according to which, know-
ledge, or philosophical speculation, moved in phases.  27 Unlike Comte, 
however, Brentano did not accept linear progress, but rather cyclical 
phases that repeat themselves historically with alternating epochs of 
advance and decline. Another important and obvious difference is that 
in Brentano’s system, psychology takes the place of sociology as the 
most complex and specific science.  28 
 Comte was, without a doubt, Brentano’s exemplar of positivist 
thinking in the PES and elsewhere. However, any assessment of the 
elements of the Comtean influence asserted on the doctrines of the 
PES must take into consideration the original Aristotelian context of 
Brentano’s understanding of the term ‘phenomena’ and also how it is 
modified (and in turn modifies) the Comtean doctrines he adopts.  29 
Although Brentano’s use of the term phenomena in the PES has been 
described as being very closely related, if not interchangeable, with 
Comte’s more ‘classical positivist’ notion of phenomena (Hickerson 
2007, 27) 30 close analysis of how the term is used does not bear out the 
above claim. This is not to say that there was not a much closer affinity 
and connection, not to mention direct influence passed down from 
Comte to Brentano.  31 However, as was stated above, this claim needs 
qualification. To better understand why we should reject claims of a 
straightforward Comtean use of “phenomenon”, a brief look at Comte’s 
actual definition and use of the term in the context of his own system 

96 From Psychology to Phenomenology
will prove useful. In his  Cours De Philosophie Positive Comte defines 
“phenomena” as follows:
 We have no knowledge of anything but Phaenomena; and our 
knowledge of phaenomena is relative, not absolute. We know not 
the essence, nor the real mode of production, of any fact, but only 
its relations to other facts in the way of succession or of similitude. 
These relations are constant; that is, always the same in the same 
circumstances. The constant resemblances which link phaenomena 
together, and the consequent, are termed their laws. The laws of 
phaenomena are all we know respecting them. Their essential nature, 
and their ultimate causes, either efficient, or final, are unknown and 
inscrutable to us. (Comte, quoted in Mill, 1866, 6)  
 On a superficial reading, the above passage is quite compatible with 
Brentano’s usage of the term phenomena. However, when we take into 
account how Comte believed that the essential nature of all phenomena 
can only be grounded in the sociological framework elaborated in his 
writings, then the differences between his position and Brentano’s 
become more apparent. Comte has no theory of inner perception, nor 
is he willing to admit intuitively grasped, that is, self-evident, princi-
ples of knowledge. In discussing the attainment of what he calls the 
dynamic versus ‘statical’ aspects of reality, Comte writes:
 If we look at the Dynamic aspect we have to study simply the exer-
cise and results of the intellectual powers of the human race, which 
is neither more nor less than the general object of the Positive 
Philosophy. In short, looking at all scientific theories as so many 
great logical facts, it is only by the thorough observation of these 
facts that we can arrive at the knowledge of logical laws. These being 
the only means of knowledge of intellectual phenomena, the illu-
sory psychology, which is the last phase of theology, is excluded. It 
pretends to accomplish the discovery of the laws of the human mind 
by contemplating it in itself; that is, by separating it from causes and 
effects. Such an attempt, made in defiance of the physiological study 
of our intellectual organs, and of the observation of the rational 
methods of procedure, cannot succeed at this time of day. (Comte, 
2000, 27)  
 In the above passage it sounds as if Comte is merely excluding a 
rational psychology, that is, one that ignores physiological research and 

Psychology as a Science 97
experimentation (and of a kind that had been almost already completely 
abandoned in Germany as a consequence of Kant’s criticism of the 
Wolffian version, wherein it played a significant role). In addition, as 
is well known, Brentano is equally critical of speculative psychology 
of the soul, believing its potential theoretical contributions to scien-
tific psychology to be very limited. However, because Comte blocks all 
recourse to attaining insight into the laws of the human mind, and 
eschews any grasp of laws of nature not connected directly to observa-
tion and empirical judgments, we see that his actual position is quite 
distant from Brentano’s views on these matters. 
 Taking all the above into consideration, it seems unlikely therefore, 
that Brentano is merely borrowing Comte’s definition of the meaning 
of what is properly ‘phenomenal’ or ‘actual’ without qualification. For 
one thing, this ignores the strongly stated differences between Comte 
and Brentano in their very understanding of what is, or can be, the 
fundamental or most complex [and therefore important] science in 
the hierarchy of sciences (for Brentano it is psychology, for Comte, 
sociology). For another, it ignores the fact that Brentano still main-
tains a basically Aristotelian epistemological foundation wherein 
first principles must determine the most or maximally general laws. 
These first principles are said to be derived from the phenomena best 
known to us (i.e. insights of inner perception), which are held to give 
us access to precisely the ultimate grounds for articulating metaphys-
ical laws. Therefore, to assume that Brentano borrows Comte’s defin-
ition of terms also ignores disagreements between the two thinkers 
pertaining to methodological matters. For Comte the positive stage 
is anti-metaphysical (or, as Mill clarifies in his study of Comte, 
“anti-abstractional and anti-ontological” [Mill, 1866, 10]), but also 
ultimate and insuperable. For Brentano, by contrast, there is a cycle 
of stages in the attainment of knowledge. The rare scientific stages of 
intellectual development are said to always fall to less rational move-
ments of decline (cf. PP). While all the stages of intellectual develop-
ment are said to be measureable or evaluated and assessable regarding 
their viability and consistency, for Brentano as opposed to Comte, 
the ultimate standard of this assessment takes place against the back-
ground of a rigorously scientific metaphysical framework. Finally, 
because Brentano was introduced to Comte’s writings through the 
work of J. S. Mill (as he affirms in a letter written to Mill in 1872), and 
because Mill’s writings contain as much criticism as praise of Comte 
(cf. Mill, 1866, 55), it seems wise to conclude that Brentano’s reliance 
on Comte was also critical.  32  

98 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 In touching on Mill, a salient additional point can be made regarding 
the above matters. Namely, that Comte was not the only writer 
promoting an epistemological form of phenomenalism in nineteenth-
century philosophy of science. Another plausible source for Brentano’s 
borrowing and use of the term phenomena and the purported phenom-
enalism on display in the PES is the English empiricist tradition. John 
Herschel, for example, makes prominent use of the term ‘phenomenon’ 
in his philosophy of science. Brentano cites Herschel in his Würzburg 
lectures on logic from 1871 where he treats of inductive inferences (cf. 
EL80–13.490.2). In his book  Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural 
Philosophy (1851), Herschel writes of how:
 PHENOMENA, then, or appearances, as the word is literally rendered, 
are the sensible results of processes and operations carried on among 
external objects, or their constituent principles, of which they are 
only signals, conveyed to our minds as aforesaid. Now, these proc-
esses themselves may be in many instances rendered sensible; that is 
to say, analysed, and shown to consist in the motions or other affec-
tions of sensible objects themselves. (Herschel, 1851, 85)  
 Phenomena are literally appearances, and according to Herschel 
they are also what scientists observe and perform experiments on. 
Nonetheless as “mere signals”, denoting a transcendent reality, 
Herschel is clear that they are only signals in the sense that they are 
‘caused’ and able to be accounted for (read: somehow reduced to) the 
external objects that present them. J. S. Mill was amongst the most 
prominent thinkers in England to take up and expand on Herschel’s 
inductivist philosophy of science. Here we approach very close to the 
position held by Brentano, and as was already noted, Mill’s thought, 
and especially his overview of inductivist method and epistemology 
as outlined in the  System of Logic , were direct influences on Brentano 
(and cf. Brentano’s EL80 12.988). Mill’s use of ‘phenomena’ in both the 
 System of Logic and  An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy 
is also one that closely corresponds to that of the appearances relating 
to the real causes or forces that constitute reality. For Mill, that is, the 
objects of experience or so-called objects in the world can be under-
stood if they are reduced to our observation statements about them 
constructed from sensations. The latter, in turn, become the basis for 
inferring the underlying ‘anticipated’ uniformities constituted by the 
regularity of the laws. For Mill matter is “the permanent possibility 
of sensation” (cf. Mill, 1865). In many passages of the PES Brentano 

Psychology as a Science 99
describes phenomena in a fashion resembling that used by Herschel 
and Mill. For example, in Book One, Chapter 3, Brentano writes of 
how “color, sound and temperature, as well as the phenomena of 
spatial location give us no idea of the realities which influence the 
phenomena we experience” (PES, 60\PES-G, 77–78). And in Book Two, 
Chapter 1, in describing the natural sciences [excluding psychology] 
Brentano writes:
 ... these are the sciences which seek to explain the succession of 
physical phenomena connected with normal and pure sensations 
(that is sensations which are not influenced by special mental condi-
tions and processes) on the basis of the assumption of a world which 
resembles one which has three dimensional extension in space and 
flows in one direction in time, and which influences our sense 
organs. (PES, 98–99)  
 Nonetheless, granting these similarities, it can still be argued that 
the nineteenth-century positivist sense of phenomena cannot, in all 
respects, be identical with Brentano’s understanding of the term. For 
one thing Brentano was critical of both Comte’s lack of insight into 
the possibilities of a scientific psychology and metaphysical foundation 
for the sciences, as well as Mill’s purely phenomenalist epistemology 
in the  System of Logic .  33 There is, however, yet another influence that 
can be mentioned, one much closer to home and more pertinent to 
how Brentano understood the phenomenal nature of evidence in his 
empirical psychology. This final source may provide the missing clue 
for grasping the underlying position maintained by Brentano. 
 Brentano is very clear that the mind is active and dynamically 
directed to extra-mental reality. There is, in other words, a nativist and 
dynamic aspect to Brentano’s philosophy of mind that is frequently 
ignored or downplayed in interpreting his theory of perception. One 
influence on Brentano here is the German philosopher G.W. Leibniz 
(who is discussed very rarely in the PES). In his critical commentary on 
Locke’s Essay, the  Nouveau Essais sur l’Entendenement (1703–05), Leibniz 
describes the mind as constituted by a constant active principle.  34 It 
can also be noted that the famous Scholastic “in esse” terminology, 
later used by Brentano to describe the intentional relation, also appears 
in Liebniz’s  Discourse on Metaphysics , in Section 8 where the quintessen-
tially mental act of predication and judgment is discussed (cf. Leibniz, 
1989, 41). Two other figures, closer in time to Brentano, are important 
in capturing his understanding of sensations and use of the term 

100 From Psychology to Phenomenology
‘phenomenon’. These are the neo-Kantians J. F. Herbart and Herman 
von Helmholtz. Herbart, the pupil of Fichte and successor of Kant at 
Königsberg, is a name that occurs frequently in the PES. Herbart’s revi-
sion of Kant’s doctrine of phenomenal knowledge is especially relevant 
here. Herbart criticized Kant’s representationalism and dualism and 
returned to a view resembling a combination of Leibniz and Locke in 
his understanding of the mind (cf. De Garmo, 1895). Herbart held, for 
example, that phenomena directed us to the things in themselves and 
were not merely projections and constructions of the faculty of pure 
reason. For all of his criticism of Herbart in the PES, Brentano’s use of 
phenomena is very similar to the use of the term as found in Herbart’s 
writings, and he is mentioned as having a more or less proper under-
standing of experience as grounded on what can be called dynamic 
phenomenal or presentational contents ( Vorstellungen ) (cf. PES, 80–81). 
Although Brentano disagreed with and criticized many aspects of 
Herbart’s mathematical model for psychology, nonetheless, he is a 
frequently cited figure in the PES; and the intellectual context within 
which Brentano was writing was one where Herbart’s doctrines were 
quite influential.  35 Helmholtz, likewise, is both mentioned and praised 
in the PES for his theory of the after-image and also for his theory of 
simultaneous contrast in stereoptic perception (cf. PES, 118, 152). Even 
though Brentano rejects his acceptance of unconscious perception, he 
comes close to Helmholtz when he discusses conscious perception. 
Helmholtz maintained a doctrine of indirect realism in perception 
and developed a theory of phenomenal representations as presented 
signs ( Zeichen ) of objects in the external world. Many passages of the 
PES can be cited as evidence that Brentano holds a similar version of 
indirect realism in perception. For example, in the PES Brentano writes 
of how,  
 The phenomena of light, sound, heat, spatial location and loco-
motion which [the natural scientist] studies are not things which 
really and truly exist [ die wahrhaft und wirklich bestehen ]. They are 
signs [ Zeichen ] of something real, which, through its causal activity, 
produces presentations of them. (PES, 19\PES-G, 24)  
 Both Herbart and Helmholtz, it can be pointed out, were revising 
Kantian doctrines. Likewise, at one point in the PES, Brentano notes 
how his philosophy of science approaches as far as possible to Kant’s 
explanations without, however, his thought coinciding with Kantian 
premises (PES, 99n\PES-G, 128n).  

Psychology as a Science 101
 3.6  Brentano’s ‘phenomenalism’ and the PES 
 Having said something about Brentano’s use of the term ‘phenomena’, 
we are better prepared to explore another aspect of the philosophy of 
science underlying the PES and that is the proper interpretation of what 
is called Brentano’s ‘phenomenalism’. Brentano has been called a realist, 
a methodological phenomenalist and a nineteenth-century disciple 
of Comte (embracing the latter’s version of phenomenalism). A better 
understanding of Brentano’s phenomenalism, one that is also better 
supported by the facts of his intellectual development and his own writ-
ings, is to interpret his position as an amended version of the Comtean 
position supplemented by the (neo-) Aristotelian version of phenomenal 
realism as influenced by the German neo-Kantian tradition. 
 That there is little consensus in the secondary literature on the 
kind of phenomenalism said to be upheld by Brentano becomes quite 
evident upon even a preliminary and superficial investigation about 
what different commentators have written and claimed. For example, 
Herbert Spiegelberg describes how,  
 Brentano’s use of the term ‘phenomenon’ has neither ‘phenomeno-
logical’ nor ‘phenomenalist’ implications; nor is it related to the 
Kantian distinction between ‘phenomenon’ and ‘noumenon’. He 
uses it exactly in the same sense as did the scientists of the time and 
as his philosophical neighbors, Auguste Comte and John Stuart Mill. 
(Spiegelberg, 1969, 39n)  
 While Peter Simons writes of how, in the PES,  
 Though [Brentano’s] metaphysical views prevented him from being 
either a phenomenalist or a positivist, Brentano stood closer to these 
positions in 1874 than later; we could consider him a  methodological 
phenomenalist. (Simons, introduction to the PES, xvii)  
 And Tim Crane states,  
 Brentano was not a phenomenalist because phenomenalism holds 
that the world is constructed from phenomena, appearances or (in 
some versions) sense-data ... Brentano holds that there is a world 
which transcends the phenomena; physical phenomena are ‘signs of 
something real, which, through its causal activity, produces presen-
tations of them’. (Crane in Textor, 2007, 27–28)  36 

102 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 Finally, in contrast to Simons and Crane, Ryan Hickerson main-
tains that Brentano’s position in the PES is that of full-fledged 
phenomenalism,  
 The Psychology’s concept of a phenomenon was simply the Comtean 
one. [Brentano held a] ... somewhat older understanding of the phys-
ical ... [which in turn] returns him to the fold of  fin-de-siècle phenom-
enalisms. (Hickerson, 2007, 27/22)  37 
 To clarify the exact kind of phenomenalism Brentano was advocating, 
it will be helpful to explore and fix our terminology at this point. 
We must, in a far more satisfactory manner, define precisely a) what 
phenomenalism meant in nineteenth-century  fin-de-siècle philosophy 
of science and b) how Brentano’s use of the term ‘phenomena’ relates to 
the philosophical phenomenalism of his time. 
 In order to better examine what can be called theories of “phenom-
enalism”, we can begin with classification. In  A Dictionary of Philosophy , 
A.R. Lacey writes of how,  
 Like subjective idealism, from which perhaps it developed, phenom-
enalism makes appearances central. Subjective idealism says physical 
objects are unreal. Phenomenalism says they are real, but are not 
what they seem – they are appearances, actual or possible. (Lacey, 
1974, 157–58)  
 James van Cleve (1981) distinguishes between types of phenomenalism 
as exhaustively breaking down into four possible versions:
 1)   analytical phenomenalism.  
 2)  ontological phenomenalism.  
 3)  Kantian phenomenalism.  
 4)  Berkeleyan phenomenalism.  
 Cleve describes the first definition, or analytical phenomenalism, as 
the doctrine that “Statements about physical objects are equivalent 
in meaning to statements exclusively about sense data (or ways of 
appearing, etc.)”. Ontological phenomenalism, he defines as, the claim 
that: “Physical objects are identical with collections or families of actual 
and possible sense data.” The Kantian thesis [number 3 above] can be 
translated into the doctrine that, “[w]e know things only as they appear 
to us, not as they are in themselves”, and finally the Berkeleyan can be 

Psychology as a Science 103
rendered: “Physical objects are existentially mind-dependent (i.e., they 
exist only when perceived)” (cf. Cleve, 1981, 325). 
 Taking the above as exhaustive, we can begin by stating that Brentano’s 
phenomenalism is not an analytical kind, such as, for example, can be 
found in G. E. Moore (c.1925–30) and, according to Cleve, in the phil-
osophy of C. I. Lewis. Analytical phenomenalism reduces what we can 
know of objects in themselves to essentially immanent mental or logical 
constructs called ‘sense-data’. In a sense, all we can speak of or really 
know are these mediating terms or ultimate subjects, that is, the logic-
ally built up sense-data in our minds. When I view a chair, on this view, 
I don’t see the chair but a collection of sense-data.  38 Brentano’s ideoge-
netic theory of judgment will be seen to be one that rejects all medi-
ating or symbolic items or ‘ideas’ as the basis for forming statements 
about the world. Judgments and statements based upon judgments give 
access to the primary objects of experience for Brentano – even if they 
are known through the mental phenomenon of the act of presentation. 
For Brentano it is also not the case that we know only our own sensa-
tions. The acts of sensation instead are always said to present a ‘content’ 
or ‘object’ that is sensed. 
 Analytical phenomenalism is therefore not a satisfactory definition 
of what Brentano is proposing. We can also take Mach’s philosophy 
as a thoroughgoing version of analytic phenomenalism. Mach adopted 
this radical version of phenomenalism by building on Fechner’s project 
of psychophysics in perception, but essentially eschewing metaphysics 
and the psychic or mental side of Fechnerian psychophysics altogether 
(cf. Mach, 1906). If the possibility of an intelligible supersensible order 
that somehow pre-informs nature is disregarded, the resulting construc-
tions of intelligibility (reducible to the connections of sense-data or in 
Mach’s case ‘sensations’ given order by the thinker) become the only 
real source of intelligibility and the only grounds upon which we can 
establish knowledge. This is Mach’s position, a radical and reductive 
form of positivism. Mach also eschews any attempt to describe objects 
beyond appearances. 
 This analytic variety of phenomenalism is also well described 
by C. D. Broad as the theory that proposes to dispense with entities 
corresponding to one or all of the three following terms: ‘sensations,’ 
‘sense-data,’ or ‘physical objects’ (cf. Broad, 1915, 227). In his article 
“Phenomenalism” Broad lists Russell as wanting [in 1915] to do away 
with physical objects, Mach as wishing to dispense with ‘sense-data’ but 
to keep sensations, and the American realist philosophers as desiring 
to dispense completely with ‘sensations’ but still preserve ‘sense-data’ 

104 From Psychology to Phenomenology
(ibid, 227–28). Of the three entities listed above, Brentano never describes 
‘sense-data’, and has a different understanding of sensations and their 
relation to physical objects. Brentano’s position could, however, be 
viewed as having an affinity with the American realists (especially the 
early William James), though rather than attributing adherence to a 
positivist or methodologically neo-positivist form of phenomenalism 
as the reason for this affinity, we would do better to attribute this to 
the shared empirical influences (Mill, Bain, etc.) especially when it is 
recalled that Brentano was writing before the later doctrines of physical 
objects as logical constructions of sense-data became fashionable.  39 
 Ontological phenomenalism can be rendered as similar to the 
analytic variety with the important difference that in the case of ‘onto-
logical’ phenomenalism the kind of ontology underlying its theory 
can be conceived as idealistic rather than materialist. This position 
would have been better known to Brentano in its Hegelian rather 
than Berkeleyan or other varieties, and as such he basically accepted 
Trendelenburg’s and Herbart’s arguments against it. From early on, 
Brentano maintained that subjective idealism is both an unsound 
and absurd position, and this assessment, we can deduce, would hold 
just as well for ontological phenomenalism. Brentano’s critical rejec-
tion of ontological phenomenalism can be equally well applied to its 
close cousin: Berkeleyan phenomenalism. As a theistic version of onto-
logical phenomenalism grounded on empiricism rather than ration-
alist premises, Berkeleyan phenomenalism is in some ways closer in 
spirit to Brentano’s position in the PES  40 – thus making it more compat-
ible than either the analytical or ontological versions. However, it must 
also be rejected as the kind of phenomenalism consistent with that in 
Brentano’s text; a rejection that holds for methodological as well as 
metaphysical reasons. 
 This leaves us with only one kind of phenomenalism that fits with 
Brentano’s version and that is the so-called Kantian phenomenalism.  41 
Kantian or epistemological phenomenalism holds in essence that 
spatial and temporal intuitions refer to objects phenomenally but our 
mental or psychic phenomena can never represent things in themselves 
that transcend experience. This is consistent with what can be found in 
many passages of the PES. For example where Brentano writes:
 We ... say that the objects of our senses, as revealed in sensation, are 
merely phenomena; colour and sound, warmth and taste do not 
really and truly exist outside of our sensations, even though they 
point to objects which do so exist. (PES, 9\PES-G, 11)  

Psychology as a Science 105
 We see that Brentano’s position here comes very close to the Kantian 
phenomenalism that was defined above. This becomes especially evident 
when we note that Brentano has not abandoned his earlier metaphysical 
realism. In the PES Brentano points out that the appearance of objects 
presented through the senses  via external perception (or in the language 
of science, secondary qualities) are deceptive as regards how reality is 
truly constituted. Brentano will later go so far as to claim that outer 
perception, or perception of the external world, is not properly ‘percep-
tion’ at all (cf. PES, 91). In Book One of the PES we are even offered similar 
arguments to those earlier used by Bishop Berkeley to convince us that 
sense impressions are deceptive and non-stable that is, merely  phenom-
enal as opposed to actually existing. Brentano writes: “these facts [i.e. the 
subjective relative status of secondary qualities] prove beyond doubt that 
the objects of sensory experience are deceptive” (PES, 9\PES-G, 11). 
 Therefore, Brentano maintains that the above considerations do not 
allow us to “believe that the objects of so-called external perception 
really exist as they appear to us” (PES, 10\PES-G, 11); that is, we must 
accept that the objects of external sense perception  as we perceive them 
do not exist outside of us but are rather “mere phenomena” [ blosse 
Phänomene ] (PES, 10\PES-G, 11). Yet Brentano also maintains that we 
have clear knowledge of the objects of inner perception: “ ... of their 
existence [objects of inner perception] we have that clear knowledge 
[ klarste Erkenntnis ] and complete certainty [ vollste Gewissheit ], which 
is provided by immediate insight” (PES, 10\PES-G, 11). The objects of 
inner perception or  psychic phenomena are, in reality, as they appear to 
be. This is indeed a great advantage for the scientific status of psych-
ology that Brentano is trying to promulgate. Since mental phenomena 
have actual existence, that is, are “true in themselves” [ Diese sind wahr 
in sich selbst ] as Brentano puts it (PES, 20\PES-G, 24), psychology can 
therefore be founded on an indubitable basis.  42 However, once again 
it must be pointed out that Brentano is not, in the above passages, 
arguing for a form of phenomenalism like Bishop Berkeley. This would 
be a metaphysical position that could not be supported from Brentano’s 
Aristotelian and realist standpoint. And there is strong evidence that 
Brentano’s position in the PES is a form of Aristotelian or empirical 
realism and not a pure phenomenalism of either an analytic, Berkeleyan 
or ontological variety.  43 Although, as mentioned previously, at one point 
Brentano does say that:
 We have seen what kind of knowledge the natural scientist is able 
to attain. The phenomena of light, sound, heat; spatial location and 

106 From Psychology to Phenomenology
locomotion which he studies are not things which really and truly 
exist. (PES, 19\PES-G, 24)  
 The above claim becomes compatible with a version of Kantian phenom-
enalism once the ontological context of the PES is taken into account. 
Brentano’s understanding of existence and reality in the PES are not 
simple or univocal and interchangeable terms. The above passage can 
therefore be read as in accord with the realist ontology and represen-
tationalist account of the mental that Brentano is working within. On 
this framework phenomenal qualities would be secondary or sensory 
qualities (some philosophers would call these  qualia ) and, as such, 
immediate interpretations of primary or actually existing qualities of 
the objective factors that ‘cause’ our impressions. The phenomena of 
light, sound, heat, etc., treated as abstractions by the scientist, lack 
independent existence because they are merely potential effects of the 
causes that inform and establish our experience. When we take into 
consideration, as was done above, how the kind of psychology Brentano 
wants to establish as scientific is one that will form a propaedeutic 
to a systematic metaphysics, then the differences and tensions with 
Aristotelianism become somewhat less pronounced. 
 The empiricist and realist context of Brentano’s text therefore, 
makes it clear that the term ‘phenomena’ describes both a wide range 
of objects  and states, while neither making it reducible to representa-
tions or transcendentally divorced from them. That is, in claiming that 
the term ‘physical phenomena’ should not be applied to the external 
or transcendent forces that cause our sensations (which are elsewhere 
referred to, in a very Kantian manner, as the unknown ‘Xs’ or causes 
of affections), there is no indication that Brentano does not also hold 
that the physical as ‘phenomena’ is also something mind-dependent, 
that is, intimately connected,  via sensations to our representations 
( Vorstellungen ) that, in turn, form the basis of mental life. Furthermore, 
it is our psychic acts that intentionally direct us to the external reality 
and the objects studied by the natural sciences (for evidence of this cf. 
Brentano’s EL80 notes). 
 To summarize, the nineteenth-century empiricist borrowings and 
transformation of the term ‘phenomena’ (as articulated in the writings 
of Alexander Bain and J. S. Mill) is adopted by Brentano and connected to 
both the Aristotelian and positivist/Comtean use of the term. Brentano 
seems to find the positivist notion compatible with the reinterpret-
ation and criticism of Kant presented in the theories and writings of 
his teacher Trendelenburg and later thinkers such as J. F. Herbart, who 

Psychology as a Science 107
offered a similar criticism of Kantianism regarding its interpretation of 
psychology. 
 Examining Brentano’s essentially Aristotelian use of ‘phenomena’ 
against the neo-Kantian conception that was respectable in the German 
universities of his day, also gives us a better perspective from which to 
understand his particular use of the term.  44 This reading is preferable to 
taking Brentano in the PES to be uncritically borrowing from any single 
source (i.e. either from Comte, Herbart, Mill, Helmholtz or Aristotle 
alone). Finally, even if many thinkers were influential in Brentano’s 
understanding of phenomenalism, or what he took to be the meaning 
of ‘the phenomenal’, ultimately the term, as it becomes established in 
the system of the PES, has a unique sense. The more idiosyncratic and 
precise meaning of ‘phenomena’ (frequently context dependent) is often 
simply synonymous with what is a ‘fact’. As such, it necessarily depends 
on the deeper ontological framework, which Brentano had developed 
before the PES was written and showed no signs of having abandoned 
therein. The precise use of the term ‘phenomena’ in the PES will be 
further clarified in the next chapter where a close examination of both 
psychic or mental and physical phenomena is presented.  

108
 In this chapter we turn our attention to Book Two of Brentano’s PES 
and present an overview of its first four chapters. Book Two carries 
the title “ Von den psychischen Phänomenen im Allgemeinen ”, which can 
be rendered as “On Psychological Phenomena in General” although 
“Mental Phenomena in General” is also an acceptable translation.  1 
These sections of the PES include some of the most important ideas in 
Brentano’s text and introduce themes that would become highly influ-
ential on subsequent philosophy of mind. In particular, they introduce 
the single most important doctrine for understanding the essential 
distinction between “psychic” or mental and “physical” phenomena, 
i.e. the “intentional inexistence” of mental or psychic acts. After giving 
a critical outline and commentary on these sections, the theoretical 
core of Brentano’s philosophical psychology is explored in detail and an 
analysis of the structural properties of consciousness and the intrinsic 
characteristics of mental acts in the PES will be given. Finally, after the 
interpretation of the doctrine of intentional inexistence, and the nature 
and the unity of consciousness as conceived by Brentano is outlined, it 
is argued that a tension is present in the PES, pertaining to the status 
of consciousness as a temporally unified continuum said to simultan-
eously unify itself while relating to both objects and its discrete acts.  
 4.1  Physical and psychical phenomena 
 The first book of the PES, “Psychology as a Science”, leads directly into the 
more detailed discussion of the second half, which focuses on “Mental 
Phenomena in General”. At the beginning of Book Two of the  Psychology 
 4 
 “Intentional Inexistence” and 
the Separation of “Psychic” 
from “Physical” Phenomena  

“Intentional Inexistence” 109
from an Empirical Standpoint Brentano writes that, “the entire world, as it 
appears to us, is divided into two great classes – the class of physical and 
the class of psychic phenomena” (PES, 77\PES-G, 101, translation modi-
fied).  2 Brentano earlier made a distinction between physical and psych-
ical phenomenon as being, “most disparate and heterogeneous” (PES, 
31\PES-G, 37). Furthermore, at the time the PES was published he main-
tained that there was neither agreement nor complete clarity regarding 
the delimitation of the two classes. In the PES he complains of how “the 
physical phenomena which appear in the imagination are sometimes 
taken for mental phenomena” (ibid).  3 Here again it must be emphasized 
that Brentano observed a fundamental difference between “physical” 
and “mental” or “psychical” phenomena. Only after this difference and 
the basis for it have been given, can the implications of the well-known 
thesis of the intentional inexistence of the mental be elaborated and its 
intrinsic connection to his philosophy of mind explored. 
 To begin we can note that both the distinction proposed between 
physical and psychical phenomena, as well as Brentano’s methodo-
logical approach for distinguishing and classifying these terms, are far 
from uncontested by philosophers today. In the PES, Brentano gives 
examples of prominent nineteenth-century empiricists and “associ-
ationist” psychologists who attempted to distinguish sensation from 
imagination. A common strategy for demarcating the two capacities, for 
example, was by holding that sensation occurs as a result of “physical” 
phenomena influencing the subject while imagination, by contrast, was 
determined only by so-called mental phenomena. The same thinkers, 
nonetheless, were forced to admit that what appears in sensation does 
not correspond to its efficient cause, i.e. the transcendent physical object 
as the non-mental cause of the subsequent “psychic” phenomena (cf. 
PES, 78). Therefore, the above demarcation criteria proposed, no less 
than the subsequent analysis provided by reference to it, can be said 
to be rendered incoherent with the consequence that very little light is 
actually shed on the essential nature of the mental. In contemporary 
philosophy of mind, by contrast (and until relatively recently) there was 
a sustained effort to exclude so-called subjective or non-quantifiable 
aspects of psychological experience such as “consciousness” or “phenom-
enal” properties or “ideas in the mind” from discussions of the mental. 
On these recent objectivist, or what can also be called physicalist, 
accounts, Brentano’s attempt to demarcate what is essentially psychic or 
mental from what is physical would be viewed as a misguided and point-
less exercise.  4 In defense of Brentano’s approach it can be noted that it 
is not at all controversial to claim that, in order for justice to be done to 

110 From Psychology to Phenomenology
the complete facts of experience (including what are rather conspicuous 
aspects of our actual mental lives), something must be said about the 
irreducible yet mysterious qualities of thought and perception such as 
those known by the terms “phenomenal” or “phenomenological” prop-
erties. Brentano’s PES text attempts to do justice to the mental and so, as 
recent cognitive approaches to the mind attest, makes valuable contribu-
tions towards providing an account of why the mental is as it is. 
 We must, however, examine Brentano’s definitions very carefully here 
before presenting and engaging with both existing criticism of cogni-
tivist approaches in psychology or providing any of our own criticism 
or interpretation about the distinctions and methodology Brentano 
uses.  5 Brentano’s descriptive psychology, as was earlier mentioned, is 
a psychological science of the “mental” or “psychic” act. Here it can 
be asked what, precisely, characterizes the mental and differentiates it 
from the physical? To determine an answer to this question Brentano 
presents (in line with his descriptive method) examples of psychical 
and physical phenomena respectively. This list of examples of the 
difference psychological phenomena includes six possible criteria for 
demarcating the mental from the non-mental. Certain experimen-
talist psychologists would later criticize Brentano for taking a specu-
lative and logical approach to psychology but it is notable that, in 
the PES, we are told that definitions can be logical (i.e. axiomatic) or 
stipulative and ostensive and based on hypothetical conditions to be 
met (or not) in experience. Brentano tells us that the latter are to be 
preferred when, as is the case in philosophy of mind, the particular 
terms or examples are clearer than the general phenomena under 
investigation. Furthermore, “[i]t does not matter to us which means 
we use, as long as they really serve to clarify the terms (PES, 78\PES-G, 
102), thus, in starting with concrete examples, Brentano is not after 
a merely logical or purely a priori definition. Explanation in science 
can be attained either by means of the subsumption of particulars 
(serving as examples) under general terms or by explicit definitions 
(PES, 78\PES-G, 103). The term “color”, for example, is better explained 
by describing it as the genus that designates a class containing, for 
instance, red, blue, green, yellow, etc. than by starting with a particular 
instance of red and then trying to explain how exactly the former 
relates to the class designation “color” (ibid). Brentano’s descriptive 
methodology applied to psychological phenomena demands that he 
give an explanation through observation of particular phenomena as 
they appear. Only after the careful descriptive work of classification 
has been done can the leap to the laws covering and explaining the 

“Intentional Inexistence” 111
facts of the observed phenomena be posited. Here we see the induct-
ivist method articulated in Book One of the PES applied directly to 
psychological phenomena. Subsequently, on this model of explan-
ation, the derivation and clarification of concepts must be formulated 
along both pragmatic and evidential grounds. All of this, although 
arguably raising problems of its own regarding philosophy of science 
and analysis of experience [see Part III, Chapter 8 below], is perfectly 
in line with Brentano’s empiricist method. Definitions and classifi-
cations are achieved by means of examples drawn from the basis of 
experience. In the PES examples of mental phenomena are listed as:
 Every idea or presentation [ Vorstellung ], which we acquire either 
through sense perception or imagination ... By presentation I do 
not mean that which is presented, but rather the act of presenta-
tion [ Act des Vorstellens ]. Thus, hearing a sound, seeing a coloured 
object, feeling warmth or cold, as well as similar states of imagin-
ation are examples of what I mean by this term. I also mean by it 
the thinking of a general concept, provided such a thing actually 
does occur. Furthermore, every judgement, conviction or opinion, 
every doubt, is a mental phenomenon. Also to be included under 
this term is every emotion: joy, sorrow, fear, hope, courage, despair, 
anger, love, hate, desire, act of will, intention, astonishment, admir-
ation, contempt, etc. (PES, 78–79\PES-G, 103).  
 Physical phenomena, on the other hand, are listed as:
 A colour, a figure, a landscape which I see  6 , a chord which I hear, 
warmth, cold, odor which I sense; as well as similar images which 
appear in the imagination (PES, 79–80\PES-G, 104).  
 Mental phenomena are further qualified by several distinguishing char-
acteristics that Brentano discusses to help clarify their distinction from 
the physical. The six criteria given for distinguishing properly mental 
phenomena from physical ones are the following:
 mental 
phenomena 
are 
either 
presentations 
or 
based 
on 
1. 
presentations;  
 mental phenomena, unlike physical phenomena, are non-extended;  
2. 
 mental phenomena intentionally contain or are directed towards 
3. 
objects or contents;  
 mental phenomena are only perceived in inner consciousness;  
4. 

112 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 mental phenomena possess actual existence in addition to inten-
5. 
tional existence – they are as they appear to be, and finally,  
 mental phenomena are presented serially as a unity (in time) while 
6. 
physical phenomena can be presented simultaneously (PES, 80–97\
PES-G, 104–26).  
 Linguistically, psychic or mental phenomena are almost always char-
acterized by verbal forms of expression in Brentano’s text, and physical 
phenomena by nominal ones. Furthermore, in Part One of the PES, 
Brentano had distinguished between physical phenomena by calling 
them “ blosse Phänomene ” – i.e. “mere phenomena”, while the psychical 
were said to have the status of full  Phänomen (Cf. PES, 9\PES-G, 10–11).  7 
Building on the Aristotelian conception of “act”, Brentano assumes that 
psychic phenomena are only made fully actual, i.e. given as full states 
or processes by which we are immediately aware of their existence, 
when they take or are directed to objects.  8 In fact, because psychic acts 
are irreducibly directed towards physical phenomena in various modes, 
the former are, according to Brentano, explicitly said to be epistemo-
logically privileged. Brentano writes of how psychic phenomena can be 
said to be, “the things which are most our own” (PES, 20\PES-G, 25). 
Psychic phenomena are also described as being precisely as they appear 
to be – which means that we can never be mistaken about them and 
that they can be given with evidence and even with what can be called 
apodictic evidence. 
 Here we can note that although phenomena fall into higher and 
lower, or more and less complex kinds, the psychic phenomena that 
the science of psychology must study are said to be of the highest level 
of complexity; one far greater than that displayed by the phenomena 
studied by mathematics, physics, or chemistry, etc. (PES, 23\PES-G, 28). 
In Book Two of the PES, after discussing the essential nature of psychic 
or mental phenomena, Brentano writes:
 We must consider only mental phenomena [ psychischen Phänomenen ] 
in the sense of real states as the proper object of psychology. And it is 
in reference only to these phenomena that we say that psychology is 
the science of mental phenomena (PES, 100\PES-G,130).  
 But what criterion distinguishes “mental” from “physical” phenomena? 
 Examining the six criteria listed above, we can immediate rule out 
the first, i.e. that all psychic phenomena are presentations or based 
on presentations (PES, 85\PES-G, 111), as completely satisfactory. 

“Intentional Inexistence” 113
This distinction is not seen as the definitive characterization because, 
according to Brentano, “it separates mental phenomena into two 
groups” i.e., presentations and phenomena based on presenta-
tions (ibid).  9 The second criterion listed above was that all mental 
phenomena are unextended in space. This is a rationalist definition 
and can be found in the writings of thinkers such as Descartes and 
Spinoza, for example, and also in Kant. The above criterion for demar-
cation nonetheless also proves unsatisfactory. In line with the above 
definitions of the physical and the psychic just listed, Brentano claims 
that some so-called physical phenomena can also be unextended, for 
example, a sound or a smell. Also (and here Brentano again follows 
Aristotle) some mental phenomena can be viewed as extended, like 
certain emotions, such as fear, which can express themselves through 
bodily effects and sensations. Ultimately, however, Brentano rejects 
the non-extension criteria as the definitive one, expressing the 
essence of mental phenomena, not for the above reasons (which he 
thinks can be disputed) but for the simple reason that, “this criterion 
gives us only a negative definition of mental phenomena” (PES, 88). 
The third criterion, intentional inexistence, will be treated in detail 
in the next section below. The fourth, that only mental phenomena 
can be perceived using inner perception, is one that Brentano takes 
to be true but effectively meaningless. Mental acts, we are told, must 
always be defined according to the objects they take and only inner 
perception is perception in the true and strict sense of the word. Outer 
perception, or sensible qualities are not actual and real parts of our 
experience [as Brentano puts it: “ Warhrnehmung ist Falschnehmung ”] 
(cf. PES, 91\PES-G, 119). Therefore, all perception, external and intro-
spective, is accompanied by an additional “inner perception” along-
side of and pertaining to mental acts. It is only this inner perception 
that can be taken as the immediate and infallible characteristic of all 
mental phenomena. However, Brentano holds that this criterion is not 
satisfactory for delimiting the mental from the physical as regards the 
need for establishing a criterion of the mental to be utilized in a scien-
tific psychology. The reason for this is that, although inner perception 
accompanies the act as a whole, it can be all too easily overlooked and 
ignored in favor of the content or primary object of the act. The fifth 
criterion therefore, that only mental phenomena possess actual as well 
as intentional existence, is something Brentano thinks is true but at 
the same time, due to its elusive nature, denied by many (PES, 93–94\
PES-G, 122). The sixth criterion is that all mental phenomena manifest 
themselves serially in consciousness while physical phenomena can 

114 From Psychology to Phenomenology
manifest themselves simultaneously. While this characteristic of the 
mental is actually held by many thinkers, according to Brentano, it is 
nonetheless deemed to be inadequate for scientifically delimiting the 
mental. The sixth definition is said to have the advantage that it high-
lights the “unity of consciousness” (see Section 5.2) but unfortunately 
it also has the disadvantage that it makes the psychic phenomena of 
our inner life appear simple, which according to Brentano, is far from 
being the case. 
 The third criterion therefore, which was passed over above, can be 
acknowledged as the preferred and central one. Brentano writes that 
mental phenomena distinguish themselves by being intentional 
or “intentionally inexistent” in consciousness. This fact, according 
to Brentano, is “ ... that feature which best characterises mental 
phenomena” (PES, 98\PES-G, 127). It is said to be the most satisfac-
tory distinguishing characteristic for demarcating mental from phys-
ical phenomena. Although “intentional inexistence” is merely called 
the best criterion among the six (and in fact is not actually focused 
on in any great detail in the PES), as is well known, it would go on to 
become one of the most influential and controversial (not to mention 
most frequently misunderstood) doctrines in the PES. As such it there-
fore warrants detailed discussion.  
 4.2  Brentano’s theory of the “intentional inexistence” 
of the mental 
 The basis of Brentano’s act psychology, and the most important 
criterion for separating and distinguishing psychic phenomena from 
physical ones, is centered on the theory of the intentional inexistence 
of the mental. Although the intentionality criterion is said to be the 
best, it is not the sole demarcation principle for isolating the proper 
object realm of psychology. Nonetheless, the critical matter of what, 
precisely, this aspect of the mental means for philosophy of mind 
must be explored here. We must also consider whether Brentano is 
presenting an internalist or externalist position on the intentional 
relation and what the reasons are for a definitive answer to the 
above question having proven so difficult to agree on. One reason, 
given below, is that various commentators tend read the inexistence 
doctrine removed from its proper context. This proper context, it will 
be argued, is a philosophically grounded theory of mind, merging 
empirical methods and frameworks from late nineteenth-century 
philosophy of science with Brentano’s earlier work on Aristotle. 

“Intentional Inexistence” 115
The mental relation, therefore, is treated in a philosophical frame-
work of psychic acts directed to reality and determined essentially 
by their intrinsic modes of relating to either themselves (as contents) 
or transcendent objects. On this reading Brentano singles out the 
intentionality criterion, therefore, precisely in order to establish a 
descriptive foundation that can be taken as a factual and empirical 
or descriptive source for relating Aristotelian  epagoge to empirical 
laws for establishing psychological knowledge. This, I maintain, is 
attempted in order to validate his earlier methodological claims for 
the scientific status of psychology. Thus, those who read Brentano 
as establishing a neo-Cartesian metaphysical account of the psyche, 
that is, as viewing the mental as inherently representational due to 
its essentially self-enclosed nature, or similarly as directed solely to 
immanent parts or contents of its own mental activity, can be shown 
to distort the doctrine. However, as we shall see, Brentano himself 
gives grounds for this distortion. 
 The theory of intentional inexistence is characterized by Brentano as 
follows:
 Every mental phenomenon is characterized by what the Scholastics 
of the Middle Ages called the intentional (or mental) inexistence of 
an object, and what we might call, though not wholly unambigu-
ously, reference to a content, direction toward an object (which is 
not to be understood here as meaning a thing [ Realität ]), or imma-
nent objectivity. Every mental phenomenon includes something as 
an object within itself, although not all do so in the same way. In 
presentation something is presented, in judgement something is 
affirmed or denied, in love, loved, in hate, hated, in desire, desired 
and so on (PES, 88\PES-G, 115).  10 
 The above definition has caused much confusion. First, we will do 
well to break it down into its constituent components. Four points are 
expressed in the above quotation. More precisely, it is claimed that the 
intentional characteristic of the mental is defined by four characteris-
tics. These four characteristics are, respectively,  
 a)  reference to a content [ die Beziehung auf einen Inhalt ],  
 b)   direction towards an object [ die Richtung auf ein Object ],  
 c)   immanent objectivity [ die immanente Gegenständlichkeit ], and  
 d)    the including of something as an object within itself [ Jedes enthält 
etwas als Object in sich ].  

116 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 As Roderick Chisholm pointed out, the first two criteria can be seen 
as psychological or epistemological in nature while the last two seem 
to carry ontological implications.  11 There is still dispute among inter-
preters as to whether Brentano was setting out an explicitly ontological 
doctrine (i.e. one concerned with the intentional object and its status) 
or a psychological one (one concerned with the structure of mental 
activity), or both. In what follows we will attempt to remain as close 
as possible to Brentano’s own formulation as he presents it in his text. 
Given the ambiguity and difficulty in articulating a coherent reading 
of the above intentionality formula by examining the intentionality 
passage alone, where necessary other sources (such as relevant passages 
in earlier and later sections of the PES as well as unpublished notes 
and other publications) will be referred to, in order to present as char-
itable and coherent a reading of this important doctrine as possible. 
The Aristotelian references Brentano cites to supplement what some 
have called an essentially non-Aristotelian ontological background 
underlying the intentional relation can be seen to be intelligible when 
read against the formulation of the intentional directedness of mental 
acts complementing the larger project of clarifying the epistemological 
grounds for arriving at principles of knowledge. This difficult section 
of the PES it will be argued, can therefore be viewed as an attempt on 
Brentano’s part to connect the inductivist methodology established in 
Book One with a solid immediate criterion that he hoped would theor-
etically clarify the foundation of our knowledge claims in psychology 
and, thereafter, in philosophy and all the sciences. 
 Before any analysis of the doctrine proper is undertaken, however, 
an important point should be stated. Namely, Brentano is not using 
the term “intentional” in, what could be called, the “original practical 
meaning” of the term.  12 The meaning of the Latin  intentio from which the 
English word  intentional derives is, in this context, better understood in 
the sense of the modern French  entendre or the Italian equivalent  inten-
dere , which can both be translated as “to understand” rather than the 
English “intention”, which connotes a more practical meaning.  13 In the 
philosophical and non-practical sense the intentionality of mental acts 
is an important and controversial theme in recent philosophy. Largely 
building on an interpretation of Brentano’s doctrine as put forth by 
Roderick Chisholm, many recent philosophers have taken up a version 
of the intentionality thesis that reads Brentano’s doctrine as articu-
lating an inextricably linguistic reference to mind-independent objects 
of awareness.  14 But against this reading, as has been pointed out by 
many commentators, Brentano is not attempting to reduce the mental 

“Intentional Inexistence” 117
to a primarily propositional or linguistic form of reference.  15 This also 
seems obvious from the terminology used to describe the intentional 
inexistence of objects and becomes even more evident when Brentano’s 
unique non-propositional theory of judgment is taken into account 
(cf. Chapter 6).  
 4.3   Ancient and scholastic influences on 
Brentano’s doctrine 
 The first thing to notice about the “intentionality” passage cited above 
is that a reference is made by Brentano, before intentional inexistence 
is actually defined in any way, to the “Scholastics of the Middle Ages”. 
This brings us to what some commentators call the “medieval source” of 
Brentano’s doctrine of intentional relations. Brentano’s articulation of 
the intentionality doctrine has been described as the reintroduction of a 
medieval notion and his references to “intentional inexistence” linked 
to what is known as the  modus essendi or “species” theory of knowledge. 
The latter was a doctrine most popularly known to have been devel-
oped and held by the Scholastics of the 13th century (cf. Speigelberg, 
1981). The thorny problem of how to reconcile this famous allusion to 
medieval and ancient sources with Brentano’s definition and formula-
tion of the relationship between intentional reference and directedness 
of thought to objects (and in the PES other states of affairs), is one that 
has caused much spilling of ink. We can touch on this controversy only 
tangentially here; specifically where it helps shed light on the meaning 
of Brentano’s thesis about psychic acts and intentional relations. 
 Some commentators believe that there is a decisive break with the 
Aristotelian-Scholastic tradition in Brentano’s philosophy of mind. 
Others make reference to Brentano’s continuation of and building upon 
the Aristotelian-Scholastic tradition. On the modernist reading of the 
doctrine of intentional inexistence, Brentano is said to posit an imma-
nent or “mental” thought object as what the mind is directed to (cf. De 
Boer 1978, Crane 2006, and McDonnell 2006). This kind of epistemo-
logical and subjectivist project was obviously not common in Scholastic 
thought. Nonetheless, many cite the close connection explicitly made 
in the  Psychology text and elsewhere to the Scholastic ontological or 
“species” theory of knowledge (cf. Marras, 1976; Spiegelberg, 1981; 
Runggaldier, 1989; Sorabji, 1991; Moran, 1996) and claim that this 
influence is present but amended by a pronounced and direct engage-
ment with other sources.  16 How closely Brentano’s position in the PES 
corresponds to Aristotelian-Scholastic doctrines is, therefore, a matter 

118 From Psychology to Phenomenology
of some contention. Furthermore, As Phillip Bartok rightly points out 
there is “ ... a set of deep tensions ... ” on display in Brentano’s PES,  
 ... [B]etween, e.g., Aristotelian and Cartesian elements, empirical-
scientific and metaphysical aims, and descriptive and theorizing 
approaches. It is at least in part because of the presence of these 
tensions in his thought that Brentano’s interpreters have been 
able to read his thesis in such divergent ways. A more historically 
sensitive reading – one that incorporates what is correct in the 
analytic and phenomenological readings while also addressing their 
excesses – must show how these deep tensions are to be resolved, or 
at least how the conceptual terrain they configure is to be navigated 
(Bartok, 2005, 455).  
 Here two points can be made: 1) Brentano’s proto-phenomenological 
approach to understanding the mind in the PES clearly arises against 
the background of his neo-Aristotelian analysis of knowledge and 
psychology that he had focused on consistently since his student 
days. More precisely, the doctrine of intentional inexistence in the PES 
is established against the backdrop of a conscious transformation of 
Aristotelian doctrines that date back to Brentano’s teaching period at 
Würzburg. For this reason alone, any claim that Brentano is radically 
opposed to the same tradition that most directly shaped his research 
and intellectual outlook up to (and after) the publication of the PES, 
requires, at the very least, some very serious qualifications. 2) Even 
if there is a decisive break and rejection of certain aspects of earlier 
Aristotelian/Scholastic philosophy of mind (a break that, for the record, 
Brentano does make – and, it will be argued below, for reasons internal 
to his system) it is important to know precisely what the differences 
are between Brentano’s doctrines and earlier and later accounts of the 
nature of intentional acts.  17 
 Certain preliminary facts will be helpful in clarifying the context of 
the intentional inexistence passage. Amongst these, the fact that, in the 
PES, Brentano is delimiting the object of awareness or proper perception 
to correlates of what he calls acts of judgment or affirmation, which are 
also referred to as directed to the “immanent objects” or “contents” 
of foundational acts of presentation (cf. Chapter 6 below). Brentano 
furthermore limits the study of acts and contents to the categories of 
psychic and physical phenomena (and cf. Bartok, 2005 and Crane, 
2006).  18 Unlike Aristotle therefore, Brentano is attempting to establish 
a foundational discipline and method [a proto-descriptive psychology] 

“Intentional Inexistence” 119
that is grounded on an epistemologically privileged framework, empha-
sizing immediate experience and the evidence along with the givenness 
of mental and physical phenomena. However, while these methodo-
logical innovations are certainly present (and an important part of 
Brentano’s text), it can also be noted that the fundamental structure of 
his understanding of science and demonstration are still Aristotelian. 
 Brentano implicitly links the Cartesian problem of knowledge of 
mental acts and their relation to their objective contents to the onto-
logical problem of the objective correlate of mental reference. Thus, 
against some recent critics of Brentano’s articulation of intentional rela-
tions as immanent through and through, it can be stressed that atten-
tion is in fact given in the PES to the connection between mental acts 
and mind-transcendent entities.  19 
 Nonetheless, the ontological background and outlook that psychic 
acts are delimited against is still one of Aristotelian realism. In the PES 
this is explicitly stated where Brentano refers to the Scholastic distinc-
tion of the mode of being of objects.  20 For Aristotle the visible or audible, 
etc. species or form of the object was abstracted without the matter (cf. 
Chapter 2 above). On a modern empiricist account, by contrast, sense 
impressions cause ideas or representations in the mind of the alien 
and unintelligible material objects that affect us. Here it can be main-
tained that Brentano’s doctrine of intentionality is not a straightfor-
ward borrowing and continuation of earlier Scholastic views, nor does 
he intend his doctrine to propose a radical or fundamental break with 
Aristotelianism. Brentano’s formulation of the problem of the inten-
tional nature of mental reference builds on earlier Scholastic doctrines, 
however, it also moves beyond them in significant ways. The initial 
transformation of these earlier doctrines by Brentano (developed under 
his studies with Clemens) began with his work on Aristotelian ontology 
and psychology. However, both in his earlier writings and from what 
he says later in the PES, it is evident that Brentano’s appropriation of 
Aristotle and Scholastic thought is critical rather than dogmatic or 
unquestioning. When we add to the factors above, the further evidence 
that Scholastic influences were not the only ones influencing Brentano’s 
thought in the PES,  21 it is possible to conclude that the theory proposed 
by Brentano is in many ways a novel and original interpretation that is 
based on older ideas. 
 This is not to say that Brentano was striving for originality and delib-
erately breaking with the past merely for the sake of novelty and to estab-
lish a radical view of his own. We are warned against such a position in 
the “Foreword” to the 1874 edition of the PES. There Brentano writes, 

120 From Psychology to Phenomenology
“in no instance have I been concerned with novelty for its own 
sake ... even when I seem to be expressing the most original ideas, to 
some extent these views have already been anticipated” (PES, xxix). 
The above claim can be taken to refer quite fittingly to the theory of 
the “intentional inexistence” of the mental object.  22 The inclusion of 
Scholastic terms is, however, quite puzzling, considering the nature of 
Brentano’s project in the  Psychology , where his purported goal has been 
characterized as one of becoming the “Comte of modern psychology”.  23 
Brentano, in effect, introduces terminology reminiscent of the “psych-
ology of the soul”, a tradition that (as was stated above) he explicitly 
distances himself from in the first book of the  Psychology . 24 I contend 
that Brentano was trying to ground his theory of intentional related-
ness of the mental in a realistic ontological setting and therefore, ques-
tions of a metaphysical nature are not completely eschewed in the PES. 
Brentano’s notion of mind is influenced not only by Aristotle but also 
by modern empiricism and the continental rationalist tradition;  25 it is 
therefore very likely that he wanted to distance his theory from the 
subjectivist turn in modern metaphysics. 
 There is evidence that Brentano did not, even at the time of the PES, 
accept the theory of intentional inexistence in the same sense as the 
Scholastics did. For one thing, Brentano’s more modern, scientific/
realist ontology, influenced by British empiricism from Locke to Mill 
and French positivism (in the form of Comte’s system), would have been 
difficult to reconcile with the metaphysical worldview of the thinkers 
of the Middle Ages. Also because, in his extant writings on Aristotle, 
Brentano had presented criticism of certain Aristotelian metaphysical 
notions, these reservations would surely have extended to Aristotle’s 
Scholastic followers. And in fact, Brentano gives evidence that bears out 
a critical attitude towards Scholastic and neo-Scholastic thought at the 
time he composed the PES.  26 
 4.4  Intentionality and consciousness 
 While many modern commentators persist in regarding Brentano’s 
formulation of intentional reference as either a direct rehash of Scholastic 
doctrines or otherwise in Cartesian “representationalist immanent 
terms ... a relation between a thinker and the content of his or her 
mind” 27 ; it was argued above that Brentano borrowed the  modus essendi 
jargon to express a new conception of the mental, one arguably that 
could not be expressed clearly in the metaphysical theories of Aristotle 
or in modern post-Cartesian metaphysics.  28 The above readings, as we 

“Intentional Inexistence” 121
have seen, ignore the criticism of Aristotle and Scholastic philosophy 
in the Würzburg lectures and also that Brentano himself constantly 
denied that he ever held a “representationalist” theory of consciousness 
in the above sense.  29 
 To propound a “realist” interpretation of Brentano’s doctrine of 
intentionality, however, should not be read to imply that the position 
of the PES can or should be conceived of as a radically externalist or 
anti-mentalist one.  30 In the PES Brentano is attempting to articulate 
a direct and non-epistemologically mediated connection to objects 
of experience. From this psychological foundation he articulates that 
presented objects are given to us in acts of presentation which lead to 
the formation of concepts having an application that transcends the 
immanent representational contents or images. In effect, the inten-
tional directedness to an object or content is one that makes mental 
relations to objects direct and known through immanent, intuitively 
accessible concepts. Unfortunately, the ontological concerns introduced 
via the  modus essendi theory, as has been pointed out, can lead to certain 
confusions in interpreting Brentano’s text, and there is a real ambi-
guity present in the dual nature of the intentional relation outlined 
above. For this reason, ignoring the broader context of his articulation 
of mental relations (developed against a neo-Aristotelian metaphysical 
framework) can very easily lead readers to accept that either Brentano 
is proposing that the immanent “inexistent” physical object exists as a 
real part of consciousness (de Boer, 1979; Moran, 1996; Jacquette, 1996) 
or, by contrast, that physical phenomena or sense contents are never 
really present in consciousness in any manner (Hickerson, 2007). 
 To highlight the proper sense of Brentano’s doctrine of mental rela-
tions, we can turn our focus to the notion of mental reference to a 
content, one that all agree is present in the PES. In all forms of reference 
there are two sides: the “referent” and the “referee”, or to borrow the 
Scholastic terminology Brentano was so fond of – all reference is between 
two terms namely the  terminus intrinsecus and the  terminus extrinsicus . 
That Brentano is not trying to formulate a “real” or external relation 
between two terms or entities (especially in the case of non-veridical 
perception or imaginatively conceived objects) is obvious from later 
remarks in the “intentionality” passage as well as from the Aristotelian 
context of his theory of mental reference. The characteristic feature 
of an intentional relation between a thinker and a physical phenom-
enon, we are told, is that the latter does not exist outside of our experi-
ence of it. The physical phenomenon need not literally be an existing 
thing.  31 This becomes evident in a case of non-veridical perception. 

122 From Psychology to Phenomenology
For example, when I think of a unicorn this is an object existing only 
in my own private mental activity. In other words, it relates exclusively 
to me, or rather to my private act of thinking or daydreaming about it. 
This seems a satisfactory definition of the mental if only because, so far 
as we know, it truly is difficult for physical objects to contain or express 
any similar kind of property. However, starting from this common sense 
position can lead to certain distortions regarding the proper under-
standing of Brentano’s doctrine. In large part this may be due to the 
tendency to take cases of non-veridical perception – such as the unicorn 
example – and articulate a reading of conscious representation against 
a materialist or naive realist ontological context. Brentano’s position, 
however, is better characterized as a hypothetical scientific realism (cf. 
Philipse, 1995 & Chapter 3 above). Brentano makes important distinc-
tions, in his early writings and Würzburg lectures as well as in the 
PES, between reality or the totality of being and existence. These onto-
logical distinctions, discussed in Chapter 2 above are also maintained 
in the PES. Unfortunately Brentano’s statements advocating the onto-
logical context of his doctrine of intentional inexistence are frequently 
ignored. “Philosophers” Brentano writes in the PES, “ ... are not in agree-
ment as to what the term “existence” really means, even though not 
only they, but any ordinary person, knows how to apply the term with 
confidence” (PES, 141\PES-G, 185). 
 Brentano’s first book attempted nothing less than to contribute to 
establishing the proper meaning of existence. In his dissertation work 
on Aristotle’s  Metaphysics the categories were stressed as articulating 
modes of being and how these are related to the focal sense or primary 
meaning of being as an entity or thing (i.e. substance). In the PES 
this theory of predication or categorical articulation of being has been 
refined; the doctrine of intentional inexistence is introduced to estab-
lish the ground of evidence, revealing the directedness of thought to 
things and (psychologically) of presentations to contents and objects. 
One benefit of Brentano’s study of mental relations is that the position 
in the PES can contribute to the debate about mental content and, 
more precisely, narrow (internalist) criteria for the individuation of 
mental contents versus wide or broad (externalist) ones. At first sight, 
it would appear that for Brentano, all mental acts are narrow or have a 
narrow content in that they point to, are directed towards, and there-
fore are individuated only by their own content. However, this strict 
internalist reading of the PES was challenged above. In Part III below, 
it will be argued that in the PES Brentano can be read as defending 
both wide and narrow positions regarding mental relations, due to 

“Intentional Inexistence” 123
his ontological dualism between the mental and the physical and 
the one-level theory of consciousness that bases mental representa-
tion on consciousness as essentially representative and intentionally 
directed. The intentional relation, however, was also further refined 
by Brentano through a close examination of conscious acts and their 
modes of relating. It is to the study of these other essential features of 
the mental that we can now turn.  
 4.5   Brentano on the unconscious 
 One aspect of the intentionality doctrine that is beyond dispute is that 
Brentano always links what is intentional to what can be called conscious-
ness. Brentano’s understanding of consciousness, subsequently, rests on 
the irreducible and non-reductive nature of the intrinsic awareness that 
accompanies every properly conscious or occurent mental act. In this 
regard, in chapter 2 of Book Two of the PES, Brentano writes:
 We have seen that no mental phenomenon exists which is 
not ... consciousness of an object. However, another question arises, 
namely, whether there are any mental phenomena which are not 
objects of consciousness. All mental phenomena are states of 
consciousness; but are all mental phenomena conscious, or might 
there also be unconscious mental acts [ unbewusste psychische Acte ]? 
(PES, 102\PES-G, 133).  
 The role of reflexive awareness or what can be called the 
self-thematizability of the mental is central not only to Brentano’s 
conception of psychology but also to the connection between the former 
and its role in providing the foundations for a scientifically clarified epis-
temology. For this reason Brentano takes great pains to argue against the 
possibility of an actually existing unconscious psychic or mental state. 
Some might argue, based on definitions alone, that an unconscious 
mental act or “unconscious consciousness” is a contradiction in terms 
(and therefore an impossibility), however, Brentano takes the possibility 
of the existence of unconscious mental phenomena very seriously. In 
this context he writes, “ ... an unconscious consciousness is no more a 
contradiction in terms than an unseen case of seeing” (PES, 102\PES-G, 
133).  32 We cannot go over all the details of the rigorously argued and 
lengthy chapter titled “Inner Consciousness” (PES: Book Two, chapter 2); 
instead we will first give a brief overview of the arguments Brentano gives 
and then focus on the relevant aspects of his doctrine of consciousness. 

124 From Psychology to Phenomenology
The intrinsic and inherent self-awareness of mental acts is one of the 
most important aspects of Brentano’s philosophy of mind, and a review 
of this characteristic of the mental is necessary for continuing the over-
view of his theory of psychic phenomena and intentionality. 
 To establish his case for the intentional and necessarily conscious 
nature of genuinely mental acts, Brentano lists four possible explana-
tions that can be offered to defend the existence of unconscious mental 
acts. All four explanations are raised in order to be criticized and refuted 
in the course of the chapter on inner consciousness. We will devote 
the majority of our attention to the fourth argument and explanation 
of the need for unconscious acts. This last argument for the existence 
of the unconscious is arguably the most important and relevant, and 
can also be seen to be the most explicitly challenging to how Brentano 
defines the mental. 
 The four possible defences that can be given for the actuality of an 
unconscious consciousness are listed by Brentano as follows:
 First, we could try to prove that certain facts given in experience 
demand the hypothesis of an unconscious mental phenomenon as 
their  cause . Secondly, we could attempt to prove that a fact given in 
experience must bring about an unconscious mental phenomenon 
as its  effect, even though none appears in consciousness. Thirdly, we 
could try to show that in the case of conscious mental phenomena 
 the strength of the concomitant consciousness is a function of their own 
strength, and that, because of this relationship, in certain cases in 
which the latter is a positive magnitude, the former must lack a posi-
tive value. Finally, we could attempt to prove that the hypothesis 
that each mental phenomenon is an object of a mental phenom-
enon leads to an  infinite complexity of mental states, which is both 
intrinsically impossible and contrary to experience (PES, 105, PES-G, 
137–38).  
 The first of the above arguments legitimating the unconscious (the 
causal theory) was, and perhaps still is, the most frequently maintained 
defense offered by supporters of the unconscious. Ignoring examples 
of clairvoyance and other parapsychological effects (such as premoni-
tions), Brentano lists reports of the accomplishments of geniuses that 
are cited as examples of non-conscious mental activity. Brentano is 
rightly dubious of these claims: “Geniuses are even rarer than somnam-
bulists” (PES, 106\PES-G, 138). Furthermore, any activity that displays 
the quality we call genius is usually the product of much and very 

“Intentional Inexistence” 125
deliberate hard work and self-awareness, or at least, Brentano implies, 
cannot be brought forward without the latter. After this, Hartmann’s 
philosophy of the unconscious is criticized for its conceptualization of 
the unconscious as playing the role of a “ deus ex machine ” that is, being 
called upon to provide explanations especially where the phenomena 
under discussion are most complex.  33 Brentano claims that there are 
reasons for rejecting hypotheses such as those proposed by Hartmann 
even independent of empirical ones. In short, the main problem with 
positing an unconscious cause of conscious phenomena is that other 
causes may account for the cognitive states said to be explained by it, 
and, if so, they are to be preferred. 
 At this point Brentano clarifies his understanding of what he takes 
to be the essentially psychophysical problem under discussion here. 
For Brentano, there is a strong parallel between the unconscious or 
non-mental and physiological activity of the brain and body and the 
psychic intentional or conscious activity of the mind (i.e. the properly 
mental). On Brentano’s view we must take into account that, “what is 
possible in the physical realm is also possible in the psychological” (PES, 
109\PES-G, 143). If we construe, as Brentano does, the “psychological” 
broadly enough we can see that phenomena such as muscle memory, 
habits, acquired dispositions, even what are called “instinctive judg-
ments” and instincts themselves (insofar as these are present in human 
beings) can be classified as psychological and physical phenomena 
rather than as unconscious mental ones. In our post-Freudian intel-
lectual milieu, by contrast, it is often all too easy to simply assume 
that the mental or intrinsically conscious aspects of our experiences 
are the by-products of essentially physiological functions or states. This 
is a position Brentano thinks is in need of argument and defense. As it 
stands, it is certainly not self-evident, and therefore not without need of 
explanation. Therefore, a large part of the problem in assuming uncon-
scious causes of conscious effects is said by Brentano to be due to the 
large and pronounced deficiency in our knowledge regarding psycho-
physics and psychology itself (PES, 116\PES-G, 151). 
 Many philosophers nonetheless articulate conceptions of unconscious 
ideas (PES, 110\PES-G, 144). These phenomena are usually posited to 
account for the recall of information or even to explain common psycho-
logical phenomena such as the negative scotoma or the so-called “blind 
spot” phenomena demonstrated through observation of visual field in 
cases of monocular perception.  34 Brentano rightly posits a physiological 
explanation of the above and most modern psychologists would agree 
with him. Current biology and physiology, for example, accounts for 

126 From Psychology to Phenomenology
blind spot vision (or the  punctum caecum ) as due to the naturally occur-
ring physiological consequence of the lack of photoreceptor cells on 
the optic disc of the retina.  35 Other cases of visual phenomena that in 
Brentano’s day were accounted for using the hypothesis of unconscious 
ideas included: non-attentive learning, dispositional traits and other 
related phenomena. According to Brentano, however, most of these 
can be explained away using some variant of the doctrine of the asso-
ciation of ideas (PES, 110–11\PES-G, 144–45). In this way, we are told, 
Henry Maudsley’s unconscious cerebral action and what Hermann Ulrici 
presented as accounts of “sleep learning” or “unconscious learning” 
(both described in detail in Brentano’s text), are said to be not only “very 
difficult to prove” and therefore to cite as actual examples of the uncon-
scious registering of sensations (PES, 115\PES-G, 150), but also, more 
damagingly for the above authors, they allow for alternate explanations. 
 The second common defense of the unconscious is said to be the 
posting of unconscious effects rather than causes. Unconscious hear-
ings (the “ perceptiones sine apperceptione seu conscientia,” and  “perceptions 
insensibiles” ) postulated by Leibniz as well as Helmholtz’s account of 
“after-images,” are listed as examples. Leibniz’s theory of the uncon-
scious is said by Brentano to be later taken up by Kant. According to 
Mark Kulstad and Laurence Carlin, Leibniz’s theory of perception,  
 ... involves something very distinctive in an age dominated by 
Descartes’ theory of ideas, the thesis that there are some perceptions 
of which we are not conscious, the much-discussed  petites percep-
tions. Although Leibniz was not the first to propose such an idea 
(Aquinas, for example, had a similar view), and although the view in 
his hands did not have the explosive quality that it did in the hands 
of Freud, the thesis remains an intriguing and important part of his 
philosophy of mind. Indeed, the Preface of the  New Essays concerning 
Human Understanding contains as strong a statement as one is likely 
to find about the centrality of this view in a particular metaphysical 
system. Among other things, Leibniz makes it very clear that it is not 
just lower simple substances that have such unconscious perceptions 
but also human minds (Kulstad & Carlin, 2007).  
 An example of these  petites perceptions, given by Brentano, is the 
following:
 When a wave strikes the seashore, we hear the roaring of the surf, and 
are conscious of hearing. But when only one drop is set in motion 

“Intentional Inexistence” 127
we think that we hear no sound. Nevertheless, it is said, we must 
assume that in this case, too, we have an auditory sensation, for the 
motion of the wave is the simultaneous movement of its individual 
drops, and the sensation of the roaring wave can only be composed 
of the auditory sensations produced by the drops. We hear, but we 
hear unconsciously (PES, 116–17\PES-G, 152).  
 In effect, when I hear a wave crashing on the strand, I must also 
somehow unconsciously hear the tiniest droplets of water composing 
the wave and then somehow mentally add them together to explain 
the apperceived crashing “wave sound”.  36 In his discussion of the 
above Brentano first agrees that, “[t]he effect of a sum of forces is not 
only quantitatively but very often also qualitatively different from the 
effect of its individual components” (PES, 117\PES-G, 153). However, 
he again points out that alternative explanations can be called forth 
to account for the above phenomena. In the wave example, Brentano 
gives the following analogy in order to account for unnoticeable and 
abrupt changes of states, namely, just as ice does not become less frozen 
when the temperature is just slightly above freezing, therefore, “even if 
a strong physical stimulus produces an auditory sensation, a weaker one 
need not necessarily result in an auditory phenomenon which is only 
of lesser intensity” (PES, 117\PES-G, 153). The sum of the parts, in the 
above case, effectively overrides the practically inaudible sound that 
would result from the water if actually broken down into individual 
tiny droplets. Therefore, the effect of the wave can be said to be of a 
different kind in the role it plays on our auditory sensations than the 
parts would be. 
 Helmholtz’s theory of the after-image, by contrast, posited that the 
temporal succession that characterizes the characteristics we observe 
in an after-image must have existed in the original image, but with 
even greater strength and intensity (PES, 119\PES-G, 155). Brentano 
again rightly distinguishes between the after-image phenomenon as an 
imitation of the pre-existing perception or sensation and the persist-
ence of the previous physical stimulation or of another physical process 
that follows it (ibid). In the case of after-image phenomenon therefore, 
the physiological facts of, for example, the nervous system re-adjusting 
itself after a stronger than usual physical stimulation, can account for 
the phenomenon without invoking unconscious mental acts. 
 The third argument in favor of positing unconscious mental 
phenomena is connected to the psychophysical law developed by 
Fechner and Weber. On this view, consciousness can be taken to occur 

128 From Psychology to Phenomenology
as soon as the intensity of a presentation reaches a certain level (PES, 
120\PES-G, 156–57). This would place the origin of consciousness, and 
account for its essential characteristics, as arising directly from the 
lower level physiological and unconscious processes of the body. Here 
Brentano objects that “no proportional relation between two intensities 
can be proven to exist”. It is also difficult to measure these functional 
relationships using an experimental method. If the Weber/Fechner law 
is true, both the intensities (the act of presentation and the intensity 
of the presented object) must be equal if inner perception is indeed 
infallible. Brentano’s psychology, however, unlike the psychophysics of 
Fechner, posits a one to one relationship between sensations and pres-
entations (PES, 120–21). 
 Finally we arrive at the most important argument in defense of 
unconscious mental life. This is the argument from regress. This argu-
ment posits an infinite regress of conscious acts if the perceptions and 
apperceptions of presentational or mental acts are tied explicitly to the 
level of consciousness and simultaneously maintained to reinforce or 
correlate with each other. The perception of the process of apperception, 
or indirect awareness, cannot itself be conscious through and through, 
the argument claims, otherwise the nature of consciousness becomes 
infinitely complex. Therefore, only unconscious mental acts can stop 
the regress and serve as the foundation for consciousness or explicit 
acts of presentations and phenomenal awareness. In order to defend 
his theory of mental life and doctrine of the intrinsic “intentional” 
directedness of mental phenomena, Brentano takes the overcoming of 
the above challenge very seriously. If the conscious presentation of, for 
example, an act of hearing, has the same object as the awareness of 
the sound, then the act and its content might be said to be two mental 
phenomena. According to Brentano, however, and necessary for his 
understanding of consciousness, the act and its content are “one and 
the same phenomenon” (PES, 122\PES-G, 160). In the PES Brentano 
writes:
 The presentation of the sound and the presentation of the presen-
tation of the sound form a single mental phenomenon; it is only by 
considering it in its relation to two different objects, one of which is 
the physical phenomenon and the other a mental phenomenon, that 
we divide it conceptually into two presentations. In the same mental 
phenomenon in which the sound is present to our minds we simul-
taneously apprehend the mental phenomenon itself. What is more, 
we apprehend it in accordance with its dual nature insofar as it has 

“Intentional Inexistence” 129
the sound as content within it, and insofar as it has itself as content 
at the same time. We can say that the sound is the primary object of 
the act of hearing, and that the act of hearing itself is the secondary 
object. (PES, 127\PES-G, 166)  
 Inner perception is, therefore, said to show us with immediate evidence 
that hearing has a content different from itself, but which against the act 
of hearing, shares none of the characteristics of the mental phenomena 
(PES, 123\PES-G, 161). Sounds, for example, can exist unheard in the 
external world. In relation to the above, Thomas Aquinas’ doctrine of 
the  sensus communis and intellectual thinking (discussed by Thomas in 
his  Summa Theologica , ST, I, q78 a. 4 ad. 2, & ST, I, q87, a. 3, 2 and ad. 2 
respectively) are both discussed in detail by Brentano in a footnote that 
merits commentary. 
 According to Thomas, when we are conscious of the sensations of the 
so-called five senses, we are nonetheless not conscious of the senses 
themselves as the senses do not perceive their own acts. Sensation in 
Thomas is described as a function of the organs, however, in order for 
the organs to perceive themselves they would have to perceive their 
own acts. Thomas holds that this is impossible because a corporeal 
thing never acts on itself.  37 Following in the Aristotelian distinction 
wherein matter is associated with potency, and act pertains to the soul 
or principle of motion, it is said that a body  qua body can never act on 
itself. Moving from physics to psychology, the above doctrine has the 
consequences that the inner sense or  sensus communis that perceives the 
acts of the external senses cannot itself be perceived. The reason is that 
Thomas distinguishes between sensing and understanding or reflective 
thought. Sensing pertains to actions of the body, such as can be had 
by animals without rational souls, while thinking – on the Thomistic 
view – pertains to the rational soul alone. The consequences of this 
position for Thomas, Brentano writes, are that “ ... the perception of the 
sensory acts of the external senses will never be perceived, and conse-
quently ... in the field of our senses, we immediately come upon uncon-
scious mental activity (PES, 125n\PES-G, 164). 
 According to Brentano, however, Thomas errs in thinking that 
consciousness or awareness of sensory activity and consciousness of intel-
lectual activity are heterogeneous. This is not to say that sensory aware-
ness and intellectual awareness are interchangeable or homogenous but 
rather, according to Brentano the two are completely analogous (PES, 
126n\PES-G, 165).Thus the source of the Thomistic error, Brentano main-
tains, is the attempt to superpose the Aristotelian hylomorphic scheme 

130 From Psychology to Phenomenology
(body as matter, soul as form) into an area (consciousness and aware-
ness) where the essence of those distinctions breaks down. This move 
also leads Thomas into embracing a naive realist theory of perception 
that had already been criticized by Brentano in his Würzburg lectures. 
Brentano’s criticisms of the Thomistic position in the PES points out 
that Thomas is led to embrace what are called “absurd possibilities”, 
such as the possible consciousness of past acts of thinking having to 
substitute for present acts of thinking (in effect shattering the essen-
tial and Cartesian certainty of immediate awareness of our own acts of 
thinking).  38 Ultimately, the criticisms presented in these sections of the 
PES give arguably question begging responses to the Scholastic position. 
In effect, it is held that if Thomas is correct, then the notion of inner 
perception that Brentano has been defending in the PES would break 
down. As Susan Krantz has commented,  
 ... those philosophers like Aquinas who maintain explicit contact 
with extra mental physical objects do not thereby do away with the 
subjective element of sense perception. (The physical object must 
still appear to these eyes, or to these ears, etc.) So the question which 
Brentano’s discussion points up is, I think, more subtle as well as 
more difficult than it is sometimes taken to be.  
 And she goes on to explain that:
 Those [like Thomas Aquinas] ... who have admitted the possibility of 
an unconscious consciousness have also insisted that the mind must 
know things other than itself first before it can know itself ... Scholastic 
realism (we do not see that we see, nor hear that we hear) looks to 
the relation between the perceiver and the world. Brentanian realism 
(there is no unconscious consciousness) looks to the relation between 
the perceiver who is aware of perceiving and the perceiver who is 
aware of things in the world. (Krantz, 1990, 751)  
 So, in a sense, and as Krantz stresses, “the two sides are talking past each 
other”. (Krantz, 1990, 752). Worse, the defender of the Thomistic view 
(or some other similar form of realism) could rightly accuse Brentano 
of subjectivism or loss of contact with the objective and non-mental 
world due to the stress he places on consciousness and inner perception. 
From this Scholastic realist perspective, therefore, Brentano’s refutation 
of the Thomistic view of the unconscious presented in the PES would 
not be viewed as compelling. 

“Intentional Inexistence” 131
 However, if both positions have grounds for claiming that their 
accounts of sensation and conscious perception are correct or can 
be defended, and furthermore, if both accounts can explain the data 
on descriptive grounds (i.e. both can be argued to be consistent with 
the facts as we experience them), then we must look to other criteria 
for assessing the probity of each position. Focusing on what can be 
called “metaphysical” considerations, we find that Brentano does in 
fact have another argument against the correctness of the Thomist 
position. The same position relating to consciousness and the active 
intellect had been criticized on more explicitly ontological grounds 
in his previous work  The Psychology of Aristotle (cf. Chapter 2 above). 
It will be recalled that Brentano there wrote at length about the 
mind-body relationship in Aristotle. He mentions Thomas’s version of 
the hylomorphic reading at the end of his account of Aristotle’s active 
intellect. Brentano claims that Thomas’s position leads to conceptual 
problems regarding psychophysical aspects of the relation between 
consciousness and body. 
 In effect, it is argued that Thomas seems to attribute aspects of will to 
the intellect and aspects of intellect to the will in a manner that is not 
coherent. Brentano writes,  
 [Thomas] says that nothing corporeal can make an impression upon 
something intellectual; at the same time he allows that the poten-
tial intellect begins to think through the influence of images that 
have been illuminated by the active intellect. We must not believe 
that in so saying he committed a folly of letting the active intel-
lect produce an intellectual accident in a corporeal subject. Rather, 
though he thought of the impulse provided by the active intellect as 
transcorporeal, he did so only in the sense that this impulse did not 
and could not have proceeded from the nature of the sensitive part, 
or from any other body. (PA, 155)  
 Nonetheless holding the entire body as coterminous with the soul 
creates tensions with the Thomistic understanding of both the active 
intellect and the relationship between will and mind. Thomas holds 
that, by reference to experience, we know that the active intellect is a 
power of our soul and that through introspection we [know that we] 
ourselves abstract concepts from particular things” (PA, 155). Brentano, 
by contrast, sides with Aristotle in holding that direct observation of 
these processes is impossible. Brentano also elaborates that Thomas 
holds that “the intellectual part is present in the entire body, and he 

132 From Psychology to Phenomenology
lets the sensitive and vegetative parts, along with the intellectual exist 
after death” (PA 156). But this is inconsistent with the Aristotelian 
view that only the active intellect (the divine or supersensible part) 
survives. It also makes an understanding of the intellect or conscious 
will as sole efficient cause or mover of the body, in cases of deliberate 
action, difficult to understand. If the soul is the body and the entire 
soul is supposed to be the principle of will, then the body is in some 
sense the principle of the will. But this destroys the freedom and agent 
causality underlying conscious deliberate choice (and for Thomas, 
as was mentioned above, a part of a corporeal whole cannot act on 
itself). These conceptual problems in the Thomistic understanding of 
the connections between consciousness and will, therefore, speak in 
Brentano’s favor. 
 However, when Brentano lists thinkers who hold doctrines of uncon-
scious mental activity (cf. PES, 103ff.), he takes up and responds to the 
positions of almost all of the significant thinkers listed while notice-
ably and curiously avoiding direct engagement with Kant. Brentano 
says of Kant’s view that his position on this matter is a repetition of 
that of Leibniz. However, someone with familiarity of Kant’s writings 
may rightly suspect that this claim is not true. Kant articulates a very 
direct criticism of the Leibnitzian as well as Cartesian conceptions of 
mind that in some ways brings his position close to Thomas, in others 
closer to Brentano, while nonetheless differing from both. As such, it 
would therefore serve us well to engage with Kant’s actual position and 
point out the challenge it potentially poses to Brentano’s conception of 
inner perception. 
 Kant’s position can be reconstructed here only tentatively for the 
present, later we will return to discuss this matter (in Part III below) 
when we engage more closely with what can be called the “transcen-
dental” criticism of Brentano’s empiricism. For Kant, the so-called unity 
of apperception, constituted and accompanied by the transcendental “I 
think”, must also accompany all of our representations ( Vorstellungen ) 
(cf.  Critique of Pure Reason , B 131–32).  39 This claim sounds very similar to 
Brentano’s own position that every properly conscious or mental act is 
also able to thematize or reflect on itself. Nonetheless, while Kant would 
agree that the unity of the manifold (or the contents of consciousness, 
cf. A107–08) are accompanied by an inherent self-awareness, he will 
also critically assess the essentially Cartesian notion of evidence that 
the mental supposedly brings with it. Nonetheless, like Brentano, Kant 
does hold that consciousness and cognition is a mixture of perceptions 

“Intentional Inexistence” 133
and judgments, or in Kantian terms an application of categories to intu-
itions (although, once again, Kant understands the nature and relation-
ship between precepts or intuitions and concepts in a very different 
sense than Brentano). Furthermore, as was mentioned in passing, Kant 
also (again like Brentano) challenges introspection as a viable source of 
knowledge upon which psychology can be established as an empirical 
science. However, unlike Brentano, Kant’s solution to pursuing phil-
osophy of mind is to turn to his own neo-Cartesian “transcendental” 
philosophy (adopting a faculty psychology and utilizing an analysis of 
what Kant called synthetic acts of consciousness or the self’s unification 
of representations A 77\B 103). 
 The biggest challenge to Brentano’s doctrine lies in Kant’s claim that 
the unity of consciousness depends on special synthesis or unconscious 
connections of experience dependent on non-empirically verifiable 
and therefore “transcendental” acts of the mind or soul. By “transcen-
dental” Kant usually means possibility conditions related to epistemo-
logical insights, and these, in turn, cannot be pointed to explicitly 
or quantifed and be made objective but must rather be deduced in a 
logical way from the given empirical clues available in experience. For 
example, when discussing the threefold synthesis underlying empirical 
perception (mediated by the so-called “transcendental imagination”), 
the entire process is described by Kant as “a blind but indispensable 
function of the soul” ( Critique of Pure Reason , A 78\B103). If we push this 
constructivist or non-intuitive conception of mind to its logical conclu-
sion, we can indeed find a forceful challenge to Brentano’s intuitionism 
and doctrine of inner perception here. This is because the certainty 
of inner perception, for Kant, would require not merely the appear-
ance of evidence, but also the justification or deduction of the mani-
fold, and therefore, as Brentano maintains, this doctrine can succumb 
to critique. This challenge comes to the fore in the later sections of 
the  Critique of Pure Reason . In the “Amphibolies of Pure Reason”, for 
example, when Kant returns to the immediate awareness of the self, 
he declares that even my direct self-awareness accompanying experi-
ence (as it is given to me) is an “appearance” and not a thing in itself. 
The unknown noumenal ground of the self, in other words, cannot be 
appealed to as the foundation of immediate evidence because our access 
to it is actually mediated. 
 The force of the above Kantian criticism is proportional to the 
degree that inner perception is equivalent and not merely parallel to 
immediate intuitive access to consciousness in Brentano’s empirical 

134 From Psychology to Phenomenology
psychology. Unfortunately, and although there are clues that conscious 
acts do not present themselves completely, and thus require supple-
mentary methods to be adequately thematized (such as retrospective 
reflection in memory, experiments, and even analyses to be made the 
subject of study), other sections of the PES forcefully stress the infalli-
bility or so-called immediate givenness of inner perception. Brentano 
holds, for example, that the mental acts that his empirical psychology 
will study are in reality “as they appear to be” or, in other words, real 
and true in themselves. For Kant, by contrast, when we turn to appre-
hending mental acts through retrospection or apperception, we none-
theless “know even ourselves only ... as appearance ... ” (A278). That is 
we, paradoxically, have no direct knowledge of ourselves as we really 
are. This does indeed open the door to unconscious acts: the transcen-
dental schematization of the categories of the understanding being 
Kant’s example of such a case. However, the Kantian challenge can 
stand even if we bypass the infamous transcendental deduction of the 
categories in his  Critique of Pure Reason . Elsewhere Kant writes of how, 
“Inner sense ... represents to consciousness even our own selves only 
as we appear to ourselves, not as we are in ourselves. For we intuit 
ourselves only as we are inwardly  affected [by ourselves]” (B153). The 
ensuing criticism of directly apprehending the self is therefore an 
attack, not only on the rational psychology of earlier German phil-
osophy and the naive philosophical analysis of mental acts contained 
therein, but also of empirical psychology in Brentano’s sense as well. 
As such, it constitutes a direct challenge to Brentano’s project in the 
PES and to the epistemological framework elaborated there. This threat 
and a similar criticism of inner perception would later emerge from 
within the context of Brentano’s own school in the form of Edmund 
Husserl’s neo-Kantian criticism of empirical psychology as naturalistic 
and psychologistic. We must first complete the overview of mental acts 
in the PES before we examine the transcendental criticism of Brentano’s 
act psychology in Part III below. 
 In summary, within the PES, Brentano’s thesis of intentionality is 
tied to the inherent consciousness or implicit awareness built into 
every occurrent mental act. If an unconscious consciousness is possible, 
the foundations of both the epistemology and the fundamental 
interpretation of mental life proposed in the PES would be compro-
mised. We have seen that a defense of Brentano’s one-level theory of 
consciousness can be given; however, we also raised the possibility 
that a counter-argument defending an alternative understanding of 

“Intentional Inexistence” 135
a one-level conception (such as the transcendental basis upon which 
Kant grounds his theory of the unity of apperception) poses serious 
risks to the correctness and universality of Brentano’s conception. We 
must now turn to the problems of establishing the “unity of conscious-
ness” and of the final aspects of conscious acts (forming the basis for 
their distinction and classification) as outlined in the final chapters of 
Book Two of the PES.  

136
 Brentano’s act psychology is based primarily on the study of mental or 
psychic phenomena, therefore it is necessary to provide a more detailed 
understanding of how these phenomena are understood. As a further 
step in establishing the theoretical foundations for his act psychology, 
Brentano undertakes the exploration of the complexity and unity or 
disparity of what can be called “conscious life” (cf. PES, Book Two, 
chapters 3–6). According to Brentano, all psychic acts participate in 
the shared ground or unity that is taken as “held together” or  consti-
tuted by consciousness itself. The starting point for an analysis of the 
complexity, as well as the unity, of consciousness must be a philosoph-
ical and reflective examination of the nature of basic cognitive and 
non-cognitive mental activity, which is said to be characterized by the 
accompanying consciousness that is always present where higher level 
mental activity takes place (PES, 138\PES-G, 181). Thus far, presenta-
tions and the direction of acts to their contents have been privileged. 
Brentano, however, explains that there are other ways in which psychic 
or mental acts manifest themselves. Amongst these other mental acts 
can be listed judgments and acts of feeling and volition. Furthermore, 
in the PES, mental acts are now called “divisives of the same reality” 
(PES, 161).  1 According to Brentano, however, different mental acts are 
not “really identical”, neither with reality nor with one another. There 
is no “real” relation between mental acts, but rather only what can be 
called a formal or “conceptual” relation. “Consciousness” subsequently 
is one concept with many complex modes or formally distinct acts 
 5 
 Psychic Acts Further Explored: 
The Unity of Consciousness 
and Brentano’s Classification 
of Mental Acts  

Psychic Acts Further Explored 137
attributing to its constitution. With its stress on the centrality of experi-
ence and the directedness of different mental acts united in an agent or 
subject, the theory of the unity of consciousness in Brentano’s PES can 
be said to be the origin of later philosophical concepts of the “subject” 
or “person” in phenomenological philosophy.  
 5.1   Further considerations regarding 
“inner consciousness” 
 It was argued in Book Two chapter 2 of the PES that every mental content 
or object is intentionally given to a thinker in a direct act or intention-
ally directed mental relation. Brentano asks: are mental phenomena 
merely presentations of objects or can we be conscious of them, and so 
classify them, in other ways? (PES, 138\PES-G, 181). 
 In Book Two of the PES Brentano examines what he takes to be the 
three main modes of consciousness: presentations ( Vorstellungen ), judg-
ments ( Urteilen ) and acts of appetite or desire ( Begehren ). Brentano also 
proceeds to articulate how the three kinds of mental acts are different 
as well as showing what they have in common (the criterion for his 
classification will be explored below). A different kind of act or mode 
of intentional directedness is what is said to distinguish each different 
mode of consciousness. For example,  
 Whenever a mental act is the object of an accompanying inner cogni-
tion [ Gegenstand einer begleitenden inneren Erkenntnis ], it contains itself 
in its entirety as presented and known, in addition to its reference to 
a primary object [ ein primäres Object ]. This alone makes possible the 
infallibility and immediate evidence of inner perception (PES, 139\
PES-G, 182).  
 In inner perception [ innere Wahrnehmung ] the presentation and the real 
object of the presentation are said to exist within us (PES, 139\PES-G, 
182). What Brentano means here is that no comparison between the 
mental content and a real object given in a conscious act of presen-
tation is possible. In order for the above to occur, we would have to 
have a perception or make a judgment and then somehow transcend 
our own mental activity so that we could compare the immediate 
awareness of the experience “objectively”, that is, from beyond itself. 
According to Brentano, however, the only access we have to our own 
experience is from the accompanying consciousness that is also a part 
of the same experience. This is what he calls inner perception. Earlier 

138 From Psychology to Phenomenology
thinkers, such as Friedrich Überweg,  2 had given highly unsatisfactory 
accounts of inner perception (PES, 139–140\PES-G, 183–84). According 
to Brentano’s reading of these earlier accounts, inner perception was 
said to result when mental images were apprehended, as they are in 
themselves, through association. Accordingly, for Überweg, mental 
acts become a combination and concatenation of real things, or what 
is the same, an integration of parts into a whole.  3 Brentano points out 
that the mere combination of mental images is not the same thing as 
knowledge of them (cf. PES, 140\PES-G, 184). According to Brentano, 
Überweg, in effect, repeats the error of St. Anselm, in confusing the 
thought of something or the predication of existence in concepts for 
extra-conceptual existence or real being. The actual kind of existence 
or unity establishing the part-whole relationship in presentations is not 
the same as real existence. It is in the former sense that we can say of 
something known that it exists as the affirmed content of a judgment 
in the mind of the person who knows it. In other words, Überweg is 
correct that mental acts have a relation of actually existing parts of the 
unity of consciousness (cf. below), but wrong that the immediate know-
ledge is confirmed by the contents of the acts taken as another existing 
thing on top of the acts themselves. Inner perception, according to 
Brentano, is instead, said to have an immediate truth that “cannot be 
proved in any way. But it has something more than proof; it is imme-
diately evident [ unmittelbar evident ]” (PES, 140\PES-G, 184). In other 
words, inner perception in Brentano’s system, as the ultimate founda-
tion of cognition and knowledge, can display no other condition on 
top of its immediate givenness “ ... [i]f anyone were to mount a skeptical 
attack against this ultimate foundation of cognition, he would find no 
other foundation upon which to erect an edifice of knowledge” (ibid). 
The existence of inner perception, as an accompanying consciousness 
and perception intangibly inhering in all occurrent mental activity, 
is therefore a transcendental or fundamental epistemological factor 
in empirical and conceptual analysis. Brentano writes of how the 
epistemic status of inner perception is equivalent to that of the “Law 
of Contradiction”, that is, it is “immediately evident and thus more 
certain than any proof” (PES, 165\PES-G, 215). 
 What is still necessary, therefore, is a proper theory of how inner 
perception relates to objects. This Brentano begins to provide by stating 
the following: 
 Perception and its object must not be separated into two distinct 
mental acts. 

Psychic Acts Further Explored 139
 We can say that the force of this argument extends beyond the 
evidence of inner perception and it even serves to confirm the way 
in which the inner presentation is connected with its real [ wirklichen ] 
object, a connection which we have already come to recognize in 
other ways. The cognition [ Erkenntnis ] of a real object cannot be more 
intimately united with it than its presentation is, since presentation 
forms the basis of cognition. Not only does the same thing hold true 
of cognitions but for the same reasons. It is not surprising, therefore, 
that the psychologists (modern day as well as Aristotle) who, like 
ourselves, have thought that the presentation which accompanies 
a mental act is an accessory feature included in the act itself, have 
likewise believed that the accompanying cognition is contained in it, 
too. (PES, 141\PES-G, 185)  
 However,  
 Every cognition [ Erkenntnis ] is a judgement and every judgement, it is 
ordinarily said, consists in a predicate’s being attributed to or denied 
of a subject. In the case of cognition through inner perception, the 
judgement is undoubtedly affirmative, but the predicate which is 
attributed to the subject would have to be existence, for what we 
perceive is that a mental act exists. (PES, 141\PES-G, 185)  
 The understanding of these matters outlined above, Brentano notes, goes 
against the received opinion in his day. In the late nineteenth century 
it was common to hold that every judgment connects “a plurality of 
concepts, and in particular that the judgment expressed in an existen-
tial proposition “adds” the concept of existence to some subject-concept 
or other” (PES, 141\PES-G, 186 and see Chapter 6 below). This is not the 
case for Brentano. Language and linguistic form alone cannot be used 
to infer predication. The above example of inner perception, on the 
other hand, is said to stand as a counter-example to the usual views of 
psychologists and logicians (PES, 142\PES-G, 186) and also to provide a 
more reliable guide for articulating ontological categories. 
 At this point, Brentano’s modification of “Weber’s law”, or the “just 
noticeable difference”, and its application to his theory of cognition 
is notable. When Weber had posited (in 1834) that a constant ratio 
obtains between a perceived stimulus and a temporally occurring later 
stimulus differing noticeably from the original, the formula he offered 
to clarify the ratio between the two was: “ I and Δ I is constant ( k ): Δ I / 
 I =  k ” (Kim, 2008 and see Chapter 4 above).  4 Amending this law, the 

140 From Psychology to Phenomenology
function of intensity of a sensation or presentation and the accom-
panying consciousness are said by Brentano to be analogous. That is, 
when any change is present in the presentation, the intimately related 
accompanying judgment also changes. Judgments, therefore, are said 
to have two intensities: 1) presentational intensity and 2) degree of 
conviction.  5 In the PES Brentano maintains that if a presentation has 
an intensity of 0, the accompanying judgment ceases to exist. What is 
called the “strength of the conviction” of the accompanying judgment, 
and the basis upon which a thinker can assert the existence of a mental 
phenomenon, must be the same constant magnitude in every case. “[E]
very inner perception is accompanied by ... absolute conviction which 
is inherent in all types of immediately evident cognition” (PES, 143\
PES-G, 188). At this point the twofold nature of inner consciousness, 
manifesting both presentations and judgments is also expanded to 
include a third feature. The third aspect is once again a different kind or 
mode of consciousness and mental act but, like presentations and judg-
ments, one that can be shown to exist in experience. This third class 
is that of feeling. Presentations and judgments, according to Brentano, 
exist in us with feelings of which paradigm cases of the last kind of 
directedness is pleasure and displeasure directed towards the object of 
an act. Like presentations, according to Brentano, feelings are inten-
tional in that they refer to objects. He writes,  
 [L]ike inner presentation and perception, the inner feeling which 
accompanies hearing, seeing, and every other act of which we are 
conscious in this way, is fused with its object and is included within 
the object itself (PES 144\PES-G, 189–90).  
 This position, however, is controversial. In his own day, Brentano 
notes how the intentionality or directedness of feelings is a topic that 
divides thinkers (PES, 144–46\PES-G, 190–93). These divisions persist 
into the present. Although it seems correct to say that some feelings 
are about objects or “intentional”, for example, when I have a tooth 
ache, the pain I feel is evidently aimed at or directed at my bad tooth. 
It is nonetheless debatable whether all feelings can be said to be so 
directed. As a counter-example, we can cite the case of overwhelming 
angst or anxiety that may not be justified by any objective reference or 
cause, but can nonetheless seem to pervade the whole of an individual’s 
consciousness. 
 At the conclusion of Book Two, chapter 3 of the PES, Brentano asks: 
Does a feeling accompany every presentation and judgment? This 

Psychic Acts Further Explored 141
matter is once again said to divide psychologists (PES, 147\PES-G, 193). 
James Mill wrote of what he called “neutral sensations”, however, John 
Stuart Mill and Alexander Bain disagreed, claiming instead that every 
sensation is accompanied by a feeling of some kind. Herbert Spencer 
and William Hamilton are claimed to have agreed with the younger 
Mill and Bain, while in Germany the above view had proponents in 
Domrich and Lotze but was criticized by Horwicz and Wundt. Wundt, 
although he characterized the experience of feeling as intimately 
related to sensations, nonetheless thought that it was impossible for 
every sensation to be accompanied by a feeling (PES, 149\PES-G, 196). 
As a counter-example, Wundt listed what he called “sensations without 
tone”. According to Wundt,  
 We characterize the sensory feeling as agreeable or disagreeable, as a 
feeling of pleasure or displeasure. Pleasure and displeasure, however, 
are opposite states which change into one another through a neutral 
point. This implies that there must exist sensations which lack 
tone, i.e. which are not accompanied by a sensory feeling. (Wundt, 
 Physiologische Psychologie , 426 as cited in Brentano, PES, 149)  
 Of the above Wundtian theory of “toneless sensations”, Brentano 
comments, “[i]f we grant the truth of the premises, it would follow that it 
certainly is possible for there to be sensation without an accompanying 
feeling” (PES, 149\PES-G, 196). However, in the PES Brentano is critical 
of Wundt and agrees instead with John Stuart Mill. Wundt’s example is 
said to be plausible at first glance, but upon examination of the evidence 
is said to be found wanting. 6 The universality of accompanying feelings 
is therefore said to be affirmed through inner perception, and Brentano 
also claims that, in an analogous manner to judgments, feelings have 
a dual or bivalent structure. More precisely, feelings are said to possess 
two kinds of intensity: 1) the intensity of the underlying act of presenta-
tion, and 2) an intensity that belongs especially to them (PES, 151). The 
same mental phenomena, therefore, can arouse different sensations in 
different circumstances (PES, 151). At this point, a review of the nature 
of inner consciousness is given:
 Every mental act is conscious; it includes within it a consciousness 
of itself. Therefore, every mental act, no matter how simple, has a 
double object, a primary and a secondary object. The simplest act, 
for example the act of hearing, has as its primary object the sound, 
and for its secondary object, itself, the mental phenomenon in 

142 From Psychology to Phenomenology
which the sound is heard. Consciousness of this secondary object 
is threefold: it involves a presentation of it, a cognition of it and a 
feeling toward it. Consequently, every mental act, even the simplest 
has four different aspects under which it may be considered. It may 
be considered as a presentation of its primary object, as when the 
act in which we perceive a sound is considered as an act of hearing; 
however, it may also be considered as a presentation of itself, as a 
cognition of itself, and as a feeling toward itself. In addition, in these 
four respects combined, it is the object of its self-presentation, of its 
self-cognition, and (so to speak) of its self-feeling. Thus, without any 
further complication and multiplication of entities, not only is the 
self-presentation presented, the self-cognition is known as well as 
presented, and the self-feeling is felt as well as known and presented. 
(PES, 153–54\PES-G, 202–03)  
 5.2   On the unity of consciousness 
 Objects, which are said to be immanent in consciousness, are brought 
before us in many ways. Brentano holds it to be evident that “wherever 
there is mental activity there is a certain multiplicity and complexity” 
(PES, 155\PES-G, 204). The three primary relations discussed above are 
also said, however, to be embedded in a unified psychic reality. The 
complexity described above, Brentano writes, is therefore not a lack 
of unity. The consciousness of what Brentano calls the primary object 
and the consciousness of the so-called secondary object are said not to 
be distinct phenomena but two aspects of one and the same unitary 
phenomenon (PES, 155\PES-G, 204–05). The multiple ways in which 
the secondary object can be said to enter consciousness does not, we 
are told, eliminate the unity, as all so-called objects of conscious-
ness are shown by experience to be part of a unified real being. In 
actuality Brentano – like William James, who borrowed the term “unity 
of consciousness” from him – holds that consciousness is “one great 
blooming, buzzing, confusion” (James, 1890, vol. 1, 488), which leads 
to its ever-changing and dynamic structure. 
 In other words, the immediately given facts or perceptions and expe-
riences that we call “conscious” can be said to flow and constantly 
change, but also to be selective and connected (cf. James, 1890, vol. 
1, 239). This leads to the question of how the declared unity of all 
diverse acts can be maintained. Perhaps the totality of mental states 
an individual occupies at any given waking hour should be viewed as a 
“collective reality” or a group of phenomena, “each of which is a thing 

Psychic Acts Further Explored 143
in its own right or belongs to a particular thing” (PES, 155\PES-G, 205). 
At this point Brentano’s earlier work on ontology takes center stage. 
The problem under investigation is what can be called the problem of 
“individuation”. Brentano writes, “ ... it is impossible for something to 
be one real thing and a multiplicity of real things at the same time” 
(PES, 156\PES-G, 205). Here Brentano follows Aristotle.  7 Necessarily 
everything that exists is identical with itself( i.e. x = x). A collection of 
objects, however, can be grouped together and called one thing, such 
as a “herd” of animals or “the plant world”. In the above cases, the 
objects grouped together are not actually one thing or interchange-
able with themselves, but instead can be called “collections”. In the 
same way, Brentano adds, a city is a collection of buildings and houses, 
and each individual house is a collection of rooms, with each room 
composed of smaller collectives or parts (i.e. the floorboards making 
up each floor of each single room). Nonetheless, without some real 
unities, “there would be no multiplicities, without things there would 
be no collectives” (PES, 156\PES-G, 205). Brentano’s investigation of 
the unity of consciousness therefore, (against many recent investiga-
tions of this topic) will be ontological and not linguistic or empirical 
alone. Taking the part-whole ontology developed in his earlier writ-
ings, Brentano maintains,  
 ... even though it is clear and obvious at the outset that one thing can 
never be a multiplicity of things, this does not mean that no multi-
plicity can be distinguished in it. Unity and simplicity – Aristotle 
again has already emphasized this point – are concepts which are not 
interchangeable. (PES, 157\PES-G, 205–06)  
 The above structure is the one Brentano finds suitable to attribute to 
mental acts. The primary and secondary consciousness, that is, the seeing 
of a marching band and the hearing of the music being played, as well 
as my awareness of both the above together, belong to only one single, 
complex and temporally unfolding act of presentation. Conceptually, it 
is true, we can always break down the different members of the collec-
tives we attend to. For example, we can separate the band members 
from each other, distinguish various instruments contributing to the 
tune being played, distinguish the musicians from their instruments, 
etc., but in none of the above cases are we dealing with a concretely 
or real existing unity. In the case of consciousness, by contrast, we are 
dealing with a real unity. Instead of “parts” therefore, Brentano says it 
is better to refer to the individual components of consciousness as its 

144 From Psychology to Phenomenology
“divisives” (Husserl will later call these abstract parts of a concrete act 
of consciousness: “moments”). Brentano now reformulates his earlier 
question about whether consciousness forms a real unity:
 ... in the case of more complex mental states, do we have to assume 
a collective of things, or, does the totality of mental phenomena, in 
the most complex states just as in the simplest, form  one thing in 
which we can distinguish divisives as parts?. (PES, 157\PES-G, 206)  
 Before an answer to this question can be given, Brentano writes of how 
without some real unities there would be no multiplicities and without 
things there would be no collectives (PES, 156, PES-G, 205). While this 
presupposition can perhaps be challenged by those holding an alterna-
tive ontology, it is nonetheless analytically sound. For example, if one 
were to deny that there is unity in reality, then one would also have to 
deny both that they exist as an individual and, in effect, the basic sense 
of their claim that they deny unity. Even the most radical pluralist must 
accept a plurality of something or thing(s), even if only a collection of 
active mental states or sensations and thoughts signifying their current 
existence, in order to do justice to the experience of a world against 
which they affirm a flux of entities. 
 Brentano adds: “even though it is clear and obvious at the outset that 
one thing can never be a multiplicity of things, this does not mean 
that no multiplicity can be distinguished in it” (PES, 157\PES-G, 205). 
This structure is precisely that found to characterize consciousness and 
conscious mental acts. What is called primary consciousness and sepa-
rated from secondary consciousness, that is, the seeing of the marching 
band and the hearing of the music, mentioned above; belong to only one 
complex act of presentation. Conceptually, of course, we can always break 
down the different components of the stream of consciousness. Brentano 
thinks that we can be conscious of a primary object in different ways and 
also that mental activity can be directed towards more than one primary 
object. This second point introduces a greater level of complexity into 
our mental activity. Nonetheless, according to Brentano,  
 It is clear ... that what we decide about this case depends upon our deci-
sions about the cases in which there is only one kind of complexity. 
If neither of the two kinds of complexity does away with real unity, 
then the two taken together will not destroy it either, and the mental 
phenomena which are simultaneously present in our consciousness 
will always constitute such a unity. (PES, 157\PES-G, 207)  

Psychic Acts Further Explored 145
 At this point, a difficulty in establishing a real unity of conscious-
ness can be mentioned: if our psychic acts or the fundamental classes 
of psychic acts are all merely divisives of one unitary phenomenon 
(i.e. consciousness), how can they also be said to be independent of 
one another? Brentano deals with this difficulty by noting that indi-
vidual mental acts come into being and pass out of being without the 
underlying presentations or mental activity ceasing: “Either seeing 
or hearing can take place without the other one ... ” (PES, 158\PES-G, 
207). Repeating again the fundamental law of presentation [“pres-
entations are the foundations of all other mental phenomena” PES, 
138]; Brentano again states how every other mode of consciousness 
is based upon a presentation and includes a presentation in it (PES, 
158\PES-G, 207). Brentano gives analogies to help clarify how diverse 
acts or psychic phenomena can belong to the same unity. Among the 
examples are the following: a) the thing loved and the conscious pres-
entation we hold of the thing loved are the same (on pains of the 
absurd situation that would result in the case of someone loving some-
thing they had absolutely no awareness of); b) the desire for the means 
includes the desire for the end. Finally, c) the act of choosing contains 
as its correlate what the choice is about or aims at (PES, 158–60\PES-G, 
207–10). 
 While the above examples can be challenged or explained away, the 
underlying structure of the mental acts Brentano is describing seems 
correct. It is the same person who both desires and loves x (love being 
precisely a relationship between a lover and the beloved) and analo-
gously in the subsequent cases. Furthermore, my sight of the marching 
band and my hearing of its music must be contained in consciousness 
in order for my same awareness of the presentation to be actualized. To 
say that the two distinct acts of awareness are not intrinsically unified 
to my stream of consciousness,  
 would be like saying that ... neither a blind man nor a deaf man could 
compare colors with sounds, but if one sees and the other hears, the 
two together can recognize the relationship. And why does this seem 
so absurd? Because the cognition which compares them is a real 
objective unity, but when we combine the acts of the blind man and 
the deaf man, we always get a mere collective and never a unitary 
real thing. Obviously, it makes no difference whether the blind man 
and the deaf man are far apart or near one another. If they lived 
together permanently in the same house, indeed, even if they had 
grown up together as inseparably as Siamese twins or even more so 

146 From Psychology to Phenomenology
it would not increase the possibility of the hypothesis one bit. (PES, 
159\PES-G, 209)  
 When we have a perception of colors and sounds, for example, they are 
perceived together in a single cognition – there is an “objective unity” 
of perception and an awareness of what is perceived. If the color and 
the sound were not presented jointly “in one and the same reality”, it 
is inconceivable that they could be compared with one another (PES, 
159\PES-G, 209). 
 The same situation, of plurality in an underlying unity, holds for 
what Brentano calls the inner aspects of consciousness,  
 When someone thinks of and desires something, or when he thinks 
of several primary objects at the same time, he is conscious not 
only of the different activities, but also of their simultaneity. When 
someone hears a melody, he recognizes that he has a presentation 
of one note as occurring now and of other notes as having already 
occurred. When a person is aware of seeing and hearing, he is also 
aware that he is doing both at the same time. (PES, 160\PES-G, 210)  
 The important point is not whether the diverse mental acts or divisives 
are really identical, but whether they are conceptually identical, that is, 
whether they share an underlying actual nature allowing them to be 
part of the same reality. Brentano maintains that: “the totality of our 
mental life, as complex as it may be, always forms a real unity” (PES, 
163\PES-G, 214). To better understand this claim we can, with Brentano, 
define these terms and point out the differences between a real and a 
conceptual identity. Simultaneous mental activities are not all “really 
identical”; in the PES we are told that, “two things have a real iden-
tity, if one is the other ... Thus everyone is really identical with himself” 
(PES, 160\PES-G, 211). This is a merely logical and formal definition 
or understanding of identity. On the other hand, “different men are 
conceptually [ begrifflich ] identical in that they are, of course, men, but 
this is not a real identity” (PES, 160–61\PES-G, 211). Every human being 
shares or instantiates “humanity”, but it does not follow that every 
human being shares a single body or possess an identical mental life 
with the same set of memories and experiences. This conceptual iden-
tity or species similarity, however, is dependent on the fact of actual 
individual human beings existing. In the same way, real identity “never 
holds between our concurrent mental activities ... they are divisives of 
the same reality, but this does not make them really identical with it 

Psychic Acts Further Explored 147
and thus with one another” (PES, 161\PES-G, 211). Although nothing is 
more identical with itself than anything else, this cannot apply to the 
relation of the parts to the whole in an existing individual. Brentano 
here propounds a common membership in one real entity or thing and 
implies that the relationship of part to whole constitutes a “one over the 
many” unity with each mental act arising and inhering in the unity of 
consciousness and participating in actual awareness of conscious life 
before passing away. The theory expounded here has much in common 
with what is today called the unity of phenomenal consciousness. 
In the PES, however, Brentano connects his terms to the Scholastics 
and writes of how the relationship he is describing is reminiscent of 
Platonic participation of particulars in the forms or more precisely of 
how Aristotelian accidents or non-essential qualities of a thing inhere 
in the concrete substance. 
 Here we are presented, therefore, with a tension between what 
Brentano takes to be the real metaphysical unity of consciousness and 
his earlier position, stated at the beginning of the PES, that his psych-
ology will utilize the model of mental life of a “psychology without a 
soul” as proposed by Lange (cf. PES, 11\PES-G, 13). We must examine, 
therefore, the consequences of Brentano’s view about the unity of 
consciousness in the PES and whether they can reconciled with the 
radical non-substantialist model that finds precedent in the empiricist 
or Humean “bundle theory” of self. That this model of the self is taken 
seriously by Brentano becomes apparent when the noticeable influence 
of Mill and other empiricists on the PES is taken into account. It can 
also be noted that a similar understanding of personal identity as that 
of Hume and Lange was held by John Stuart Mill in the phenomenalist 
context for psychological identity propounded in his writings. 
 First it can be said that the above argument for the metaphysical unity 
of consciousness rests on similar premises to Brentano’s earlier discus-
sion of the intrinsic consciousness of presentations and the intrinsic 
self-perception of mental phenomena. Once again, the first and most 
obvious weakness in the argument is the premise that what is mental 
is essentially conscious. If the latter premise is not accepted, then 
Brentano’s account of his mental divisives adhering to a single or unitary 
psychic reality becomes less compelling. If the essential consciousness 
and directedness of the mental, as Brentano understands it, is accepted, 
however, it will be seen that the variety of phenomenalism offered here 
is not (and cannot be) of the Humean or Millian variety. The latter 
version can be called psychological, as although experience is taken 
into account, its justification is empirical alone. In order to show why 

148 From Psychology to Phenomenology
a “bundle theory of self” cannot ultimately be defended within act 
psychology, a brief comparison of Brentano’s understanding of mental 
life with the views of Hume and Mill will therefore prove useful. 
 When Hume applied his empiricist principle of meaning verifica-
tion to the self (which very roughly stated can be said to be “no ideas 
in the mind without prior impressions”), not surprisingly, he came up 
with nothing but the free-floating contents of his own consciousness 
and no impression of self whatsoever (cf. Hume, 1978, 252\Treatise, I, 
IV, vi).  8 Following Hume’s lead, according to J. S. Mill, every mental 
state is connected to and caused by sensations that are, in turn, said 
to be grouped together according to the laws of association. These 
“permanent possibilities of sensation”, as Mill called them, were said 
not to require a permanent self in order to be united through the 
universal “law of causality” since the law of the association of ideas can 
substitute for the missing psychological unity (Mill, 1979, 185–87). For 
Brentano, by contrast, mental acts are described in the PES as “mutu-
ally” or “partially” independent; love without a presentation of the 
thing loved would be impossible as would hate without something 
hated, etc. Similarly, awareness of something in sight and a simultan-
eous audio or tactile impression of the same object would be impossible 
to notice if there were not a common factor and real unifying bond to 
all of these different sense impressions making the possibility condition 
of the awareness possible. Conscious awareness (granted through inner 
perception) is therefore based on an underlying unity of all conscious 
phenomena and this is nothing less than the structure of consciousness 
described by Brentano as a  real unity. 
 Nonetheless the precise interpretation of this mental unity is made 
somewhat puzzling by the fact that, throughout the PES, Brentano 
posits an intimate relationship between the mental and the physical. 
The theory of intentional inexistence, as stated in the first chapter of 
Book Two of the PES, is noticeably unclear on whether the mental can 
be ultimately reducible to the physical. However, with his conception of 
the unity of consciousness, we see that Brentano’s system actually does 
not allow for the mental to be ultimately reduced to the physical  if the 
physical is defined as extended and atomistic or completely mechanistic 
in its micro-properties. A discussion of atomism, as what is called “a 
popular hypothesis” about the world, is made by Brentano in chapter 3 
of Book Two of the PES (PES, 162\PES-G, 212–13). The atomic model can 
be said to serve as an analogy for the ontological/metaphysical distinc-
tions articulated by Brentano. The atomic model posits fundamental 
parts or units belonging to the same reality but adhering to strict and 

Psychic Acts Further Explored 149
efficient  certerus paribus laws. According to Brentano, reducing reality to 
atoms in the void of space demonstrates how a plurality of divisives can 
be connected – in that the atoms are said to be related to each other in a 
variety of ways with their identities and relative distance and motion in 
respect of other atoms used to establish their identity (PES, 162\PES-G, 
213). What the atomic model facilitates, therefore, is the adoption of a 
holistic approach to the mental viewed as dependent on (and ultimately 
reducible to) the physical. On this analogy, however, the general laws of 
physics must relate directly to what can be called the “special laws” of 
psychology. This is made clear when Brentano writes that,  
 [W]hen we teach the unity of consciousness, we do not maintain in 
any way that different groups of mental phenomena, which do not 
belong to one and the same reality, can never be connected with one 
and the same connected physical body. (PES, 164\PES-G, 214)  
 As an example, the case of coral is presented where “countless little 
animals appear to have a common bodily life in one and the same 
stem” (PES, 164\PES-G, 214). On the above example, the simultan-
eous mental phenomena of each polyp do not form a real unity, and 
there is also no inner perception possible for such simple and primi-
tive life-forms. However, the above case is cited as analogous to the 
hypothetical example in human psychology of demon possession (as 
reported in the Scriptures). If a demon could occupy my consciousness, 
writes Brentano, it would be analogous to two coral attached by a single 
stem. In the demon case, the different personalities inhabiting my 
consciousness would have their own unity of consciousness, and if one 
personality was dominant (either human or demon), Brentano main-
tains, it would literally have memories that would be hidden and there-
fore made completely unavailable to the other personality. Something 
like the above was the position of Leibniz, we are told, when he held 
that my conscious self is really a dominant monad controlling a colony 
of an immense number of genuinely distinct substances each with a 
spiritual nature.  9 
 The above cases are supposed to prove that inner perception in a 
unity of consciousness can be differentiated into a variety of active 
streams without losing its immediately evident and infallible status 
(PES, 164\PES-G, 215). However, although the ultimate evidence in the 
last three examples shows us unity but no extension, Brentano also 
writes that this cannot be taken to mean that the unity of conscious-
ness is not compatible ( pace Leibniz) with the having of quantitative 

150 From Psychology to Phenomenology
parts or spatial extension. The unity of consciousness must, in the case 
of human consciousness, belong to a body.  10 The only thing that is 
certain, writes Brentano, is that we cannot conceive of the mental activ-
ities that belong to the unity of consciousness as “quantitatively divided 
in every which way” for,  
 It is not possible for seeing to occur in  one quantitative part of our 
consciousness while the inner presentation, perception or pleasure 
which accompanies the act of seeing [occurring in] a quantitatively 
different part of consciousness. This would contradict all we have 
heard about the particularly intimate connection and close union of 
these phenomena. 
 It is likewise clear that a presentation is never contained in one 
quantitative part of our consciousness, while the judgement or 
desire directed upon the object of this presentation are contained in 
another part. In this case, there would be no presentation as the basis 
of the judgement and the desire, as inner perception shows that there 
is. On the other hand, we do not as yet have any reason to contest 
the view that perhaps one presentation is extended, or that different 
presentations may exist, in something analogous to a spatial way, 
alongside one another, etc. (PES, 166\PES-G, 217)  
 Although it is difficult to conceive of how essentially non-extended and 
intangible entities such as mental acts can be quantitatively divided at 
all – except in temporal terms (which Brentano acknowledges is also the 
case), the above qualification seems to exclude an atomistic model for 
the physical sciences (even if it can said to be compatible with some kind 
of materialism depending on the important caveat of how “matter” is to 
be conceptualized). Although memory is said by Brentano to reveal no 
more than one temporally continuous series of groups, we are told that 
it is not evident, going from memory alone, whether the data presented 
in a given set of memories that, for example, reveals the stream of our 
current recently remembered mental activity, is continuous with other 
streams from our past (PES, 168\PES-G, 220).  11 
 What seems a necessary condition for establishing Brentano’s 
doctrine is a theory of mental causation that can form the basis of both 
the unity of consciousness and serve as warrant for the givenness of 
inner perception, upon the evidence of which the objective laws of act 
psychology will be established.  12 It will be against the framework of a 
special metaphysics of nature that Brentano ultimately wants to ground 
his understanding of the sciences. What is philosophically important 

Psychic Acts Further Explored 151
about Brentano’s discussion of the unity of consciousness, however, 
is the focus placed on individuality understood from a systematically 
immanent and phenomenological perspective. Thomas Nagel, years 
later, would attempt to thematize what he called this philosophical 
problem of “being someone”, that is, of having a uniquely irreducible 
and subject centered point of view in an objective world (cf. Nagel, 
1986, 54ff). Brentano is attempting to philosophize with the same 
concern that would occupy Nagel. Brentano’s attempt to establish the 
unity of experience and the continuity of mental life as connecting 
essentially private experiences together would later be directly taken up 
by phenomenological philosophers as diverse as Edmund Husserl, Max 
Scheler and Jean-Paul Sartre.  
 5.3  Brentano’s taxonomy of mental phenomena 
 For Brentano, an essential characteristic of the mental is intentional 
reference to an immanent content or object. The intentional character-
istic of the mental, Brentano argued, was said to be a characteristic not 
shared by any physical phenomena. We are now in a position where 
the following question can be posed: do different psychic phenomena 
have universal characteristics? If the answer to the above question 
is affirmative, then a definition of the given characteristics that all 
the different types of psychic phenomena have in common can, and 
arguably should, be made. From the above principle of classification 
of psychic phenomena emerges what Brentano calls the “determin-
ation of the fundamental classes of mental phenomena” (PES, 44\
PES-G, 55). This determination proceeds on the basis of the different 
“natural affinities” between psychic phenomena. In what follows, we 
will first show how this distinction is tenable. Furthermore, following 
the program elaborated in the PES for tracing the affinities of psychic 
acts with one another, it will be demonstrated how a system of classi-
fication is required by Brentano’s psychology to establish insights into 
certain mental laws. 
 Brentano has observed that the phenomena of mental life are diverse. 
Indeed it could be argued that every mental act refers to a different object 
in a different way. Nonetheless, the number of fundamental classes is 
said, for a number of reasons, to be limited. In the PES Book One chapter 
3, Brentano had written, “we shall have to establish the natural order as 
well as the number of fundamental classes of mental phenomena” (PES, 
45\PES-G, 56). In Book Two we learn that Brentano’s classification of 
mental phenomenon is basically Cartesian. As Descartes distinguished 

152 From Psychology to Phenomenology
between “ ideae ”, “ iudicia ”, and “ voluntates ” in his  Meditations , so 
Brentano distinguishes between “presentation”, “judgement” and 
“appetition” (the last class of psychic acts being a combination of acts of 
feeling and will).  13 In his treatise  The Origin of Our Knowledge of Right and 
Wrong (from 1889) Brentano explicitly acknowledged this debt he owed 
to Descartes. There, after the three fundamental classes listed above are 
delineated, we are told:
 We may thus distinguish three fundamental classes of psychological 
phenomena. It was Descartes who first made this distinction; we 
find a complete and accurate statement in the  Meditations . But what 
he said was not sufficiently attended to and was soon forgotten. In 
more recent times, Descartes’ method of classification was independ-
ently rediscovered, and we may now look upon it as something that 
has been established (ORW, 16).  
 In the PES the classification of the fundamental mental classes proceeds 
in two steps. First (chapter 5) a survey and overview of earlier devel-
opments is given.  14 Second, Brentano defines his own fundamental 
classes (chapter 6). These classifications are meant to distinguish not 
only different ways of being conscious of (i.e. referring to) an object 
but also different modes that consciousness can take regarding the 
objects or contents of its awareness. This separation and distinction of 
psychic acts into fundamental classes was and is still controversial. The 
entire project of systematically breaking down experience and mental 
life into categories and classifications is difficult to the point that some 
thinkers argue it cannot be done (cf. Blackmore, 2002, 17–18). As was 
outlined above, if Brentano was attempting to get behind conscious-
ness or exhaustively reduce experience to essentially external or quan-
tifiable and objective categories, we would be forced to agree that we 
simply do not have the appropriate knowledge or resources to categorize 
and exhaustively classify where (or how) consciousness emerges and 
functions. However, classifying experiences according to general classes 
based on immediately experienced mental activity is a very different 
undertaking. A process of this kind, starting from an internal appre-
hension of mental activity, using what Brentano calls inner perception 
aided by memory, is both more realistically attainable and has histor-
ical precedent. With this said, we can turn to Brentano’s classification 
of individual mental or psychic acts. 
 Brentano gives Plato the credit for the first fundamental classification 
of mental phenomena. In his  Republic Plato came up with a tripartite 

Psychic Acts Further Explored 153
classification of mental classes or phenomena in his division of the parts 
of the soul. Plato distinguished between the appetitive (το έπιθυμητικον), 
the spirited (τό θυμοειδές), and the rational (τό λογιστικόν) parts of the 
soul. According to Brentano, Plato’s classification is imperfect because, 
“ ... it is rooted entirely in ethical considerations” (PES, 178\PES-G, 235), 
corresponding to the three main classes of the state as outlined in Plato’s 
dialogue. Also Brentano notes that a kind of taxonomic confusion 
results from Plato’s classification. Sensory perception for example must, 
according to Plato, be assigned to both the appetitive and the spirited 
parts and, “ ... in certain passages Plato gives the impression of placing 
it, along with other kinds of knowledge, in the rational part” (PES, 179\
PES-G, 235). Ultimately, therefore Plato is not a strong direct influence 
on Brentano’s system of classification. Much more important in influen-
cing Brentano is the Aristotelian division of mental phenomena. 
 Like Plato, Aristotle also proposed three basic classifications of mental 
phenomena. In  De Anima the Stagirite distinguishes the vegetative from 
the sensitive and both of these from the rational part of the soul (an 
essentially Platonic distinction). Brentano treats Aristotle’s vegetative 
and sensitive parts as one class (Brentano is also unwilling to ascribe, 
as Aristotle did, souls to plants) (cf. PES, 179\PES-G, 236). In  De Anima 
Aristotle draws a distinction between mental phenomena considered 
as activities of the “central organ” and others that are incorporeal. The 
mental faculties correspond to the mortal and immortal parts of the soul 
respectively. Next Aristotle divides mental activities into two groups of 
which the first is common to animals (όρεξις or desire) and the second 
specifically human (νούς or thought). Finally, and most importantly (for 
Brentano’s purposes), Aristotle anticipates Brentano’s own classification 
by differentiating classes based on reference to an object.  15 This, of course, 
is the basis of Brentano’s theory of intentional inexistence (see above) and 
it will be refined by Brentano and treated as the indispensable criterion in 
the classification of different mental phenomena.  16 The Aristotelian defi-
nitions were, according to Brentano, dominant throughout the Middle 
Ages and also into modern philosophy where Kant was one of the most 
important thinkers to propagate Aristotle’s definitions. 
 Like Descartes, Kant claimed that there were three faculties. 
Although Kant ordered the mental faculties differently from Descartes, 
namely he distinguished between the cognitive faculty, the feeling of 
pleasure and pain, and the faculty of desire. Nonetheless, according 
to Brentano, Kant made use of the same three faculties as the basis for 
his classification of mental life in his critical philosophy (PES, 182\
PES-G, 240). The above distinctions are considered fundamental for 

154 From Psychology to Phenomenology
Kant because he believed that “none of these three classes is capable of 
being derived from the others or of being reduced along with any other 
class to a third class which is their common root” (ibid). The Kantian 
distinction subsequently became a popular one. Brentano attacks it in 
his  Psychology claiming that it is inappropriate and also that a priori 
deduction (which is what Kant is said to have based his classification 
on) is a very bad criterion for distinguishing fundamental classes. 
 It can be noted here that two basic differences can be identified between 
the Kantian trichotomy and Brentano’s. Firstly, for Kant, there is a sharp 
division in consciousness between knowing and feeling. According to 
Brentano’s theory, both feeling and judgement are based upon presen-
tations and have other similarities. Secondly, for Kant, desire (or will) 
is separated from knowledge and feeling. Brentano, in the  Psychology , 
unites feelings and will and incorporates them into the same class. So it 
can be seen that, in his taxonomy of mental acts, Brentano borrows the 
notion of directedness to an object from Aristotle and the classificatory 
distinctions of Descartes to support his theory. To validate his taxonomy 
of mental events, Brentano still needs a principle to guide the classifica-
tion (PES, 194\PES-G, 256). Here he maintains that his principles will be 
the same as those that are taken into consideration by scientists in the 
other natural sciences. All scientific classification should be such that 
it arranges the objects to be studied in a way that facilitates research. 
Objects closely related by nature should therefore fall into a single class. 
Where no knowledge of the objects that are to be classified can be had, 
there can be no classification. The fundamental rule of classification is 
that: “it should proceed from a study of the objects to be classified and 
not from an a priori construction” (PES, 194\PES-G, 256). According to 
this criteria, any dogmatic assertions about the mental, such as those 
regarding what the mental is or must be (whether spiritual inner sphere 
or something reducible to physiological processes) cannot be the foun-
dation of psychological classification. One reason for this is the back-
wards state of psychology. We simply do not know enough about what 
the mental is or how it relates to the physiological processes that mani-
fest it. Therefore, Brentano holds that psychological classification must 
build on the discoveries and insights of the other sciences. 
 Brentano considers previous attempts at classification notable and 
deserving of attention. However, he also writes that many earlier 
philosophers have been misled by imperfect knowledge of the psycho-
logical sphere. After listing previous methods and conflicts, Brentano 
maintains that the best method is the one used by Aristotle and devel-
oped earlier in his own text, that is, a study of the relations that mental 

Psychic Acts Further Explored 155
activities have or manifest to their immanent objects (PES, 197\PES-G, 
260). Using this method, Brentano declares, also allows his system 
of classification to be in agreement with Descartes. Brentano there-
fore, like Descartes, posits three fundamental classes of mental acts. 
He ends the chapter by giving definitions of the three classes while 
pointing out that, although his borrowing the same terms used by 
previous thinkers is unavoidable, his use of the terms will nonetheless 
be marked by a somewhat different sense than how they were used in 
earlier classification. Thus, for example, Brentano will use the term 
Presentation, in a somewhat wider sense than how Kant and Wundt 
used the term. Like “consciousness”, presentation ( Vorstellung ) is also 
said to be something of a gap filling term, that is, there simply do not 
exist other expressions for mental activities of this first fundamental 
class or the essential basis of mental life. Presentations are character-
ized as follows:
 We speak of a presentation whenever something appears to us. When 
we see something, a color is presented; when we hear something, a 
sound; when we imagine something, a fantasy image. In view of the 
generality with which we use this term it can be said that it is impos-
sible for conscious activity to refer in any way to something which 
is not presented. When I hear and understand a word that names 
something, I have a presentation of what that word designates; and 
generally speaking the purpose of such words is to evoke presenta-
tions. (PES, 198\PES-G, 261–62)  
 Contrasted to this is the class of Judgments, which are characterized as 
follows:
 By “judgement” we mean, in accordance with common philosoph-
ical usage, acceptance (as true) or rejection (as false). We have already 
noted, however, that such acceptance or rejection also occurs in cases 
in which many people would not use the term “judgement,” as, for 
example, in the perception of mental acts and in remembering. But 
of course we will not hesitate to include these cases too, in the class 
of judgement. (PES, 198–99\PES-G, 262)  
 Brentano struggles to find an appropriate label for the third class,  
 The lack of a single appropriate expression is felt most strongly 
in the case of the third class, whose phenomena we designated as 

156 From Psychology to Phenomenology
“emotions,” as “phenomena of interest” or as “phenomena of love.” 
In our view this class is said to include all mental phenomena which 
are not included in the first two classes. But the term “emotion” is 
usually understood to mean only affects which are connected with 
noticeable physical agitation. Everybody would call anger, anxiety 
and passionate desire emotions; but in the general way in which we 
use the word, it also applies to all wishes, decisions and intentions. 
Yet Kant, at least, used the word  (Gemüt) in an even broader sense 
than ours, since he characterizes every mental faculty, even that of 
knowledge, as a faculty of emotion. 
 Likewise, the term “interest” is usually used only to designate 
certain acts which belong to the class we are describing, namely, 
those in which curiosity or inquisitiveness are aroused. Yet it is not 
inappropriate to describe every pleasure or displeasure in something 
as interest, and every wish, every voluntary decision is an act of 
taking an interest in something, too. (PES,199\PES-G, 262)  
 In this way, the essential differences in mental acts have now been 
distinguished. The first and most basic class, “presentations” can 
be seen to be foundational and cognitive (i.e. accusative and object 
taking) acts. Presentations are viewed as fundamental and necessary 
for the manifestation of the intentional directedness said to charac-
terize all mental life. These foundational acts are distinguished from 
the second, equally widely applicable and cognitive, class of judg-
ments. Judgments, for Brentano, are also fundamental to what can be 
called higher level mental life, coming into play whenever a percep-
tion of an object is had or when we reflect on our own mental life and 
past experiences as well as when we affirm and deny both objects and 
propositions or ideas. Finally, the class of emotions and will is said to 
be a non-cognitive class that is nonetheless involved in the essentially 
cognitive activities of presentational and judgment acts. Like the class 
of judgments, emotions and volitions will be said to be founded on 
more basic acts of presentation. Unlike judgments and presentations, 
the phenomena of feeling, emotion and will, are said to be conceived 
as a continuum of interconnected, intrinsically related, acts. 
 In relation to prior thinkers, we can see that Brentano’s classifica-
tion takes pains to articulate differences in what was earlier viewed as 
a homogenous class of thinking. Where Aristotle made a fundamental 
distinction between so-called cognitive or thinking and non-cognitive 
acts of desire, Brentano instead follows Descartes in separating mere 
presentations (or  ideae ) from judgments ( iudicia ) and both from acts of 

Psychic Acts Further Explored 157
will ( voluntates ). However, Brentano’s position will differ from Descartes’ 
regarding precisely how the connection of will to cognitive activity is 
conceived. In relation to Kant, Brentano will again distinguish separate 
levels of cognitive acts where Kant connects the faculties of the under-
standing and reason into one cognitive class; and instead of separating 
feelings and the will as Kant does, Brentano joins the two together. 
 What is innovative and original in Brentano’s account is his placing 
of presentations (as he conceives them) as the basis of mental life. The 
subsequent study of how objects and contents are “presented” to a subject 
will lead to a far greater awareness of the various modes and relation the 
mind takes to both transcendent objects of perception as well as its 
own sensations and thought contents that can be found in the writings 
of earlier thinkers. For Brentano, in other words, the careful descrip-
tions of various facets of mental life highlight aspects of experience 
that must be accounted for by act psychology. The remaining sections 
of Brentano’s PES will examine the essential characteristics of each class 
of mental act and also articulate how they relate to one another.  

158
 The final three chapters of the PES feature a psychological elucida-
tion of the epistemological foundations of Brentano’s system as well as 
the presentation of his unique theory of emotion, feeling and volition 
that would later serve as the basis from which he developed his ethical 
doctrines. Brentano’s theory of judgment, discussed in chapter 7 of 
Book Two of the PES, distinguishes judgments from presentations and 
argues that the two activities are unique modes of intentionally relating 
to the same presented content. Brentano’s discussion of the theory of 
judgment is one of the most innovative sections of his entire book. 
Developing an essentially neo-Aristotelian theory of intellectual judg-
ment as affirmation or denial of things holding outside the mind, 
Brentano nonetheless challenges and rejects Aristotle and the entire 
Aristotelian tradition for the inability to either clearly grasp the proper 
logical form of cognitive judgments or for failing to conceive of them as 
intentionally directed mental acts. In developing his alternative theory 
of judgment, Brentano ties up ambiguities in his earlier Aristotelian 
writings regarding inductive and deductive logical inference as well 
as the role of terms and concrete presentations to conceptual thought. 
What is more, Brentano simultaneously puts forward a new, and what 
can be called “phenomenological”, theory of truth and belief states. 
In the concluding chapters of the PES, Brentano articulates his theory 
that feelings and the will manifest themselves as a psychic continuum 
of closely related mental acts that are actually separate from presenta-
tions and judgments and as such constitutive of a separate mental class. 
Brentano ends his book by comparing the three basis classes of mental 
acts and describing what is called their “natural order”.  
 6 
 Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 
and the Connection of Feelings 
and Acts of Will  

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 159
 6.1   Presentation and judgment – two distinct 
fundamental classes of mental acts 
 The theory of judgment was historically the name for the branch of 
epistemology that could deal with logic, meaning, and other important 
characteristics of manifestly rational thought processes. Traditionally, 
the theory of judgment proposed an intimate link between psychology 
and logic and how certain mental operations worked in the attainment 
of knowledge. Traditional theories of judgment were therefore closely 
related to epistemology precisely because they were taken to unite 
psychology or theories about the origins of our ideas with the analysis 
of reason and reasoning processes. 
 In contemporary philosophy, the notion of a “theory of judgment” 
frequently comes under attack. Many contemporary thinkers view 
theory of judgment as a historical doctrine reflecting prejudices in phil-
osophy and metaphysics.  1 Although this was not the case in the nine-
teenth century, nonetheless in providing his own theory of judgment, 
in the PES, Brentano develops pointed criticism of existing theories and 
the presuppositions underlying them. Brentano’s theory of judgment 
in the PES grows out of his Aristotelian writings but transforms the 
Aristotelian theory of judgment and uses his reappropriation and revi-
sion of Aristotle to challenge the dominant theories of his time in logic 
and psychology. Given its innovative qualities, Brentano’s view in this 
area was nonetheless largely ignored outside of the phenomenological 
tradition.  2 The basis of his theory of judgment was originally developed 
though his engagement with Aristotelian texts, which Brentano had 
been working with for some time. The theme of connecting intellectual 
judgments with the affirmation of existing things, for example, can 
be traced back to Brentano’s earliest writings. In chapter 4 of his book 
 On the Several Senses of Being in Aristotle , Brentano clearly anticipates 
central aspects of the theory of truth and judgment later presented in 
his PES and subsequent writings. There he writes, “ ... obviously, it is 
the judgment which is here called true and false, hence to be or not 
to be; judgment itself is the subject to which being belongs as a predi-
cate” (OSS, 23). The notion of being as a predicate is later abandoned, 
but the Aristotelian notion of the affirmation of the object presented 
before the thinker’s mind [ psuche ] as actually existing can be seen to be 
the origin of Brentano’s later theory of judgment. This theory is subse-
quently developed in Book Two, chapter 7 of the PES. 
 In this chapter Brentano determines that presentations and judgments 
are two entirely different ways of being consciously directed to an object 

160 From Psychology to Phenomenology
(PES, 201\PES-G, 266). For Brentano, the relationship between presenta-
tion and judgment is analogous to what past philosophers (most notably 
Aristotle and Kant) claimed was the relation between presentations and 
desire (ibid). Affirming his earlier claim that judgment is founded on a 
presentation, Brentano here clarifies that when an object is judged, it 
enters consciousness in a new and completely different way, in effect 
forming a different intentional relationship than the object had when 
it was merely given in a presentation. Objects taken up by judgments 
can in this way be affirmed and denied. A large part of Brentano’s aim 
in outlining his psychological theory of judgment is to account for this 
dual aspect of the essentially cognitive relation that the subject has 
with objects. 
 A great deal of chapter 7, Book Two of the PES is subsequently devoted 
to establishing the above claim. This claim, and its consequences for the 
logic of terms and truth theory was, in 1874 at least, both unorthodox 
and highly original. Brentano had already developed his critique and 
reform of traditional logic in his Würzburg lectures, although many 
of the results of his research and thought were first made public in 
these sections of the PES. Defining judgments as intentionally directed 
mental acts with a bipolar structure, Brentano writes of how presen-
tations exhibit nothing of the kind and so are a different “class” of 
psychic acts. Presentations, for example, do not affirm or deny the 
contents they present. According to Brentano, granting the existence of 
conscious presentations and what can be called thetic acts of judgment 
amounts to a strong challenge to existing theories. If his views about 
the nature of judgment are not correct, Brentano asserts, there can be 
only two possible alternatives:
 That a difference in content or object is referred to by presentations 
1. 
versus judgment and this different content or object is the distin-
guishing feature between the two activities.  
 That a difference in the fullness or intensity with which the content 
2. 
is related to the thinker by the respective acts (presentations and 
judgments) is the distinguishing feature.  
 A third explanation, rejecting both of the above theories as well as 
Brentano’s, was articulated by John Stuart Mill’s colleague Alexander 
Bain. Bain, anticipating later behaviorist views on this matter, 
attempted to distinguish between “presentings” and “judgings” by 
locating the distinguishing characteristic, not in the thought structure 
 or the content of the mental act, but rather in the manner by which the 

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 161
two activities affected the subject. Judgments, held Bain, have a direct 
influence upon the will, while presentations do not (PES, 202\PES-G, 
268). Brentano calls Bain’s theory a “very unfortunate one” as he thinks 
that it is almost beneath refutation and not worthy of serious consider-
ation (Brentano also maintains how he is reinforced in this assessment 
by the fact that Bain himself later rejected the theory).  3 However, both 
James Mill, in his  Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind (1878), 
and Herbert Spencer in his  Principles of Psychology (1870), made more 
consistent attempts to uphold a position similar to Bain’s. For Mill and 
Spencer, the difference between presentations or ideas and judgments 
was based on what they called “mental habits”. That is, these thinkers 
held that when an inseparable association was formed between ideas 
or the contents of presentations, a belief (or judgment) was supposed 
to be formed that could, through psychological analysis, be traced back 
to the associated contents (PES, 203\PES-G, 269). This position reduces 
presentations to the same basic kind of acts or thought contents as judg-
ments were supposed to be. Brentano comments,  
 The habit of thinking about two characteristics joined together is 
not itself a thought or a particular characteristic of a thought, but 
a disposition which manifests itself only in its consequences. And 
the impossibility of thinking about one of the two characteristics 
without thinking about the other one is not a thought or a particular 
characteristic of a thought either. On the contrary, according to the 
views of these philosophers, it is only this disposition to a particu-
larly high degree. If this disposition only manifests itself in the fact 
that the combination of characteristics is thought of without excep-
tion, but is still thought of in exactly the same way as it was before 
the acquisition of this disposition, it is clear that, as we said, there is 
no intrinsic difference between the earlier thought, which was a mere 
presentation, and the later thought, which is supposed to be a belief. 
But if the disposition turns out to have influence in still another 
way, so that after it has been acquired it modifies the thought of the 
combination and confers upon it a new, special characteristic, then 
we have to say that it is this quality rather than the inseparable asso-
ciation by which it is produced that constitutes the real difference 
between holding something to be true and mere presentation. (PES, 
203–04\PES-G, 269–70)  
 In this way, James Mill and Herbert Spencer tried to account for 
judgment. Nonetheless Brentano accuses both Mill and Spencer of 

162 From Psychology to Phenomenology
maintaining an erroneous view said to be related to Bain’s. In both 
cases there is a confusion and conflation of distinctive features of the 
consequences of making judgments (i.e. the so-called acts of will moti-
vated or arising from the judgment) with the intrinsic properties of 
holding something to be true or false and articulating an act of belief 
about it (PES, 204\PES-G, 270). 
 According to Brentano, therefore, the difference between pres-
entational acts and judgments is not an extrinsic one but rather an 
“intrinsic” one, that holds between the two modes of thought as inten-
tional relations. However, before elaborating on his own position, 
Brentano examines the possibility that the difference is not to be 
found in the intrinsic and intentional directedness but in the fullness 
or intensity with which objects of belief are given in thought (PES, 
204\PES-G, 270–71). If the difference between the two kinds of mental 
acts is one of the fullness or intensity of the mental activities involved, 
it might then be thought that the essence of a judgment or belief 
consists in the content of the presentation being thought with greater 
intensity. “On this view, judgement would merely be a more intense 
presentation and presentation a weaker judgement” (PES, 204\PES-G, 
271). Brentano objects that we can be convinced of the truth of some-
thing even though the content of the judgment is weak and the most 
vivid presentations [think here of certain optical illusions or cases of 
hallucination] can be judged to be false (PES, 205\PES-G, 271). Also, 
Brentano adds, if the affirmation of the object was only tied to the 
intensity with which it were presented, then how could the negation 
of an object be conceived? This moves Brentano to consider a more 
compelling theory, one both more influential and more commonly 
advocated in the history of philosophy, namely that a judgment 
consists of a combination or separation that takes place in the mind 
of the thinker. Presentation is, according to this view, conceived of 
as singular, while mental acts of judgment are somehow combinatory 
acts. In other words, the two acts have different contents.  
 If a certain kind of union or relationship between two properties 
were thought, this thought would be a judgement, while every 
thought which had no such relationship as its content would have to 
be called a mere presentation. (PES, 205\PES-G, 272)  
 Regarding the above position, Brentano points out that some presenta-
tions actually do contain a combination of several characteristics. For 
example, the proposition: “A Green Tree”, which translated into the 

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 163
traditional theory of judgment can be parsed into: There is a subject 
term (a tree) and there is a predicate term (the existing quality of “being 
green”) and they are presented together. However, claims Brentano, 
someone could ask me, “Is any tree red?”  
 Not being too well acquainted with the vegetative realm, and forgetful 
of the colors of leaves in autumn, I might withhold all judgement on 
the matter. Nonetheless, I do understand the question, and so I must 
have a presentation of a red tree. Red combined with tree, just like 
green above, would form the content of a presentation not accom-
panied by any judgement. And someone who had only seen trees 
with red leaves and had never seen one with green would, when 
questioned about green trees, probably have as the content of this 
presentation not just a similar combination of characteristics, but 
the very same one which formed the content of my judgement. (PES, 
205–06\PES-G, 272)  
 The above ability to hold a presentation, or entertain a mental content, 
before the mind’s eye, without having any belief one way or another 
about its existence, is taken by Brentano to be strong evidence that the 
combinatorial view of judgment is flawed. Brentano then notes how, in 
his  System of Logic , John Stuart Mill “came closer than any other phil-
osopher to a correct appraisal of the difference between presentation 
and judgement” (PES, 206\PES-G, 273). The younger Mill achieved the 
above by proposing that judgments have an intrinsic property or char-
acteristic lacking in presentations, beyond merely combining “ideas”. 
Mill writes,  
 Almost all the writers on Logic in the last two centuries, whether 
English, German or French, have made their theories of Propositions 
from one end to the other, a theory of Judgments. They considered a 
Proposition or a Judgment, for they used the two words indiscrimin-
ately, to consist in affirming or denying one  idea of another ... . 
 It is, of course, true, that in any case of judgment, as for instance 
when we judge that gold is yellow, a process takes place in our minds 
of which some one or other of these theories is a partially correct 
account. We must have the idea of gold and the idea of yellow, and 
these two ideas must be brought together in our mind. But in the 
first place, it is evident that this is only a part of what takes place; for 
we may put two ideas together without any act of belief; as when we 
merely imagine something such as a golden mountain; or when we 

164 From Psychology to Phenomenology
actually disbelieve: for in order even to disbelieve that Mahomet was 
an apostle of God, we must put the idea of Mahomet and that of an 
apostle of God together. (Mill, 1979, 116–17)  
 Judging that “gold is yellow”, therefore, does not connect two ideas 
(understood as representing mind-independent qualities or states of 
affairs) in the mind any more than does judging “a golden mountain 
exists”. Mill, elsewhere, also rejects that assertion or predication is 
essentially reducible to the conjoining of separate terms and that every 
term is expressive of a single idea.  4 In the case of Mill, however, what 
Brentano takes to be the above “correct” insights are accompanied by 
that concomitant belief that a combination or separation of presented 
attributes actually does still take place in every judgment (PES, 207\
PES-G, 275 and 218–19n\PES-G, 286–89n). Brentano’s theory of judg-
ment will embrace Mill’s first claim, but give grounds for rejecting the 
latter assumption.  
 6.2  Thetic or existential judgments 
 In order to articulate his existential theory of judgment, Brentano 
sharply criticizes the Aristotelian tradition. With its emphasis on the 
categorical judgment and being or predication “added as a third thing” 
(i.e. the multi-termed or combinatorial theory of judgment was held to 
be analogous to linguistic forms of predication of subjects of propos-
itions to predicates), Brentano considers traditional interpretations of 
Aristotle to be untenable accounts of the true nature of judgment. The 
foil and contrasting position for the explanation of judgments will be 
Brentano’s own alternative “existential” theory. 
 According to Brentano,  
 It is not even correct to say that there is a combination or separ-
ation of presented attributes in all judgements. Affirmation and 
denial are no more always directed toward combinations or connec-
tions than desires or aversions are. A single feature which is the 
object of a presentation can be affirmed or denied, too. (PES, 208\ 
PES-G, 276)  
 The basic strategy behind Brentano’s analysis of acts of judgment is the 
manifest focus on and analysis of terms and their connection to acts of 
predication. For its time, Brentano’s approach was indeed revolutionary 

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 165
and radical. Traditional term logic was closely tied to both syllogistic 
deduction and categorical forms of predication. In Aristotelian logic,  5 
for example, logical relations are tied to four basic propositional forms. 
These forms are: 
 The Universal Affirmative (A) = “All S is P”; 
 The Universal Negative (E) = “No S is P”; 
 The Particular Affirmative (I) = “Some S is P”; and 
 The Particular Negative (O) = “Some S is not P”.  
 What will be noticed immediately is that all of the above propositions 
take the subject predicate form with the copula “is” added as a third 
thing. Mill’s claim that propositions or judgments consisted of “affirming 
or denying one  idea of another” is therefore perfectly correct if we are 
dealing with Aristotelian logic. The particular – universal distinction 
cited above was regarded as a quantitative difference in the propos-
itional or judgment form and the affirmative – negative distinction was 
said to be a difference in propositional or judgment “quality”.  6 
 However, as Brentano points out,  
 When we say, “A exists,” this sentence is not, as many people have 
believed and still do, a predication in which existence as predicate is 
combined with “A” as subject. The object affirmed is not the combin-
ation of an attribute “existence” with “A” but “A” itself. By the same 
token, when we say, “A does not exist,” there is no predication of the 
existence of “A” in a negative way – no denial of the conjunction of 
an attribute “existence” with “A.” On the contrary, “A” is the object 
we deny. (PES, 208\PES-G, 276)  
 The object affirmed on this view is simply not an amalgamation of “A” 
combined with the mysterious attribute “existence”. Instead “A” alone 
(the object) is what is asserted to exist. Also when an object is affirmed 
in a judgment its existence is said to be, implicitly, also affirmed. For 
example, if I affirm that a learned man exists, then the existence of 
at least one man is simultaneously and instantaneously affirmed. 
Abstract attributes of the object (the “learnedness” of the given man) 
or the abstract “existence” of the object affirmed are not – in the PES – 
primarily what the correlates of my judgment are directed towards. 
Rather, the learned man as really existing is present before my mind 
when making the judgment and the thing itself (the learned man) is 

166 From Psychology to Phenomenology
that which my judgment immediately affirms as existing.  7 Brentano 
writes,  
 ... when someone affirms a whole, in so doing he affirms each part 
of the whole as well. So whenever someone affirms a combination of 
attributes he simultaneously affirms each particular element of the 
combination. (PES, 208\PES-G, 276)  8 
 The claim being made here, which can be substantiated in propositional 
logic, is that the existence of a term “A” and its affirmation (or quan-
tification), are – for logical purposes – the same thing. Negation, on 
Brentano’s theory, makes the case for existential judgments even more 
clear. “When someone affirms a whole, he also affirms, in so doing, 
each part of this whole, but it is not true that when someone denies a 
whole he is denying each individual part of this whole.” That is, if we 
deny that blue and white swans exist, for example,  
 ... we do not thereby implicitly deny that there are white swans. And 
this is quite natural, for if even  one part is false, the whole cannot 
be true. So when a person denies a combination of attributes, in so 
doing he in no way denies every single attribute which is an element 
in the combination. (PES, 209\PES-G, 277)  
 In other words, if one part is false then the whole cannot be true, but 
we can deny attributes or qualities predicated of subject terms without 
denying the reality of the logical subject or object of predication. 
According to Brentano,  
 If the judgement, “A does not exist,” were the denial of a combin-
ation of an attribute “existence” with “A,” then A would not be being 
denied in any way. But it is impossible that anybody should hold 
such a view, for it is clear that this is precisely the sense of the prop-
osition. (PES, 209\PES-G, 277)  
 Maintaining the above view, however, goes against the very sense of the 
proposition being asserted and so Brentano concludes that, “A alone is 
the object of this negative judgement” (ibid). 
 Here it can be noted that, although Brentano’s reform of logic seem 
thus far to conform very well with the later development of predicate 
calculus and modern term logic, it would be a mistake to attribute 
the same motives to him as those that influenced the formalists and 

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 167
logicists in their latter critiques of syllogistics. For example, when 
Brentano claims that “predication is not the essence of every judg-
ment”, he justifies his claims by appeals not to truth tables and the 
notation of the propositional calculus but to psychology. According to 
Brentano, “all perceptions are judgments, whether they are instances 
of knowing or just mistaken affirmations (PES, 209\PES-G, 277). The 
evidence for the above claim is said to reside in various aspects of 
immediate experience of inner consciousness. On Brentano’s view, the 
object of an inner perception (which is simply a mental phenomenon) 
and the object of an external perception differ. The latter is simply 
a physical phenomenon, “a sound, odor, or the like” (PES, 209–10\
PES-G, 278). It must be stated that very few modern logicians would 
acknowledge the above “proof” as obvious or conclusive. Nonetheless, 
Brentano’s psychological analysis is frequently very insightful. As, 
for example, where he writes of how analysis of the concept of exist-
ence can shed light on the confusion entailed by such claims as “we 
perceive the existence of things”. Brentano maintains that we do 
derive the concept of existence from experience; however, with refer-
ence to judgments, only from “inner experience” (PES, 210\PES-G, 
278–79). At this point Brentano develops insights arrived at earlier by 
Thomas Aquinas and Immanuel Kant, namely that existence is not a 
first order predicate, that is, existence is not a predicate in the sense 
that “Whiteness” or “Three Pounds” are predicates. However, where 
Thomas and Kant maintain that existence can be understood to be a 
predicate of concepts rather than individuals, Brentano takes the view 
that existence is not a predicate of any kind (PES, 229\PES-G, 301). 
Brentano’s account of his unique existential theory of judgment is 
completed with the claim that,  
 ... it can be shown with utmost clarity that every categorical prop-
osition can be translated without any change of meaning into an 
existential proposition, and in that event the “is” or “is not” of the 
existential proposition takes the place of the copula. (PES, 213\
PES-G, 281–82)  
 Brentano’s examples in his text are as follows: 
 “Some man is sick” [the (I) form of classical logic] means the same 
thing as: “A sick man exists” or “There is a sick man”; 
 “No Stone is living” [(E) form] = “A living stone does not exist”, or 
“There is no living stone”; 

168 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 “All men are mortal” [(A) form] = “An immortal man does not 
exist” or “There is no immortal man”; and, finally, 
 “Some man is not learned” [(O) form] = “An unlearned man exists” 
or “There is an unlearned man” (PES, 213–14\PES-G, 283).  
 Traditional logic held that “All men are mortal” and “No man is 
immortal” [the A and E forms respectively] to be equipollent or validly 
deducible from one another, but on Brentano’s account they are actu-
ally said to be identical. Therefore, the “is” or “is not” of the existential 
proposition is likewise said to be “merely equivalent” to the copula. The 
logical sense of the copula is, however, once again, not to be taken as a 
predicate; nor does it have meaning on its own. This last point touches 
on a strategy that runs through the entirety of Brentano’s development 
of his theory of judgment, namely that logical form is independent of 
language and linguistic expression.  9 Due to this fact, Brentano views 
categorical propositions as completely reducible to the existential form 
even if reduced to “hypothetical” modes. Categorical propositions are 
also always said to be, in actuality, negative assertions (PES, 218\PES-G, 
286). Brentano writes,  
 [W]hen we reduce categorical propositions to existential propos-
itions, the “is” of the latter replaces the copula and is thus shown 
not to involve a predicate any more than it does. Further, it is quite 
obvious that the compounding of several elements, believed to be 
so essential for the universal and specific nature of judgements, 
the combination of subject and predicate, of antecedent and conse-
quent, etc., is in fact nothing but a matter of linguistic expression. 
(PES, 221\PES-G, 289)  
 If the traditional form of propositional statements or terms can be called 
synthetic (with the categorical “S is P” form predominating), Brentano’s 
alternative can be called “thetic”, since the focus is squarely on the term 
presupposed in the presentational act and its existing or non-existing 
correlate.  
 6.3  Judgments as higher level acts stemming 
from presentations 
 The psychological basis of Brentano’s reform of logic is evident in the 
above examples. According to Brentano, no fundamental difference 
exists in content between presentations and judgments (PES, 221\

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 169
PES-G, 289). The same content is presented in a different mode of rela-
tion when a judgment rather than a presentation is involved.  10 The 
elimination of the categorical form furthermore and the equivalence 
posited between the universal affirmative and the particular negative, 
renders the traditional “square of opposition” obsolete. 
 Brentano regards the psychological import of this insight to be as 
significant as his logical insights. Almost no one, he writes, would deny 
that there is a psychological difference between evaluating, believing, 
judging (that something is the case), and merely having presentations. 
If Brentano’s earlier criticism of Bain and the elder Mill and Spencer is 
correct, that is, that the difference is not “a merely external one” found 
in “causes and results” (PES, 221\PES-G, 290) then, as was noted above, 
only two possibilities remain: 1) The difference between presentations 
and judgments resides in what is thought or the content, and 2) the 
difference resides in the intensity or fullness with which the content is 
thought. Both alternatives, Brentano concluded, are untenable. As we 
have seen, presentations as well as judgments can have simple or complex 
contents or objects as their content. Furthermore, the distinctive feature 
of judgments, in-line with the doctrine of mental activity presented 
throughout the PES, must be said to hold in a particular kind of relation 
to the immanent object given to the subject in experience. 
 At this point Brentano sets out to more rigorously establish these 
conclusions of his psychological account of judgment. A comparison 
between presentations and judgments, with the corresponding contrast 
between presentations and emotional acts of love and hate taken into 
account, will be said to highlight the strengths of his intentional account. 
When we love or hate something a different mode of consciousness than 
what is present in judgments is intentionally manifested towards the 
thing that is loved or hated. More controversially, Brentano thinks that 
this emotional act is analogous (but in no way identical) to the mode 
or relation holding for affirmation and denial of the judgment. Since 
there are no contraries for presentations (other than the homonymously 
based ones pertaining to selected and contrasting objects contained in 
the presentations, that is, a presentation of cold, we say, is opposed to a 
presentation of warmth, of light to darkness, etc.), we must exclude them 
from the two higher or founded classes of judgments and emotions. Love 
and hate, maintains Brentano, therefore introduce completely different 
kinds of opposition (PES, 223\PES-G, 291). For one thing, relations of 
love and hate introduce levels of intensity (magnitudes of feeling) as 
opposed to the vividness or clarity that characterizes and effects pres-
entations. This last point, however, is not self-evident. Although there 

170 From Psychology to Phenomenology
do seem to be manifest differences between things loved and things 
hated, it can be pointed out that in the latter case what is loved is not 
the opposite of what is hated but rather a different relation altogether. 
To call love the opposite of hate therefore can be construed as imposing 
an intellectualist schema (a law of thought in the form of the “principle 
of bivalence”) on what is, in reality, the highly complex continuum of 
emotional life. However, Brentano is well aware of the complexity of 
feelings and emotions and also of their essentially non-cognitive nature. 
Furthermore, because emotions are more closely related to the will than 
to intellectual acts in Brentano’s system, he notes that ethical consider-
ations are said to enter with love and hate,  
 Even though they are not independent of the laws governing the 
succession of presentations, love and hate, as a special class of 
phenomena with a fundamentally different mode of consciousness, 
are subject to  special laws of succession and development, which, above 
all, constitute the main psychological foundation of ethics. Very 
frequently an object is loved or hated on account of another, while 
it, in and of itself, would move us in neither way, or, perhaps, would 
arouse only the opposite emotion in us. And love, once transferred 
in this manner, often becomes permanently attached to the new 
object without regard to its origin. (PES, 224\PES-G, 293)  
 The above passage clearly reflects the ambivalence and ambiguity 
related to emotional life. Nonetheless, as regards the theory of judg-
ment, Brentano thinks the above aspects of our non-cognitive and 
emotional life reveals clues as to how mental acts of judgment should 
be constituted. Just as the relation of love for something arises out of 
“special laws”, so judgments too follow one another according to their 
own laws of development. These laws of judgment are said to bear the 
same relation to logic as the laws governing the succession of acts of 
love and hate bear to ethics (PES, 224\PES-G, 293).  11 The salient point 
is that both judgments and acts of love and hate have a bipolar or dual 
structure while presentations do not.  12 
 [F]rom the analogy of all the accompanying relationships, it becomes 
apparent once again that if there is a fundamental difference in refer-
ence to the object between presentation and love, and in general 
between any two different mental phenomena, we must assume that 
such a fundamental difference exists between judgement and pres-
entation. (PES, 225\PES, 295)  

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 171
 Inner experience reveals the above differences in how we relate to 
contents as defining the essential characteristics of judgments and 
distinguishing them from presentations. It remains for Brentano to 
point out the reasons for why the above separation criterion for the two 
psychic classes was not settled by earlier thinkers. Brentano notes both 
psychological and linguistic reasons. The psychological reasons include 
the complexity of every act of consciousness (PES, 225–26\PES-G, 
295–96). Even supposedly simple mental acts actually contain what are 
called primary and secondary objects, and multiple ways of relating to 
both their own mental contents as well as themselves. It was because of 
difficulty in conceptualizing psychic acts that,  
 some thinkers ... subsume[d] all mental phenomena under the 
concept of cognition as though they were in a single class, [and it] 
has induced others to include at least presentation and judgement 
in the same class because they never occur separately, while they 
establish distinct new classes only for phenomena which, like feel-
ings and strivings, are added on in particular cases. (PES, 226\PES-G, 
296–97)  
 The linguistic reason for the confusion originates in the terms used in 
everyday life to designate mental activities. There is a single term that 
is applicable to both presentations and judgments, namely “thinking”. 
We call both presentations and judgments thought and this perpet-
uates a fallacy of equivocation (PES, 227\PES-G, 298). Judgments (or 
propositions) are usually expressed in language, and more precisely in 
sentences (PES, 228\PES-G, PES-G, 299). However, expression and not 
scientific investigation is the chief end of most ordinary and day to day 
language. Regarding the relationship between language and judgments, 
Brentano writes,  
 It can be said that the expression of a judgement is usually a sentence, 
a combination of several words, and this is easily understood from 
our point of view, too. It has to do with the fact that every judge-
ment is based on a presentation and that affirmative and negative 
judgements agree with regard to the content to which they refer, 
since the negative judgement merely denies the object which the 
corresponding affirmative judgement affirms. Although the expres-
sion of judgement is the chief end of linguistic communication, 
this very fact strongly suggests that the simplest form of expression, 
the individual word, should not be used by itself for this purpose. 

172 From Psychology to Phenomenology
But if it were used by itself as the expression of the presentation on 
which both members of the pair of judgements are based, and if a 
double form of flexion or two kinds of stereotyped little words (such 
as “is” and “is not”) were then added in order to express the judge-
ments, this simple device would save one’s memory half the effort, 
for the same word would be used in both the affirmative and the 
corresponding negative judgements. Besides that, by omitting these 
supplementary signs you have the advantage of possessing a pure and 
isolated expression for another class of phenomena, presentations. 
Since presentations form the basis for desire and feeling, too, such an 
expression could perform further admirable functions in questions, 
exclamations, commands, etc. (PES, 228\PES-G, 299–300).  
 The communicative use of language with its rhetorical and practical 
aspects can prejudice the investigation of scientific and philosoph-
ical matters. These linguistic confusions, Brentano holds, eventually 
branched out into the metaphysical and logical spheres as well. The 
ontological argument for the existence of God, as it was formulated by 
various philosophers throughout history, is here said to be only one of 
their fruits (PES, 229\PES-G, 300). 
 The class of mental acts known as judgments is subsequently said 
by Brentano to have a very broad meaning. Judgments encompass 
acceptance (as true) or rejection (as false) but also play an active role 
in mental life that extends even to basic acts to perception (including 
the perception of mental acts themselves) and to acts of remembering 
(PES, 198–99\PES-G, 262). Proper understanding of the mental class of 
judgment is therefore, central to Brentano’s philosophy of mind and 
epistemology. Throughout the PES it is emphasized how judgments are 
not merely presentations. In chapter 7 of Book Two we are told, that 
judgments are: “entirely different ways of being conscious of an object” 
(PES, 201\PES-G, 266).  13 A blatant error in the traditional theory of judg-
ment, Brentano points out, is the claim that assertion is synonymous 
or tantamount to the mental or linguistic act of predication. By 
contrast, Brentano writes of how, in being presented with an object [or 
in being consciously directed to something], no ideas before the mind 
relate the subject to the content of their experience. Subsequently, no 
combination of ideas can essentially be constitutive of, or necessary 
to, defining the essential characteristic of an act of judgment. Instead, 
what is called an “act of affirmation” (of the “presented object”) is the 
one essential core ingredient of judgment. In other words, not all judg-
ments are about combining or separating presented attributes, ideas 

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 173
or concepts. Whenever anyone affirms a combination of attributes, 
according to Brentano, they simultaneously affirm each particular 
element of the combination (PES, 208\PES-G, 276). At this stage, the 
object of a judgment is the same as the content of the presentation 
and both are explicitly said to be intentionally aimed at by mental 
acts. This acceptance of a content therefore is prior to and immediately 
underlies the later propositional formulation of any uttered statement 
or abstract intellectual representation (conceptual thought) of what I 
am thinking about. Stressing the priority of the psychic or mental act, 
which can be described as originally and primitively intentional and 
directed to contents; Brentano treats of judgments as one class of these 
object directed mental acts. In this way, Brentano resolves the tension 
in the Aristotelian theory of judgment, which he earlier embraced, by 
emphasizing the terms and developing cognitive relations and concep-
tual reasoning as stemming from the immediate and direct connection 
to the things in the world mirrored by our judgments (cf. Section 2.5).  
 6.4  Theory of judgment and epistemology: induction 
and deduction 
 Brentano’s theory of Judgment is articulated against the context of a 
foundationalist understanding of knowledge and epistemology. For epis-
temological purposes, Brentanian judgments, at the most fundamental 
level are said to be of two basic kinds – 1) judgments of fact, and 2) 
judgments of reason. In his Würzburg lectures on logic, these are called 
“a posteriori” and “a priori” judgments respectively (EL80\13.360.1–8). 
According to Brentano, judgments of fact can be derived either from 
what is called “outer” or from “inner perception”. Judgments of reason, 
by contrast, are grounded on and derived only from immediate or “inner 
perception”. The latter will later be further distinguished by being 
said to contain a conceptual or non-sensuous component, but in the 
PES they are written about as having a kind of “intensity”. According 
to Brentano, all judgments can be either affirmative or negative (as 
described above). As he makes clear in his logic lectures and other writ-
ings, judgments can also be blind or evident. Especially in his logical 
writings, Brentano notes how the mode of judgment can be of two basic 
kinds or classes. The first class is “assertoric” and under this category 
fall judgments that are either possibly true (or false) but unproven, as 
well as those that can be said to be apodictic, that is, self-evidently 
true and provable with immediate certainty and complete evidence (cf. 
EL80\13.228.5). Later, he would articulate how both of what he called 

174 From Psychology to Phenomenology
“possibly true” judgments and “immediately evident” ones, could be 
“motivated” or “unmotivated” (SNC, 42). In the PES however, judg-
ments of fact, if derived from outer perception, are said to be always 
blind. Nonetheless, since Brentano’s epistemology is not strictly exter-
nalist, evident judgments of fact are said to be possible. These evident 
factual judgments are none other than those given with evidence and 
that are said to be “descriptive of inner perception”. As such, so-called 
evident judgments of fact are never based on outer perception of any 
transcendent objects (FCE, 12). Judgments of science, or what can more 
be properly be called “theoretical judgments of fact” in Brentano’s 
system, depend on these more immediate factual judgments given with 
evidence. These immediate factual judgments are in turn connected to 
the intuitive apprehension of basic data of intentional psychic life and 
thus can be explored by act psychology. Nonetheless, it was seen that 
Brentano grounds all science ultimately on first philosophy or meta-
physics. This holds equally so for the science of psychology. However, 
in the PES, psychology takes on a special role with regard to epistem-
ology, and therefore to the attainment of metaphysical principles. 
Because of this strategy the theoretical framework for Brentano’s phil-
osophy of mind, stemming from what would become and later be called 
a strictly non-genetic or descriptive psychology, begins with judgments 
and the psychological apprehension of immediate facts in an empiricist 
fashion. In addition, Brentano also attempts to ground these first prin-
ciples “scientifically”, which is tantamount to securing proof or gaining 
evidence in immediate insights. 
 In dealing with the foundations of knowledge we are dealing not 
with practical matters but theoretical ones. This Aristotelian distinction 
between kinds of sciences was consistently maintained by Brentano. As 
such different disciplines and sciences must be treated in or by distinct 
theoretical disciplines. For Brentano, the difference between practical 
and theoretical disciplines pertains as much to classes of truths as it does 
to the objects of study each discipline devotes itself to exploring. Ethics, 
for example, is the highest practical discipline, and it is said to deal with 
psychic matters pertaining to will and desire (see below). Metaphysics, 
as the highest theoretical discipline (and cf. FCE, 3–4), is said to contain, 
as a class of truths, the propositions explored by the particular sciences. 
The particular sciences in turn proceed by insights attained through 
judgments of fact. Furthermore, Brentano once again closely follows 
Aristotle in his articulation of the foundations of the sciences, as well as 
in the distinction between the order of proof and the grounds of know-
ledge. In short, he acknowledges a fundamental difference between the 

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 175
 ordo essendi and the  ordo cognoscendi . “[A] judgment occurs where there 
is truth in the sense of correctness, or falsehood in the sense of error” 
(FCE, 68). More fundamentally, on Brentano’s theory of judgment, 
within every judgment something is either recognized as existing or 
rejected as not existing (ibid). This aspect of Brentano’s theory of judg-
ment, outlined above, is precisely the reason why it has frequently been 
described as an “existential” theory of judgment. Here we can note that 
it is also most likely, for the reasons above, that Brentano holds that all 
judgments contain an “intuitive” component. While this seems obvious 
for judgments of fact, within which something (immediately taken as 
a content) is given, Brentano is quite clear that the intuitive status of 
judgments holds equally well for what are called “judgments of reason”. 
In the latter class belong so-called analytic judgments or propositions, 
including the so-called analytic a priori.  14 Of all other forms of propos-
itions or judgments, he writes:
 No elementary concept can be acquired without the corresponding 
intuition ... [and] every analytic judgment presupposes intuitions 
which are the source of the concepts it analyzes. (OEG, 74)  
 Following Aristotle, Brentano maintains that some truths are better 
known in themselves, others to us. The reason why something is true 
“in itself” can be accounted for by the ground of its being. This ground 
or foundation of the thing can, under certain circumstances, produce 
effects or causes (directly or indirectly related to the existential proper-
ties of the thing). These “real” causes by turn, affect how (or if) we can 
know the thing. For something to be true for us, the ground or founda-
tion of the thing, and subsequently its place in the order of knowledge, 
must be knowable through either: perception, reasoning, or inductive 
generalization (OEG, 124). 
 Connecting the above, epistemological tenets to psychology, we can 
here note how all factual knowledge starts from a self-evident ground 
or foundation,  15 the immediately apprehended psychic activity of the 
subject. Extending the chain of factual knowledge and taking examples 
of judgments of fact known to be true immediately, we start with judg-
ments based on the immediate apprehension of our own mental states, 
for example, “I am now seeing a gray cat” or “I am currently sitting 
down”. The apprehension of our own internal mental activity, such 
as in, “I am thinking about Socrates” or “I am remembering my last 
vacation” are also judgments of fact that are immediately evident and 
cannot be other than what they actually are (cf. FCE, 15–16). Since they 

176 From Psychology to Phenomenology
are based on memory contents, the latter do not share the same status 
of evidence as do our occurrent mental acts. The above judgments are, 
in fact, beyond refutation because they pertain to activity immediately 
occurring in immediate experience. However, according to Brentano, 
also included in the category of self-evident truths and judgments must 
be basic postulates or axioms. These include what were called the prin-
ciples or laws of thought (the Law of Non-Contradiction, the Law of 
Identity and the Law of Excluded Middle), all of which are accepted by 
Brentano. Turning to what have been called “first principles” in trad-
itional philosophy, we can at this point examine the basic proofs that 
underlie all thought and knowledge and therefore form the foundation 
of Brentano’s philosophy of mind as a scientific psychology of inten-
tional acts.  
 6.5  Foundations of knowledge and judgments 
of reason 
 According to Brentano’s foundationalist tenet: “[i]n a science it is not 
possible to prove every opinion which we set forth. For every proof 
rests upon certain presuppositions; if we prove these, it is upon the 
basis of still further presuppositions ... but the process cannot go on 
forever” (FCE, 14). Therefore, we must start with unproven principles, 
with immediate assumptions or what are sometimes called “first princi-
ples”. Because the first principles in themselves are not capable of being 
proven in the same way that the truths derived from them or the basic 
facts (derived either from perception or on the basis of accepted princi-
ples), this will give us pause. Skeptics throughout the ages have declared 
the foundations of knowledge either arbitrary (and all proof untenable) 
or simply impossible to attain. Brentano, true to his Aristotelian legacy, 
attempts to avoid the skeptical dilemma in any of its forms. In dealing 
with the problem of first principles, Brentano utilizes insights from his 
act psychology and from the ontological framework and analyses he 
worked out independent of the PES. 
 In Brentano’s system, the skeptical disavowal of knowledge is avoided 
by distinguishing epistemologically between the process of defining 
proof versus what is called the “setting up” of a proof (FCE, 14). The 
principles or foundations of knowledge (whether these are conceived 
of as limited, mitigated or absolute) are said to be acceptable by virtue 
of the cognitive activity of the healthy human mind in action. This 
process of setting up epistemological proof demands nothing less than 
what the philosopher Bernard Lonergan called “insight”. More precisely, 

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 177
for Brentano, the setting up of epistemological proof requires “insights 
which exclude all possibility of error” (FCE, 15). This is quite a strict 
criterion and, as a consequence, the class of immediate insights apodicti-
cally and intuitively apprehended as true will be small. In turn, this will 
make for austere demands on Brentano’s part for grounding a theory 
of knowledge and philosophy of mind. In Part III, we shall critically 
examine Brentano’s epistemology in greater detail, to point out where 
his method can be challenged and his position criticized. Here however, 
before exploring the notions of insight and evidence, we must first 
explore the basis of all knowledge that our acquaintance with the facts 
of experience (in judgments of facts) can be said to provide. 
 In a late work on the philosophy of Aristotle, Brentano writes:
 We often know a thing merely as a fact, as when I grasp it percep-
tually. In other cases I not only recognize that it exists but also I can 
indicate the reason for its existence. Perhaps this reason is for me 
merely some other fact which is grounded in something else and 
which lacks explanation until that other thing is known. And this 
[lack of explanation] will continue until one arrives at an inherently 
necessary thing which need not be and cannot be explained further. 
One has given a conclusive explanation of a fact only when it has 
been traced back to its first ground. (AWV, 17)  
 Brentano goes on to maintain how, regarding the ultimate and first 
ground of knowledge, the apprehended fact will be the same as that fact 
which serves as the ground for all concepts, that is, existence itself as 
an absolutely necessary ground. But unfortunately, for various reasons, 
we can have no immediate and direct knowledge of necessary being or 
non-contingent existence and instead we must start with what we know 
first and better (what is presupposed by all science), that is, dependent 
and mediated facts. These are the contingent and changing, but imme-
diately given facts of experience. These facts, as immediately evident, 
are said to be grasped in perception. As was outlined above, along with 
these “immediately evident judgments of fact” we are in possession of 
only one other kind of immediately certain knowledge: general judg-
ments of reason or what Brentano calls “a priori judgments” (cf. AWV, 
24–25). 
 Linking the immediate insight available to us and relating it to the 
“first principles” of knowledge, we can connect the preliminary require-
ments of the attainment of immediately true principles to Brentano’s 
existential theory of judgment as elaborated in the PES. In this way we 

178 From Psychology to Phenomenology
can attain clearer insight regarding the epistemological foundation of 
the system elaborated there. From truths apodictically grasped in judg-
ments of reason, general laws are articulated. These laws are compre-
hended on the basis of the concepts they contain and are therefore 
said to be more abstract and less direct than the immediately grasped 
truths or insights. Examples of judgments of reason will help clarify 
the category of statements that fall under this sphere. Judgments of 
reason include: my judging that “two things are more than one”; that 
“something red all over is not also green”; that “no triangle has four 
sides”, or “a whole cannot exist without its parts” (cf. FCE, 15–16). Given 
the above examples, it is nonetheless still not clear which propositions 
we should begin with or how we know in a sufficient and adequate 
manner that any of the above is, in reality, truly immediately evident 
and certain. 
 We arrive here at problems pertaining to the order of knowledge, 
proof, and the more controversial problem of the attainment of a priori 
truth. Brentano dealt with these perennial problems in epistemology 
by developing a theory of evidence or as he calls it a theory of the 
evident. Accordingly, some truths are said to be evident to some judger 
but not to another. Such truths are usually those said to be evident 
from concepts. The most straightforward and clearly presented proofs 
are those that pertain to the nature of conceptual truths or chains of 
reasoning. However, even these conceptual truths may nonetheless 
be rejected by thinkers who maintain that the evidence or proof (and 
therefore the proposition itself) is not really immediately true and, 
therefore, not actually evident. This holds even for seemingly more 
straightforward and obvious truths of fact as well. Descartes – to take a 
famous example – in his  Meditations on First Philosophy (1641), rejected 
the immediately evident judgment of fact listed in the previous section 
above, that is, “I am now seeing a gray cat”. The nature of the evidence 
that this proposition contained was deemed insufficient by Descartes 
for it to be established as beyond doubt or apodictically certain. The 
reason was that, on Descartes’ rationalist criterion, none of the evidence 
of the senses can be counted as reliable beyond a shadow of a doubt (I 
am fairly certain that I am looking at a video screen as I type this, but 
I might after all be a “brain in a vat” – to take a famous example from 
modern epistemology). 
 Nonetheless Descartes is not a skeptic but, like Brentano, a foun-
dationalist who accepts certain truths as fundamental and beyond 
doubt. In Descartes’ case, the indubitable and immediately evident 
fact or proposition upon which he builds all knowledge is the famous 

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 179
enthymemetically arrived at  cogito or “I am thinking”. From this brute or 
immediate and impossible to doubt fact, Descartes derives his own exist-
ence. This is essentially a truth that is both necessary and universally 
beyond reproach. In Brentano’s terms this proposition is “a priori”. The 
 cogito was not the only immediately evident or “a priori” truth listed by 
Descartes. The laws of mathematics and logic also had this status, but the 
 cogito was prior to the latter and in that sense better known. It is on the 
same foundationalist principle that Brentano provides justification for 
the inductively arrived at laws of general and special sciences, including 
psychology. However, in the case of psychology – as a special science 
on par with other special sciences such as philosophy or epistemology-
inductive recourse to establishing its fundamental laws must be made. It 
is to this probabilistic justification of induction that we can now turn in 
order to complete the outline of Brentano’s epistemology.  
 6.6  Induction in the broad sense: mathematics 
and probability 
 If we could be certain only of the immediate contents of our sensations 
and the sense impressions that manifest and account for the same, even 
science would be a matter of luck and chance rather than anything 
approaching an essentially rational or purposeful activity. In the seven-
teenth century the above position was said to be the direct conse-
quence of any consistent and thoroughgoing empiricism by no less a 
thinker than the Scottish philosopher David Hume. For Hume, what 
could be proven were matters of fact and relations of ideas, but because 
the latter had no bearing on the former, they were capable of being 
doubted. Encompassed by this doubt was nothing less than the prin-
ciple of causality, the non-empirical basis of all scientific theory. Since 
Brentano is an empiricist and, unlike Hume, believes in the possibility 
of metaphysics, we must here take up what can be called Brentano’s 
answer to Hume. This defense of metaphysics and science is grounded 
on mathematical theories of probability that are, in turn, supported 
by insights from his act psychology. According to Brentano, in evident 
judgments rational thinkers can be said to grasp connections of ideas 
that can be used to establish the course of nature. Scientific judgments 
reveal, through immediate evidence gleaned through inner perception, 
the certainty of the axiomatic foundations of the theory of causality. 
The reliability of the causal nexus or what is called the classic problem 
of induction (reformulated in Brentano’s logic lectures as the problem 
of induction in the narrow sense) is something that Brentano thinks 

180 From Psychology to Phenomenology
must be supported by mathematical proof. Brentano therefore turns 
to mathematics in order to establish induction as scientifically viable. 
In dealing with this central problem of philosophy and epistemology, 
Brentano makes reference to Bernoulli and Bayes (amongst others) and 
links the classic problem of induction to their mathematical work on 
probability. These mathematical thinkers (especially Bayes) attempted 
to ground induction on a logical form of probability by identifying the 
inference from a sample and its application to a population as an exer-
cise in what can be called “inverse” reasoning. In the case of Bayesian 
inference, for example, the frequency with which a characteristic occurs 
in a population (a sample collection of data) is said to lie within a small 
interval “e” of the value “p”. In any given distribution, let us say of 
human traits such as,. “having green eyes”, the number of cases can 
be said to be distributed or occur (x) with a frequency that = p. Or to 
formalize the above claim: (x), and p = m/n.  16 
 The above expression is essentially a reverse of Bernoulli’s theorem or 
“Law of Large Numbers” in statistics and probability theory. Bernoulli’s 
theorem which states that the average from the results obtained from a 
large number of observed events will, in the long run, convey a reliable 
value of the probability for any event taking place. We can ignore here 
the multiple criticisms raised upon the viability of the above method 
as a logic of induction (and cf. McGrew, 2001 and 2003, 38).  17 Safe to 
say that Brentano, much like the thinkers who influenced him in this 
regard, such as Laplace (and cf. Brentano’s comments on Laplace in his 
logic lectures, EL80\13.040[1] and his references to him in OEG, 131) 
and Bayes, who both conceived of the application of the mathematical 
laws of probability in logic as a basis for solving inductive claims. Later 
this theory of “immanent induction”, as it was described by Brentano 
during his Würzburg lectures, was developed with a view to giving it 
greater rigor and precision in its analyses of inductive claims (TPB, 20; 
37). However, Brentano also had a very pronounced and philosoph-
ically elaborate formulation of probability calculus as the solution to 
Hume’s problem. Starting with a justification of change and movement 
(affirming the reality of change against, e.g. logical and metaphysical 
arguments such as those of Zeno that deny it), Brentano conceived of 
the probability of different changes occurring in a completely uncon-
nected manner or arising without any determinative influence from 
outside of their own effects as infinitely improbable. Brentano writes, 
“Nothing contingent ( Zufälliges ) comes into existence; everything not 
necessary (and thus not independent of a cause) is, when it starts deter-
mined in its becoming a cause” (TPB, 216).  18 Connecting the above 

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 181
insights to the infallibility of inner perception, Brentano sets out to 
establish a teleological theory of casual principles grounded empiric-
ally but requiring both mathematics and, more precisely, a “degrees of 
entailment” interpretation of probability to secure the epistemological 
insight necessary in order to refute the radical skeptical challenge to 
inductive apprehension of causality. Brentano also viewed his solution 
and answer to Hume as anti-Kantian, as it has no use of synthetic judg-
ments.  19 In Part III below it will be argued that essentially, there is a 
strong similarity between what Brentano and Kant want to accomplish 
and therefore, their actual attempts to establish the foundations of the 
sciences philosophically can be viewed as complementary to a certain 
extent. 
 Nonetheless, where Brentano and Kant differ, for example, in their 
disagreement about the application of probability calculus to inductive 
inferences (something that, of course, Kant would have been completely 
unaware of), they can be seen to once again agree that a non-formal 
ground – the unity of consciousness – takes precedence over pure math-
ematics and any non-ontologically articulated, or merely formally 
deduced, models. After Brentano developed his approach to the problem 
of causality, other thinkers working independently introduced the 
same methods in order to ground the causal principle. Stanley Jevons, 
for example, elaborated a model similar to Brentano’s in his attempt to 
connect causality and induction by basing both on the mathematical 
laws of probability. Jevons applied the mathematics of probability to 
causality in his  Principles of Science (1874). Once again, like Brentano, 
Jevons’ based his approach on Bayes’ formulas.  20 Carl Stumpf (Brentano’s 
student at the time), mentions how, although his teacher arrived at his 
theories independently, unlike Jevons, he never published them (TPB, 37). 
Years later, probability theory would become very influential in the 
social sciences. John Maynard Keynes, for example, applied the above 
calculus of probability to economics in his influential  Treatise on 
Probability (Keynes, 1962, cf. especially pp. 338–39). In Brentano’s time, 
these methods were therefore gaining ground in their application to the 
sciences, and especially the so-called special sciences where complete 
or systematic quantification of data or strict  ceteris paribus laws cannot 
be so easily, if ever, developed. Nonetheless, what is of interest for us 
regarding a philosophical assessment of Brentano’s epistemology is that 
he manages to articulate a theory of induction and probability within 
the context of a richly developed philosophy of mind. For Brentano 
the insight about the probability of a law holding, as was mentioned, 
is arrived at through an act of judgment. This act of judgment in turn, 

182 From Psychology to Phenomenology
is said to be based on the evidence revealed about the necessity of an 
aspect of the causal chain holding, gleaned from within inner percep-
tion. Hugo Bergmann has criticized this theory as conflating analytical 
necessity (the mathematical laws of probability) with synthetic cases in 
the factual sciences. Bergmann writes,  
 We are sure about the laws of geometry in general [as a case of an 
analytic system of laws] ... This situation changes entirely if we try, 
with Brentano, to demonstrate the law of causality itself with the 
aid of the probability-calculus. No general framework of valid laws 
is assumed in this case; on the contrary, such a framework of valid 
laws itself remains to be proved by the calculus of probability. It 
seems to me that this imposes a burden on the calculus which the 
latter cannot carry. The probability-calculus is an aggregate of purely 
analytic, i.e. tautological operations, which have nothing to do with 
the reality of things. (TPB, 220)  
 At the heart of Bergmann’s criticism lies an insistence that the analytic-
synthetic distinction cannot be closed by any judgments of reason that 
are simultaneously used to affirm any matters of fact. Using analytic or 
purely rational judgments as justifications for empirical explanation, 
writes Bergmann, is therefore said to be an illicit and unwarranted 
move on the pains of the vicious circle that ensues in empty definition 
of terms that do not correspond to real (read: physical) laws. “No empir-
ical conditions whatsoever can make analytic propositions false, but 
they may become useless in certain situations” (TPB, 221). For Brentano, 
however, the above bifurcation is invalid and so-called analytic judg-
ments can indeed be informative. This insight and consequences from 
it were developed by Brentano in his lectures on logic. We will return to 
an assessment of this claim in Section 7.4.  
 6.7   The third fundamental class – the continuum 
of feeling and will 
 Brentano separates presentations and judgments, but he unites feel-
ings and the will (PES, 235\PES-G, 307). Many earlier thinkers are 
cited by Brentano in support of his assessment of an intimate connec-
tion between the feelings and volitions. In chapter 8, Book Two of the 
PES, Brentano wants to establish this connection on the basis of his 
act psychology. As Magda Arnold states, “ ... the fortune of emotions 
as a category for scientific study have fluctuated sharply” (Arnold ed., 

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 183
1968, 9). The reason for this, Arnold claims, is that emotions, unlike 
behavior, are not easy to observe. Brentano would agree, and for this 
reason he writes of how appeal must be made to the “testimony of 
immediate experience” (PES, 235\PES-G, 307). Brentano begins by 
noting that the so-called cognitive mental states are quite easily 
distinguishable from the non-cognitive. The two kinds of mental 
phenomena are even described differently in language. Therefore, an 
appeal to expressions and linguistic classification of the difference  
between mental acts can initially help us recognize certain states 
as cognitive and others as emotional. When it comes to classifying 
the specific differences between types in the genus of all affective or 
non-cognitive acts however, Brentano thinks we are presented with a 
different challenge,  
 ... the question of what counts as a feeling and what as a desire, a 
volition, or a striving is quite another matter. To be quite truthful, I, 
at least, do not know where the boundary between the two classes 
is really supposed to lie. There are other phenomena which have 
an intermediate position between feelings of pleasure and pain, and 
what is usually called willing or striving. The distance between the 
two extremes may appear great, but if you take the intermediate 
states into consideration, if you always compare the phenomena 
which are adjacent to one another, there is no gap to be found 
in the entire sequence – the transitions take place very gradually. 
(PES, 236\PES-G, 308)  
 At one extreme lie feelings, at the other acts of will. Brentano writes:
 Consider the following series, for example: sadness – yearning for 
the absent good – hope that it will be ours – the desire to bring it 
about – the courage to make the attempt – the decision to act. The 
one extreme is a feeling, the other an act of will; and they may 
seem to be quite remote from one another. But if we attend to the 
intermediate members and compare only the adjacent ones, we 
find the closest connections and almost imperceptible transitions 
throughout. – If we wished to classify them as feelings or strivings, to 
which of the two basic classes should we assign each case? – We say, 
“I feel yearning,” “I feel hope,” “I feel a desire to bring this about for 
myself,” “I feel courageous enough to attempt this,” – the only thing 
which no one would say is that he feels a decision. (PES, 236–37\
PES-G, 309)  

184 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 Therefore, and given the evidence drawn from experience, we are forced 
to extend the species of mental acts of feeling and that of will into 
one unified fundamental class as there is, according to Brentano, no 
clear cut or natural boundary that can be drawn between the two (PES, 
237n\PES-G, 310n). 
 What the above entails for Brentano, however, is that both classes 
(feeling and willing as mental states) are essentially related in how they 
refer to something (PES, 239\PES-G, 311–12). It remains to be deter-
mined what the common characteristic [ gemeinsame Charakter ] is that 
actually unites the two classes. Of both feelings and will, it is noted that 
one trait that unifies them is that they share the structure of a polarity 
and bifurcation regarding how they refer. Where judgments can affirm 
or deny an object, feelings can love or hate it and the through the will 
we can initiate action towards or away from the object. Furthermore, 
“If something can become the content of a judgement in that it can be 
accepted as true or rejected as false, it can also become the object of a 
phenomenon belonging to the third basic class ... ” (PES, 239\PES-G, 
313). Therefore Brentano thinks the bipolar structure in feelings and 
the will is analogous to, but different from, the same structure as it is 
found in the class of judgments (PES, 239\PES-G, 312–13). It should be 
stressed that Brentano is not claiming that acts of feeling and willing 
are explicitly cognitive (as presentations and judgments were taken 
to be). Feelings are not judgments but rather a separate class. There is 
also said to be no intrinsic feeling pertaining to presentations  per se . 
Brentano states,  
 Our presentations of truth and falsity, too, presuppose and are 
acquired by reflection upon judgements, as no one would doubt. If 
we say that every affirmative judgement is an act of taking something 
to be true, and every negative judgement an act of taking something 
to be false, this does not mean that the former consists in predicating 
truth of what is taken to be true and the latter in predicating falsity 
of what is taken to be false. (PES, 239–40\PES-G, 313)  
 What Brentano instead attempts to show is that the same intentional 
directedness to an object exists in both classes of mental acts. Also, the 
distinctive way of referring to a content is what allows feelings to be 
classified as a separate species of mental acts. Furthermore, it is how we 
are related to objects or ideas, Brentano thinks, that denotes whether 
they can have ascribed to them attributes of good, bad, valuable, worth-
less, etc. (PES, 240–41\PES-G, 313–14). 

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 185
 Many previous thinkers came to view feelings and acts of will as 
closely related. Kant and Mendelssohn as well as his contemporary the 
neo-Kantian philosopher Hermann Lotze (in his  Microcosmos – where 
he argued against interpreting willing as a kind of knowing) are all 
cited by Brentano as being in fundamental agreement on this matter. 
Yet, Brentano goes back, once again, to Aristotle who we are told took 
the terms good and desirable to be synonymous. In Book One of the 
 Nichomachean Ethics , for example, Aristotle writes of how, “Every action 
and every choice seems to aim at some good and for this reason the good 
has rightly been described as that at which all things aim” (Aristotle 
NE, 1094a 1–3, cited in Brentano’s PES, 241–2). Accordingly, Brentano 
holds that some of the most eminent thinkers of various periods are 
in agreement with him in classifying feelings and the will as united 
classes of mental phenomena,  21 but some of these earlier thinkers, we 
are told, may not have not evaluated the significance of this connection 
in the same way (PES, 242\PES-G, 316). 
 At this point Brentano turns his attention to examining the 
phenomena of pleasure and pain, which are usually associated with 
feelings but often separated from the will. Brentano notes how those 
thinkers who connect the two phenomena are following in the foot-
steps of Aristotle (PES, 244–45\PES-G, 319–20). Brentano adds,  
 Every act of will shares the common character of our third basic 
class, and, therefore, anyone who calls the willed object something 
which someone loves  (was jemand lieb ist), has to some extent already 
characterized the nature of volitional activity and in a very general 
way. If we then specify the particular nature of the content and the 
distinctive character of the presentation and judgement on which 
the act of will is based, these complete the original characterization 
and make an exact definition of it in much the same way as they do 
in other cases where a class of feelings is being defined. Every act 
of will has to do with an action we believe to be in our power and 
with a good which is expected to result from the act of will itself. 
(PES, 248–49\PES-G, 325–26)  
 Therefore, when dealing with feelings and acts of volition, there is a 
continuum of connected mental activity that accounts for and can be 
analyzed as relating to both phenomena. Elizabeth Anscombe, in her 
essay, “Will and Emotion” criticizes Brentano’s formulation of the rela-
tionship between feelings and the will, maintaining that Brentano’s 
continuum argument for classifying the two phenomena is flawed 

186 From Psychology to Phenomenology
(Anscombe, 1978). According to Anscombe it is not feelings that motivate 
the will to action but rather a bodily state analogous to sensation but not 
dependent on presentations of any kind (cf. Anscombe, 1978, 144–5). 
For Anscombe, that is, there is nothing inner, “nothing psychological” 
(in Brentano’s sense of intentionally directed mental acts) that precedes 
the act of will (cf. Anscombe, 1978, 146–7). Taking the heterogeneous 
nature of sensation and feelings into account, it follows that there 
cannot be a continuum between feelings and acts of will. Brentano 
would have recognized this, implies Anscombe, if he had taken as para-
digmatic for acts of will any one of a variety of willful actions less obvi-
ously “mental”, for example,. closing a window or leaving to catch a 
train (cf. Anscombe, 1978, 145). However, in response to Anscombe, 
and as Brentano points out, even if we never speak of “feeling a deci-
sion” or being explicitly aware of acting, this may not be enough to 
say that decisions are not at all connected to feelings (and therefore 
mental states) in other, more complex, ways. On Brentano’s account, 
for example, feelings cannot be reduced to cognitive acts but are none-
theless said to be dependent on foundational acts of presenting. The 
psychic relation between feeling and will therefore, it can be argued, 
must somehow exist if we are to take account of phenomena such as 
frustration and the accompanying feelings of regret when we cannot 
act as we think we should or must. Finally, and in Brentano’s defense, 
he is not saying that every act of will is obviously and explicitly an act 
of feeling. If that were his position, then Anscombe’s critique might 
have more of a sting to it. By contrast, what Brentano is maintaining 
is that the will is continuous with the emotions, even if one or the 
other (either acts of feeling or volitions) are more evident and immedi-
ately present psychologically at any one given time. When either side 
of the spectrum is dominant therefore, the other end of the continuum 
recedes into the background, although, Brentano would argue, this 
does not negate the connection. On these matters Brentano is in accord 
with the Utilitarians, such as Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill, in 
that we are motivated to act by feelings of pleasure and to shrink away 
from what causes pain. Brentano’s theory, however, is also compatible 
with Darwin’s account of the emotions in  The Expression of the Emotions 
in Man and Animals (1872), where he writes of how the expression of 
emotion is a remnant, or evolutionary leftover, for what were once 
habits and instincts. Brentano would have welcomed the support of 
these Darwinian findings. In his Würzburg lectures on the existence 
of God, for example, Brentano writes that Darwinian evolution can 
be viewed as a necessary but not sufficient condition for explaining 

Brentano’s Theory of Judgment 187
natural phenomena; such as the multiplicity of species as stemming 
from a small number of original types (OEG, 223).  22 
 Anscombe’s alternative theory cited above, by contrast, actually 
has more in common with William James and the Danish physiolo-
gist Carl Lange’s theory of the emotions.  23 The so-called James-Lange 
theory is premised on the theorem that “physiological changes are the 
‘mind-stuff’ that constitute real emotions” (cf. James, [1884], 1968, and 
cf. Hothersall, 1984, 257). In other words, when we are presented with 
physiological changes, fear causes the physiological response mech-
anism of the release of adrenalin, heightened alertness, tension, an 
increased heart rate, etc., and we immediately experience the physio-
logical change as accompanied by a mental state. In the late 1920s James’ 
and Lange’s theory was criticized by Walter B. Cannon, who raised 
several objections and found the theory to be contradicted by a number 
of facts, including that visceral reaction times can often be measured 
and found to be slower, not simultaneous or faster, than emotional reac-
tions (Cannon, [1927], 1968, and see Hothersall, 1984, 258). 
 Here it can be noted that Brentano’s theory is supported by some 
findings in recent neuroscience. Relevant studies of neurobiology, for 
example, have traced emotions and controlled movements back to 
impulses deriving from the basal ganglia in the limbic system. Other 
studies have been found to connect emotions to decision making and 
higher brain activity closely related to attention and behavior and even 
thought itself (cf. Damasio, 1994). This is not to say that Brentano’s own 
defense of his position makes use of or even anticipated in any way 
these later experiments and findings; he rather maintained the theory 
as justified due to insight into immediate experience gleaned from 
inner perception. Furthermore, Brentano would have pointed out that 
the state even of current physiology and neurobiology is one of uncer-
tainty and continual development. Physiological research can comple-
ment but not replace the analyses of act psychology.  
 6.8  Comparison of the three basic mental classes 
and determination of their natural order 
 The  Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint ends with a comparison 
of the three basic classes and what is called a determination of their 
natural order. Brentano writes of how the three fundamental classes are 
most intimately intertwined (PES, 265\PES-G, 346). Each total state of 
consciousness, Brentano claims, shows that the capacity for each kind 
of phenomena is present. The hierarchic or natural order of the classes 

188 From Psychology to Phenomenology
is as follows. First come presentations, then judgments and finally 
emotional and volitional acts. A challenge to Brentano’s classification 
as listed above was made by his student Alexius Meinong. Meinong 
accepted the difference between presenting and judging as outlined by 
Brentano, but pointed out that one can take an object as a correlate of 
the act of presentation in neither a purely presentative nor a purely 
judgmental nor an emotive way. This class of cognitive acts is said to 
stand between presentations and judgments and called “assumptions” 
( Annahem ) by Meinong (cf. Meinong, 1902). As Meinong describes 
them, they are the correlates of acts of acceptance where the content or 
object of the act is neither affirmed to exist nor denied any reality. As 
an example, Meinong lists thought experiments, for example, 
 “assume that Alexander the Great had not died so young ... ”, because 
we know he did die young, we can classify the above “assumption” 
as a judgment without conviction. (Meinong, 1902, 177) 
 If Meinong is correct that this class of psychic acts stands between pres-
entations and judgments, then Brentano’s tripartite classification can 
be challenged. Brentano’s response, no doubt, would be that the mode 
of assumption can be accounted for as either a presentation or a judg-
ment. Since the object assumed is not one that falls under the category 
of actually existing or non-existing thing (we can assume anything), 
the likely explanation on Brentano’s system is that these mental acts 
are modes of presenting. Another criticism of Brentano’s classification 
of mental acts, however, follows from the above. If the organization 
of the number of mental classes can be challenged, then the order or 
number is not a priori and definitive. To this objection we can point 
to the empirical nature of Brentano’s methodology and say that with 
better descriptive evidence Brentano would concede that changes can 
be made in the classification. A priori deductions are not a part of the 
method of act psychology.  

 Part III  
 

 In this chapter we examine Brentano’s system and begin to give an 
overview of what can be said to still be of value within it. We will also 
explore what aspects of the system of the PES must be rejected in order 
to preserve those of its core insights that may be usefully applied to 
problems in contemporary philosophy of mind. We start with an over-
view and selected criticism of some of the leading paradigms in recent 
philosophy of mind. After this, an outline and explanation of the meta-
physical dualism and the anti-materialist context of Brentano’s one-
level theory of consciousness is given. With Brentano’s philosophical 
strategy for separating the psychic from the physical further explained, 
we then begin to present an overview of the basic framework of the 
1874 system in the PES before turning to criticism.  
 7.1  Contemporary philosophy of mind 
 Currently, the most acceptable accounts or theories available to answer 
the question of what constitutes the mind are the following: reduc-
tionism, dualism, functionalism and behaviorism. 1) Reductionism 
or physicalism is the theory that the mind is identical with the brain, 
or that mental processes are nothing more than manifestations or 
effects of physical (usually simply straightforwardly neural) processes. 
In the physicalist camp can be mentioned “hard” or “strong” reduc-
tionists (i.e. thinkers who believe that every aspect of the mind can be 
accounted for by a clear physical or physiological cause or analogue) 
and “moderate” or “soft” ones. All hard reductionists hold that a strong 
form of ontological reductionism applies to explaining the mental. As 
 7 
 From Psychology to Phenomenology: 
Brentano and Contemporary 
Philosophy of Mind  
191

192 From Psychology to Phenomenology
a rule, therefore, for a strong reductionist; mind = brain. Moderate or 
soft reductionists, however, may not be committed to complete reduc-
tion of mind to physical brain states. Nonetheless they usually agree 
with their hard reductionist colleagues that, ontologically speaking, 
there is only matter. Moderate reductionists are also sometimes called 
“soft” types; included amongst their ranks can be listed thinkers who 
adopt theoretical frameworks relying on the notion of “superveni-
ence” to account for the mental. Supervenience thinkers in turn differ 
between those holding that the mental or mental properties strongly 
supervene on physical ones, and those holding that they only weakly 
do (in which case the weak supervenient reductionist can promote a 
physicalist version of what can be called “property dualism” or even 
a covariant view of the mental [higher properties] as independent but 
conditioned by the physical [lower] properties). Weak supervenience 
thinkers are sometimes known as non-reductive physicalists. Currently, 
the most popular versions of non-reductive physicalism also includes 
believers in what are called “qualia” or “phenomenal properties”, as well 
as the so-called mysterians, that is, those non-reductive physicalists who 
hold that there is an insuperable limit to what can be known about the 
world and, therefore, about the mind/body relation.  1 
 2) Dualism, by contrast, is the position that the mind is somehow 
distinct from the body and moreover, also in some way  essentially 
different from physical, biological or neurological processes in some 
important way. Many dualists maintain that the difference between 
the mental and the physical exists in what can be called a “robust” 
(and even metaphysical) sense. On the dualist position the mind 
cannot be completely reduced to physical phenomena or any purely 
physical properties, not even those of the brain. Amongst the dual-
ists can be listed “occasionalists”, “compatibilists”, “interactivists”, 
Cartesian or substance dualists and even proponents of the intention-
ality of the mental (such as Brentano), who argue that because of essen-
tial differences pertaining to the nature of the mental, any frameworks 
promoting an ontological reduction of mind to the physical can be 
challenged. 
 3) Functionalism is the position that the mind or the mental is 
somehow a manifestation of intrinsic properties that bring the mental 
(a function properly of the former) forth. That is to say, what we inter-
pret as the mind is really a complex manifestation of certain active 
and functional states of a living organism. Therefore, the mind is the 
byproduct of the physical systems we call the brain and nervous system 
actively engaging in their proper functions. For the functionalist, what 

From Psychology to Phenomenology 193
we call the mind is really the living brain in neural action, which just 
is, or somehow contains, the mind. Functionalists can also be sepa-
rated into different kinds. Amongst these can be listed those who adopt 
computational models of the mind, as well as so-called “machine 
state” functionalists (i.e. those who generally believe that the brain 
is somehow analogous to some kind of computer; with the mind as 
its biological “program”). Also we can find in this camp so-called 
psycho-functionalists who generally give more credence to the unique-
ness of consciousness as a precondition for certain cognitive processes 
(in practice, however, psycho-functionalists often defer to the results of 
experimental research and studies of contemporary cognitive science). 
Finally we can list those thinkers who can be described as “analytic 
functionalists”, these being philosophers who try to remain neutral 
about the nature of the mental but agree that it can be explained as 
some kind of general “function” of the brain.  2 
 Lastly 4) behaviorism is the view that mind is a consequence of 
action or behavior. Amongst behaviorists we can list classic behav-
iorism, including Pavlovians and followers of John Broadus Watson. 
These two thinkers frequently used tests and experiments on animal 
behavior to explain the human mind. The classical version of behav-
iorism was a psychological variety that interpreted “the mind” as 
analogous (not always equivalent) to a set of more easily observable 
biological behaviors and processes and responses. After the Pavlovian 
and the Watsonian versions of behaviorism lost credibility the 
so-called neo-behaviorists, including thinkers such as, E. C. Tolman, 
E. R. Guthrie, C. L. Hull and B. F. Skinner in the United States, refined 
and promoted their own versions of behaviorist psychology. Often 
these latter thinkers put forward what can be called “methodological” 
versions of behaviorism. As the behaviorists were concerned with 
science and testing, they attempted to describe the mind by limiting 
or eliminating any non-behavioral evidence or appeal to introspection 
and inner states of any kind in order to more sharply delineate psych-
ology from the other sciences. In twentieth-century analytic phil-
osophy there was also defended, by thinkers supporting the so-called 
linguistic turn, a logical type of behaviorism (this variety of behav-
iorism may have stemmed from the work of the later Wittgenstein 
who influenced the logical positivists, such as Rudolf Carnap but it 
was also given support and made popular by Gilbert Ryle’s “ghost in 
the machine” view of dualism). Analytic behaviorism maintains that 
all so-called mental language can be analyzed into so-called behav-
ioral language.  3  

194 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 At first glance, it is obvious that the majority of the above positions, 
including physicalism, functionalism and behaviorism, are all variants 
of (or at least more or less theoretically compatible with) materialism.  4 
The above positions are far more prevalent in philosophy of mind today 
than dualist positions. Dualism, by contrast, is not so easily compatible 
with materialism – although certain forms of it (e.g. functionalist read-
ings of hylomorphism and certain versions of so-called property dualism) 
can be viewed as perhaps acceptable to certain physicalist thinkers and 
therefore permissible on a materialist framework. Nonetheless, although 
historically significant, it is not an exaggeration to say that dualism fell 
out of favor in modern philosophy of mind (with some reasons for the 
above situation presented in the “Introduction” to this study). In what 
follows, we will examine Brentano’s distinction between the mental and 
the physical and the dualism it promotes. Since new versions of dualism, 
inspired by conceivability arguments and possible world semantics,  5 
have begun to gain currency in more recent philosophy of mind we 
must also explore how Brentano’s version compares to these later kinds. 
 Brentano’s philosophy of mind in the PES was described in Part II 
above as a version of intentional dualism, and in many ways it can be 
seen to be an original version of the dualist theory. We must briefly 
explore how Brentano’s phenomenological realism and metaphys-
ical dualism, as outlined in the PES, can account for the mental, and 
also pose challenges to the reigning materialist paradigms. Brentano is 
convinced, in John Heil’s words, that, “the fundamental philosophical 
questions concerning the mind remain metaphysical questions” (Heil, 
1998, ix). Metaphysics in the above sense is understood as a discip-
line that theoretically underlies the investigations of the sciences and 
takes account of what fundamentally exists and what can be known. 
Many thinkers have noted the fundamentally Aristotelian ontological 
legacy surrounding the development of Brentano’s philosophy of mind 
(cf. Smith, 1994, 35–54); however, fewer have focused on the PES as 
expounding an account of the mind grounded on a philosophy of 
science that presupposes a dualist metaphysics. 
 The philosophical system outlined in the PES, however, may not be 
viewed as appealing or as acceptable by many modern philosophers 
or psychologists. This is especially true of those thinkers of physic-
alist, functionalist or behaviorist conviction. They would reply that 
Brentano’s theory is alarmingly Cartesian, and as Sydney Shoemaker 
remarks: “A distinct feature of recent philosophy of mind has been the 
repudiation of ‘Cartesianism’” (Shoemaker, 1990, 187).  6 It is probably 
correct to say, therefore, that many contemporary philosophers and 

From Psychology to Phenomenology 195
psychologists (the majority in fact) would find the foundationalist and 
metaphysical aspects of Brentano’s project (rather than the phenom-
enalist and positivist aspects of his thought, for example,) difficult to 
sympathize with. For many contemporary philosophers of mind, this 
type of Cartesian and foundationalist endeavor is viewed as untenable. 
For example, Descartes was supposed to have been refuted and found 
to be in error after important developments in physiology and brain 
science (cf. Damasio, 1994 and Dennet, 1995). Part of the reason for 
the critical attitude that still holds towards Brentano and his system 
may therefore, be as much sociological as philosophical.  7 Strange as 
it sounds, a large part of twentieth and twenty first-century psych-
ology, as typified by the behaviorism and many functionalist models 
of the mind developed after Brentano’s PES was published, promoted 
a “psychology without a subject” (cf. Kush, 2005 and Teo, 2005). In a 
similar manner, much of twentieth-century mainstream philosophy 
denigrated the psychological approach to epistemology and science 
that had been so influential in late nineteenth-century empiricism 
(which was, for example, embraced almost uncritically by thinkers 
such as John Stuart Mill, Stanley Jevons, William Whewell, Alexander 
Bain etc.). After the linguistic turn that replaced the logicist project of 
the early 20th century, the application of psychology to philosophical 
problems was held to be more or less of very limited importance, and 
its role in clarifying epistemological issues came to be viewed as negli-
gible at best. 8  
 To summarize and complete the account of Brentano’s approach 
towards psychology, and to see if any aspects of his project as outlined 
in the system presented in the PES can still be defended today, some 
brief comments on what is of value in its methodology will prove useful. 
First, however, we will take up the matter of Brentano’s dualism in order 
to complete the metaphysical context of the status of the mental in the 
PES. Thereafter, Brentano’s empiricism can be examined more closely, 
taking special account of his intentional study of acts and objects as 
relating to existence claims and the connection of his act psychology 
to his philosophy of science. Finally, after pointing out problems with 
Brentano’s semantics and the foundations of the system (more precisely 
the evidential basis of grounded knowledge articulated in his system 
and said to be derived from inner perception see Chapter 8 below), we 
can then articulate what can be said to still be of philosophical value in 
Brentano’s system, and to show how some kind of phenomenological 
and intentional basis should serve as the foundation for any viable phil-
osophy of mind.  

196 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 7.2  Brentano’s dualism 
 In the PES Brentano is a dualist. The fact of Brentano’s dualism has 
either been misunderstood or not appreciated in the secondary litera-
ture for a number of reasons. The first is that the PES was left uncom-
pleted.  9 The second reason is that the sections that would have dealt 
with dualism and, for example, the immortality of our mental life, were 
never published or completed in publishable form to Brentano’s satisfac-
tion. It will therefore, be helpful to give an overview of the metaphys-
ical status of psychic or mental phenomena and to try to reconstruct 
Brentano’s arguments for why they are not only methodologically but 
ontologically irreducible to physical states or processes. 
 Brentano’s dualism is closely connected to the  sui generis nature of 
the mental and to his philosophical claim that consciousness or mental 
phenomena cannot be reduced to any physical or non-intentional 
compositional substratum. Underlying the unity of consciousness 
therefore, is a metaphysical position that presents mental phenomena 
as both intrinsically conscious and unified into a self-individuated 
and non-extended continuum. The majority of commentators on the 
mind-body relation in Brentano’s PES, however, claim that the system 
therein eschews materialism not because Brentano is a metaphysical 
dualist but rather due to the possibility of non-existing objects forming 
correlates to intentional acts (cf. Field, 1978, 9).  10 Others maintain that 
Brentano’s position is agnostic about the materialist/non-materialist 
question in philosophy of mind. Uriah Kriegel, for example, states that 
“the [PES] text itself does not appear to decisively support one interpret-
ation [extensional (non-dualist) or intensional (dualist) interpretation 
about the status of the mental] over another, though arguably the tenor 
of Brentano’s discussion suggests the stronger claim: intentionality 
is the essence of mentality” (Kriegel, 2012). However, Dermot Moran 
writes that “Brentano never held that mental events were ontologically 
irreducible to the physical; or that materialism was false” (Moran, 1996, 
3). 11 To be fair, in many passages of the PES, it does seem as if Brentano 
is arguing for a possible reduction of the psychic and consciousness 
itself to a physiological basis. For example, Brentano approvingly cites 
the work of Adolf Horwich, writing of how, “The undeniable depend-
ence of mental processes upon physiological processes has repeat-
edly led psychologists to base psychology directly upon physiology” 
(cf. PES 48–49). We can also find many instances in the PES of the 
psychic and physical described as directly and almost inextricably 
linked (cf. PES, 116). Nonetheless, close reading of the PES shows that 

From Psychology to Phenomenology 197
Brentano cannot ultimately bring himself to agree with either Horwich’s 
or any other kind of strict reductionism.  12 Accordingly, for Brentano 
to say that mental life as we experience it depends on physical condi-
tions is simply not the same as holding that physical conditions are 
sufficient on their own to bring forth mental phenomena or features 
such as, for example, phenomenal consciousness.  13 In other writings, 
Brentano is even more clear and explicit that physiological methods 
alone cannot be exhaustive in the exploration of the mental. In lectures 
given at Würzburg before the publication of the PES (and later again in 
Vienna), Brentano writes of how, “physiological analysis [of the brain] 
offers virtually nothing [to elucidate the connection between the struc-
ture and function of mental life and therefore to support a reduction of 
the mental to the physical] ... and will do so forever” (OEG, 158). 
 Thus, from existing Würzburg lectures, taken together with unpub-
lished manuscript material, we know that Brentano distinguished the 
mental from the physical, not only methodologically but, apparently, 
ontologically as well. In his notes for the unpublished Sixth Book of 
the PES for example, we find chapter headings for the refutation of 
materialism and against any physicalist attempts to reduce the mental 
to the physical (or the soul to the body). There are also remaining 
notes that basically amount to informal attempts to prove, based on 
the nature of mental acts of presentation in human beings, that the 
soul or human psychic phenomena (as opposed to those of animals) are 
immortal (cf. Brentano, PS 50 52143–46 as cited in Rollinger, 2011, 31). 
This dualism, however, should be placed in context. What Brentano is 
effectively attempting to articulate is what later comes to be known as a 
“one-level theory of consciousness” founded on a phenomenal realism. 
As Amie Thomasson writes, “modern higher-order views of conscious-
ness are typically traced back to Brentano, but ... far from defending a 
higher-order view, Brentano saw problems with higher-order accounts 
and sought to develop a one-level approach to consciousness that could 
avoid them” (Thomasson, 2000, 190). A higher order view of conscious-
ness is one which holds that a mental act is  made conscious in virtue 
of “a second-order mental act directed towards it.” A one-level theory, 
by contrast, maintains that “consciousness is an intrinsic feature of 
those states that have it, not something bestowed on them by some 
further act” (Thomasson, 2000, 190). Some higher level views (known 
as higher-order perception theories or higher order thought explana-
tions of consciousness, i.e. “HOP” and “HOT”) hold that so-called 
conscious properties of mental acts are determined by higher-order 
non-mental or physical states (cf. Carruthers, 2011).  14 In the case of a 

198 From Psychology to Phenomenology
higher-order view of what consciousness is, the higher-order acts, there-
fore, can be (and in many cases are taken to be) unconscious. As we 
saw in Section 5.2, Brentano argues against the possibility of uncon-
scious mental acts. These arguments would hold equally well against 
a higher-order view of consciousness if the higher-order theorist was 
attributing the intentional properties of mental acts to some other, 
intrinsically non-intentional, processes or states or entities. However, in 
unpublished notes, Brentano offers other arguments for defending the 
intrinsic consciousness of mental acts and also hints at how the theor-
etical grounds for the viability of a one-level theory of consciousness in 
his system can be defended. 
 In his analysis of acts of presentation from his psychology lectures in 
the winter semester of 1871, for example, Brentano notes how general 
presentations or conceptual thought is not contained in the particular 
sensory concepts we form. If our general presentations could be corre-
lated with and contained (as parts of a whole) within sensory presenta-
tions, then the reduction of the mental to the physical would be feasible. 
This distinction between psychic acts that allow higher-level functions 
(such as abstract thought) and lower level presentations and judgments 
are, however, said to provide the basis for a distinction between human 
and animal mental life (PS 50 52137).  15 As such, the human is distinct in 
kind due to the ability of our presentations to relate to reality abstractly 
and symbolically. One of the most striking attributes of this difference 
for Brentano is that the psychic acts of humans are non-corporeal in 
essence and therefore directly able to be related to the psychic reality 
underlying space and time. In this way Brentano maintains a dualism 
between psychic and physical life as feasible and wants to argue, on 
an empirical basis, that the immortality or imperishable status of the 
human soul can be maintained (cf. PS 62 54011–12 cited in Rollinger, 
2011, 14). It should be noted however, that, on the above view, there is 
no evidence that Brentano is saying that the mental is something essen-
tially substantial and existing “above” or somehow spatially beyond the 
physical. As he makes clear, the mode of existence of the mental is of a 
different order but nonetheless somehow connected and able to interact 
with the properties that we take as “physical”. Therefore, Brentano 
can write of how, “[l]ight, sound, etc., awaken consciousness and the 
whole sensitive life, which in turn awakens intellectual life” (OEG, 169). 
Brentano is also not saying that the mental is a “property” that can be 
1) manifested in the physical or 2) be in any way somehow reducible to 
existing physical laws or completely conditioned by them. The modal 
status of the mental, for one thing, is different (mental states are actual 

From Psychology to Phenomenology 199
or fully real, physical states merely potentially real). Furthermore the 
ontological status of the mental on Brentano’s view is different from 
how it is conceived on positions that take it to be a dependent part 
of any (ultimately) physical system. The question arises therefore of 
precisely what kind of dualism we are presented with here. 
 Almost all forms of dualism in western philosophy can be traced back 
to Plato. A series of logical arguments for what is now called “mind-body 
dualism” can be found as far back as Plato’s dialogue the  Phaedo . Brentano 
almost always criticizes Platonic dualism in the sense of the positing of 
universals or ideal objects existing independently of the sensible world 
and nonetheless somehow interacting with it. In its modern form, by 
contrast, dualism finds paradigmatic expression in René Descartes’ phil-
osophy of mind, the  locus classicus for modern dualist positions being 
 Meditations on First Philosophy (1641). Since Brentano was influenced by 
Descartes’ philosophy more than by any kind of Platonism, it will be 
useful to quickly list the parallels between the Cartesian view of mind/
body duality and Brentano’s position. 
 In his  Meditations , Descartes distinguished between the mind and the 
brain (or body), based on the results of a conceptual argument in which 
the possibility of conceiving of the mind as a separate substance leads 
to the acceptance of the fact in reality. The distinctness of mind and 
body, in other words, is conceived by Descartes as two separate modes 
of existence or being. According to Descartes, because I can conceive of 
myself as existing without a body, my bodily extended self is nothing 
essential about what it means to be a thinking thing. Subsequently, I 
am essentially a thinking thing or non-extended substance and only 
contingently have a body. As Descartes puts it: “ ... the fact that I can 
clearly and distinctly understand one thing apart from another is 
enough to make me certain that the two things are distinct, since they 
are capable of being separated, at least by God.”  16 Making use of this 
essentially rationalist argument and utilizing both systematic doubt 
about the outside world and his analytical method of breaking up prob-
lems before arriving at definitions and giving proof, Descartes deduces 
his fundamental or a priori truth about the mind. The mind is essen-
tially different from the physical. It is, in fact, a separate substance. 
Because Descartes’ criterion for the real distinction between mind and 
body is abstract and purely rational, challenges and disagreements with 
Descartes’ dualism quickly arose. These challenges were (and still are) 
many, but the two most fundamental criticisms can be listed as follows: 
the materialist or anti-dualist criticism for example, would respond 
to the above Cartesian argument by maintaining that the purported 

200 From Psychology to Phenomenology
clarity and distinctness of Descartes’ apprehensions of his own mind 
is neither satisfactory nor sufficient to merit the dualist assumption he 
arrives at. Thus, a non-rationalist and empiricist like Hume, can attack 
both Descartes’ reliance on introspection as a reliable source for know-
ledge of the self as well as his conceivability argument derived from 
rational analysis of intuitions alone.  17 
 The second criticism of Cartesian dualism is internal to Descartes’ 
system (and originally presented to Descartes’ in a letter by Princess 
Elizabeth of Bohemia). This criticism relates to how the mind can be 
essentially different from the body and yet still be said to interact with 
it. Descartes’ substance dualism maintained that the mind is both in 
communication with and somehow residing within the body, but how 
does an essentially non-extended substance reside “within” and interact 
with an extended substance? This so-called “interaction problem” is 
the second major criticism of Cartesian dualism. How can mind and 
body ever affect each other? Although dualism is a minority position in 
philosophy today, there are still both Cartesian and anti-Cartesian or 
substance and non-substance or non-dualist views of the mind claimed 
to be living options in philosophy of mind. This can be witnessed by 
the number of thinkers who accept (either as they stand or in a some-
what modified form) one or the other narratives as basically correct.  18 
Obviously, the problem of whether the mind or mental qualities are 
something different from physical properties (and subsequently either 
irreducible to or identifiable and explained by the latter), hinges to a 
great extent on how we articulate the notions of “identity” and “indi-
viduation” of entities. We are faced, in other words, not merely with 
a problem for science alone but also with a metaphysical problem. 
As we have seen, Brentano’s system articulates a rich understanding 
of mental life based precisely on philosophical studies in mereology 
and ontology. Brentano, we saw, also embraces a version of empiri-
cism for exploring mental life. In the PES he follows F. A. Lange and 
promotes a quasi-Humean psychology “without a soul” (i.e. not presup-
posing the existence of a thinking substance). Although Brentano is 
critical of traditional notions of substance dualism metaphysics, as well 
as non-phenomenal or what can be called non-essentialist versions of 
“mental properties”, when we turn to the PES and examine his position 
there, we see that he is in fact synthesizing the Humean inability to 
perceive the self as a substantial thing with a Cartesian notion of the 
immediate grasp of my thoughts as indefeasibly given. Brentano, in 
other words, accepts Descartes’ conclusions that the mental is an essen-
tially different mode of being than the physical, but sympathizes greatly 

From Psychology to Phenomenology 201
with Hume’s empirical approach for conceptualizing the Cartesian facts. 
In many ways Hume’s concerns and doubts about Descartes’ ration-
alist justification of the self were shared by Brentano. For this reason, 
although Brentano thinks we have access to our experience alone and 
cannot base knowledge of the properties of the transcendent world or 
the mental on merely logical arguments, he maintains that experi-
ence shows us a unity to our mental life (cf. Section 5.2). The unity of 
the mental is not displayed by our bodily existence. Furthermore, this 
unity is characterized by essential properties and characteristics (inten-
tionality, levels of evidence, modes of givenness, etc.) that are not at all 
shared by physical objects or the physical (atomic or micro-) structures 
of the brain and body. 
 Whether we should take Brentano’s articulation of psychic/phys-
ical dualism to be probative or compelling will depend not only on 
the arguments he gives to defend the ontological separation between 
mental and non-mental, but also on the coherence of his system and of 
both the accuracy of the descriptions it provides along with its under-
lying understanding of the mental therein. An immediate objection is 
that, since Brentano does not accept the essential modal independence 
of the mental from the physical in a substantial sense (i.e. he is not a 
Platonist or a Cartesian substance dualist), then his system can be better 
supported by some form of property dualism. Property dualism or dual 
aspect theory in modern philosophy of mind is the view that the mental 
and the physical are distinct and irreducible properties, but that mental 
properties are somehow instantiated in a particular (usually conceived 
as a physical) entity that is, the brain of a living human being or animal. 
If the property dualism in question is also one that defines the mental as 
modally distinct and essentially different from the physical in kind, we 
seem close to Brentano’s definition of the mental as non-corporeal and 
irreducible to any essentially physical sub-structure. One reason most 
modern versions of property dualism cannot be made compatible with 
Brentano’s position, however, rests on the kind of instantiation rela-
tion they promote. According to many of the modern versions of prop-
erty dualism,  19 mental properties are essentially different from physical 
ones (they are: intentional, content-containing, etc.) but the mental is 
also held to be “instantiated” in a physical particular. If the physical 
particular obeys the (closed) laws of physics, that is, it is explainable 
and bound by known physical laws, then the mental, on these theories, 
must somehow also be dependent on those laws. However, if mental 
properties are separate but emergent, or instantiated but supervening 
upon (as modern thinkers say) physical particulars, than the physical 

202 From Psychology to Phenomenology
properties must somehow determine the behavior and modal status of 
the mental. Whether the explanation for how the physical “supervenes” 
on the mental is causal or metaphysical, Brentano’s system in the PES 
would deny that any essentially (lower level) physical laws can exhaust-
ively explain (higher-level) mental phenomena due to his fundamen-
talist position about the mental as actual or truly real and distinct 
from the physical. Nonetheless, this points to tensions in Brentano’s 
system because, as he argues in the PES and elsewhere, the method of 
psychology (just like the method of physics) must be the same as that 
of all the sciences. Book One of the PES introduced a theoretical hier-
archy, grounded in a scientifically clarified metaphysics (cf. PES, 6, 18 & 
SB, 239) as the basis of his system. Therefore if our modern property 
dualist assumes that instantiated mental properties can be causally 
exhausted by the laws of physics (the latter viewed as in some sense 
an ultimate level of reality)  20 then property dualism is not compatible 
with Brentano’s dualism. Not only does the above position presuppose a 
completed physics (and therefore that we know what the physical is), but 
it also makes the physical laws basic and fundamental. This of course, 
inverts the order of how Brentano views the situation. Physical laws are 
hypothetical laws holding for the world of experience and phenomena. 
Matter, in Aristotelian metaphysics, does not exist as anything other 
than a potency – to be informed and made actual by a formal prin-
ciple and conditioned by causal principles. Brentano amends the above 
Aristotelian position by maintaining that physical laws only indir-
ectly explain the behavior of things in themselves but cannot explain 
or replace psychological and metaphysical laws. Both psychology and 
physics, however, require metaphysics. Brentano believes that we can 
know nothing of true causes through empirical science (PES, 10–11). 
The most maximal laws of reality, therefore, are determined by meta-
physical laws (and cf. PES. 26).  21 Subsequently, any essentially physic-
alist defense of property dualism would be criticized from Brentano’s 
position. 
 In reply, the property dualist might argue that the differences between 
mind and body appear to hold on the macro-level of our experience, 
but ontologically the mental must somehow interact with the physical 
and therefore, it must be causally connected or causally related to what 
is non-physical (the best explanation for which is the closed laws of 
physics). The challenge is on Brentano to show how his system disagrees 
with this position, and why the above argument does not effectively 
challenge his inductivist “covering law” theory of science. Largely 
Brentano’s answer to the property dualist will have to be two-leveled. 

From Psychology to Phenomenology 203
First the physicalist theory of causality must be defined and exam-
ined philosophically. Secondly, Brentano will stress that the property 
dualist or physicalist must provide a suitable definition of “the mental” 
satisfying the phenomenology of conscious experience along with its 
manifest intentionality, as well as other merely psychological factors 
of experience insofar as these are non-physical. The latter however, is 
something that any physicalist or higher-level thought theorist will 
immediately deny is necessary. 
 Nonetheless, any strong physicalist position can still be challenged by 
the act psychologist. If the physicalist holds that the only certainty we 
can attain about what the mind is “in itself” (i.e. essentially) must rely 
only on physical laws (meaning: the third person point of view estab-
lishing the fundamental laws of physics as an empirical science), this 
makes the mental in some sense, ultimately physical and, in fact, from 
Brentano’s point of view is therefore a veiled attempt to reduce away 
what we call “mental” in the first place (a conclusion that, of course, is 
welcomed by strong reductionists or materialists). Brentano, however, 
would also point out that the strong reductionist position, in attempting 
to account for the appearance of the mental (frequently translated into 
observable neural/physiological states, plus behavior) actually denies 
that the mental exists. This is not only counter-intuitive but unjusti-
fied. The materialist argument for the ontological reducibility of the 
mental to the physical therefore implies two presuppositions. First, that 
we actually know what the physical is “in itself”. Second, that we know 
how the mental relates to the physical beyond the evidence provided 
by the phenomenology of the situation. This again presupposes that 
we are in the possession of a completed physics. Neither of the above 
options seems correct or plausible.  22 Therefore, Brentano would main-
tain, materialism is unjustified. For the above reason, it can be stated 
that Brentano’s dualism cannot be dismissed out of hand nor can it 
be rejected because it rests on a metaphysical point of view.  23 What 
remains to be seen is whether Brentano’s position is coherent. 
 In reply to this latter query, the non-Brentanian might argue that 
Brentano’s one-order theory of consciousness, outlined above, actu-
ally presupposes a unity of mental phenomena that only render them 
ultimately irreducible to what were called “fundamentally quantitative 
parts”. In other words, the unity of consciousness was said to be incap-
able of ultimate divisibility to the level of what nineteenth-century 
atomic theory in physics held to be the micro-structure of reality. 
Since this is a theory that is no longer viable, Brentano’s theory of 
mental properties has to be adapted to a modern conception of physics 

204 From Psychology to Phenomenology
(i.e. Quantum Mechanics). According to Brentano, however, the 
theories of physics (or chemistry or biology, etc.), are all contingent 
and hypothetical theories that posit statistical laws to account for what 
exists beyond our direct or immediate experience. The natural sciences, 
that is, outside of the special science of act psychology and meta-
physics, arrive at their theories in a probabilistic (not an essential) way. 
Therefore, these empirical scientific theories assume a transcendent 
world of “things in themselves” beyond but somehow analogous to our 
individual experience.  24 Once again, there is no essential reason, on 
Brentano’s account, for accepting a non-philosophical or non-eviden-
tial account of the mental by turning away from act psychology and 
accepting a “less complex” science as authoritative about these matters. 
However, other forms of philosophical criticism can be raised against 
Brentano’s theory of consciousness, as well as his theory of evidence for 
establishing descriptive, and what can be called a priori, laws. First we 
must turn to criticisms of Brentano’s theory of consciousness as repre-
sentational. After that we will explore the foundations of his empiricist 
epistemology.  
 7.3  Brentano’s one-level theory of consciousness 
 Brentano’s articulation of consciousness as one-leveled has been criti-
cized, and the adequacy of his analysis of the representational nature 
of mental acts has also been called into question. Here we will assess 
if Brentano’s account of the mental as intrinsically representational 
is problematic regarding the foundation of his understanding of 
consciousness and thereafter we will attempt to answer the challenge 
leveled against Brentano’s position that it is ambivalently one-leveled or 
contains a higher-order theory “in disguise” (cf. Thomasson, 2000, 199 
and Zahavi, 2004, 72–73). 
 Brentano’s distinct one-level theory has been said, by Dan Zahavi for 
example, to be inadequate and unsatisfactory in how it is formulated. 
Zahavi writes:
 Both the higher-order theories and Brentano’s one level theory 
construe consciousness in terms of self-awareness. In both cases, 
consciousness is taken to be a question of the mind directing its 
intentional aim upon its own states and operations. Moreover, both 
types of theory argue that conscious states involve two representa-
tional contents. In the case of a conscious perception of a sunset, 
there is an outward directed first-order content (that takes the sunset 

From Psychology to Phenomenology 205
as its object), and an inward directed second-order content (that takes 
the perception as its object), and their only disagreement is over the 
question of whether there are two distinct mental states, each with 
its own representational content, or only one mental state with a 
twofold representational content. Thus, both types of theory argue 
that for a state to be conscious means for it to be represented, and 
they only differ in whether it is represented by itself or by another 
state. (Zahavi, 2004, 72–73)  
 Zahavi’s worry has also been raised by other thinkers (cf. Thomasson, 
2000).  25 In effect, the criticism amounts to the claim that Brentano’s 
theory of a self-representational or one-level consciousness is problem-
atic or untenable because it leads to a multiplication of the objects of the 
mental act, and therefore to an ambivalent one-level theory of conscious-
ness that fails to preserve the intrinsic intentionality of the mental in an 
adequate way. If, as Brentano holds, every mental act takes two objects 
(a primary object and a secondary one) the relationship between the two 
objects must be explained. Critics of Brentano’s position explain the rela-
tionship by holding that: “ ... the idea of built-in “secondary awareness” 
of our mental states ... retain a hangover of the idea that consciousness 
is at least in part based in  consciousness of our mental states”, and this 
feature, it is held, makes Brentano’s theory something of a “higher-order 
theory in disguise” (Thomasson, 2000, 192; 199). 
 We must examine this claim here and see if the very foundations of 
Brentano’s criterion for the separation of the mental from the phys-
ical are not undermined by his own theory of intentional reference 
and mental representation. If the above is the case, then the advan-
tages Brentano’s system was said to promote over higher-order theories 
and other available alternatives, would, needless to say, also be severely 
challenged. 
 In the PES, Book Two, chapter 7, Brentano writes,  
 Every mental act is conscious [and] ... includes within it a conscious-
ness of itself. Therefore, every mental act, no matter how simple, 
has a double object, a primary object and a secondary object. The 
simplest act, for example the act of hearing, has as its primary object 
the sound, and for its secondary object, itself, the mental phenom-
enon in which the sound is heard. (PES, 153\PES-G, 202)  26 
 If the primary object and the secondary object mentioned above are 
related by a “consciousness of themselves” such that the primary object 

206 From Psychology to Phenomenology
is somehow different from the essentially conscious and representa-
tional properties of the act [or what is the same: made conscious by 
a secondary consciousness], then Brentano’s theory indeed remains 
ambivalent and implicitly committed to a higher-order account (cf. 
Zahavi, 73). The real problem here is that there may be a distance 
introduced between the represented (presentation content) and the 
representation (the conscious act), which then compromises not only 
the intrinsic unity of the act but also the phenomenological evidence 
or descriptive faithfulness of how our directedness to contents (such as 
those constituting our own mental lives) actually occur. The criticism 
therefore stands or falls on whether Brentano’s theory of intentional 
reference is an immanent object account or an adverbial directedness 
towards a content. 
 Here it can be stated that there is strong evidence (as was stressed 
in Section 4.2) for the illegitimacy of an “immanent object” view of 
Brentano’s doctrine of intentionality. This fact alone does much to 
disarm the criticism that a distance (logical or otherwise) exists between 
the act and its content on Brentano’s theory of intentionality. The imma-
nent object account is relational. It presupposes a twofoldness relation 
of the act with another psychic tie somehow binding the mental act 
with its own immanent objects (that can of course be taken to be the act 
content). The immanent object account may also posit a transcendent 
object or “intentional object” that holds when the act is representative 
of veridical object perception. This relational account of intentionality 
is said to have the virtue that it makes the act of presentation such 
that it can extensionally relate to truth values. Thus, our perceptions 
are “true” in cases of veridical perception when the presentational act 
“lines up” with its transcendent object of reference. Brentano’s account 
however, seems to be far closer to giving what is known as an “adver-
bial” account of the intentional relation. 
 Barry Smith and David Woodruff Smith distinguish relational from 
adverbial accounts and characterize them as two different kinds or 
groups of solutions to the problem of intentional reference.  27 Smith 
and Smith distinguish between  relational and the  adverbial solutions as 
follows,  
 Relational accounts, as the name suggests, see intentionality as a 
relation between a subject or act and an object: thus if John sees a 
red square, then he or his act of seeing stands in a certain relation 
to the object he sees. Adverbial accounts, by contrast, see intention-
ality as a mere feature of the subject or act, a feature that may be 

From Psychology to Phenomenology 207
expressed linguistically by means of adverbial modifiers, as in “John 
sees redly” or “John sees squarely” (Smith & Smith, 1995, 14).  
 Smith and Smith go on to claim (following the popular reading by 
Chisholm) that, “Brentano embraced a radical version of the adver-
bial theory asserting that the object of consciousness is in every case 
existent in the mind: the act is affected by the fact that the object is 
‘intentionally inexistent’ within it” (Smith & Smith, 1995, 14). This 
characterizes fairly well the persistent problem of the ontological status 
of the so-called intentional object in Brentano’s PES. If the intentional 
object need not exist in external reality but is only a proxy content 
“in the mind”, then what is its ontological status? Is it an immanent 
“real” part of the mental act somehow existing as an “idea”? Or is the 
object capable of holding independently of the act that is directed to it, 
for example, in the case of veridical perception? We have shown above 
that Brentano’s account posits that the mental representation or act of 
presentation actualizes the object immanently as the correlate of an act 
of judgment. The existence of the object is therefore independent of 
its actually inhering as a real part within consciousness for Brentano. 
What exists primarily (for us as knowers) are the mental representa-
tions (objects and contents) that intentionally direct us to the world. 
The main criticism often raised against strong adverbial or imma-
nent theories of mental reference is that the ability of the act to relate 
to mind-independent things (transcendent of psychological acts of 
presenting) becomes impossible to coherently articulate. Consciousness, 
in effect, becomes a screen separating us from reality.  28 
 The problems with Brentano’s immanent realism, as it can be called, 
as well as his theory of inexistence as it pertains to transcendent 
objects and relations (especially to meanings) will be treated in 
Section 8.3. One thing that should be evident is that if the “immanent 
object” view of Brentano’s theory of intentionality is wrong, or can 
be contested, then the ambiguity supposedly present in Brentano’s 
one-level theory of consciousness is largely unwarranted. The above 
accounts of Brentano’s theory of intentionality (Section 4.2) and theory 
of judgment (Sections 6.1–5) argued precisely that the immanent or 
intentional object as existing in the act is not Brentano’s position. 
Therefore the truth conditions for a Brentanian judgment were said 
not to depend on the correlation of the mental act with an object, 
either somehow present within and on top of the act or existing in a 
mind-transcendent (abstract or concrete) way. In the case of epistemic 
access to immanent contents of consciousness, the transcendent 

208 From Psychology to Phenomenology
relation is unnecessary because of the immediate givenness of objects 
to acts. In the case of perceptual judgments, the intentional content 
of the judgment is the proper correlate for the intentional relation. On 
Brentano’s theory it is precisely the combinatory or sign view of judg-
ment (i.e. the view of judgment as bringing together an immanent 
idea that must be somehow combined with another idea or object or 
related to a propositional content) that is challenged (again cf. Chapter 
6 above). This is not to say, of course, that Brentano’s position is not 
representational. How consciousness represents contents, however, is 
not based on higher-order acts making primary contents conscious 
but instead on the intrinsic representational properties of the original 
act of presentation. 
 Finally, when we turn to the PES text to provide further proof, we 
see that Brentano does indeed claim that our conscious or psychic acts 
are intrinsically intentional before they are directed to objects. It can 
be recalled that these so-called Brentanian objects are also “contents”. 
For Brentano, mental contents or objects are the intentional correlates 
of the act. Once again it would be a mistake to take the intentional 
correlate to be an immanent “existing” part of the act. As was argued 
above, this reading is rejected by Brentano. What Brentano does say 
about the objects of psychic acts is that: 1) they are not always known 
(cf. PES, 225–26), and 2) they inhere in a very complex relation of what 
can be called a “multiplicity in unity”. In other words, Brentano thinks 
that if the primary object or content of the act were always known, then 
knowledge would be the primary mental act. This is obviously not the 
case, even if presentations are a species of cognitive acts (the inherent 
awareness and conceptual nature of human consciousness allowing 
them to fall into this class), nonetheless they are not judgments (PES, 
226). If, writes Brentano, it is furthermore true that all feelings are inten-
tional, this is to say that they always relate or are directed to contents or 
objects, then they nonetheless do so in a different way from how acts of 
presentation and judgment relate to objects. However, the relationship 
of acts must, once again, be taken to be a dynamic intrinsic aspect of 
phenomenal consciousness and not a static correlate to an immanent 
part of the act itself.  29 
 7.4   Brentano’s system i: knowledge and 
intentionality\belief and truth 
 We saw above how Brentano accepts the classical problem of know-
ledge and attempts to deal with it in his epistemology (see Section 6.5). 

From Psychology to Phenomenology 209
Brentano’s system in the PES provides many useful insights into the 
structure of the justification of belief and its relation to truth. 
 The first definition necessary in establishing any coherent epistem-
ology (and therefore an epistemological clarification of the mind itself) 
is that of the subject or the knower. The understanding of the subject 
can also be taken as the locus for the foundation and ground of our 
discursive and non-discursive knowledge, and so the irreducible center 
or cognitive axle of all intentional acts. How the knower is under-
stood, in other words, forms the foundation against which an essential 
component for understanding (i.e. the mental activity that underlies 
all concrete acts of knowing) is, or can be, thematized. The second 
aspect of any epistemological theory that requires clarification is that 
of the object realm, that is, the world or the domain against which our 
attained knowledge is to be circumscribed and delimited. Therefore, 
any properly sophisticated epistemology is going to begin by either:
 elucidating a relationship between the subjective conditions of the 
1. 
apprehension of concepts and data (i.e. start with analysis of experi-
ence of how we grasp objects of knowledge) or,  
 jumping straight to the world, i.e. taking what is essentially non-
2. 
subjective as better known. In the second case (by focusing directly 
on explaining the structures or objects forming the content of know-
ledge and explaining why they are accessible i.e. articulating an 
objective explanation and account of the world) the philosopher can 
slowly work backwards to the subject realm.  
 In modern philosophical terms we, as epistemologists, can 1) take an 
externalist perspective and add the subject-relative or non-objective 
conditions for attaining knowledge after the fact, or 2) we can start from 
the given (and subjectively certain) acts of awareness that constitute 
consciousness. Brentano opts for the second choice. Luckily, and for our 
purposes here, we have already done much to establish the foundations of 
mental life as presented in Brentano’s philosophical system and descrip-
tive psychology (see Part II above). Brentano begins with the immediate 
knowledge or directly apprehended aspects of the irreducibly private and 
subjective mental acts that constitute the basis of his understanding of 
the science of psychology: intentional mental acts. Some thinkers refer 
to the essential quality these acts present as the level of “phenomenal 
consciousness” and their contents as “phenomenological contents” or 
“phenomenological propositions”, or simply the “raw feel”, immediately 
given brute fact and the “what it is like” aspect of consciousness that is 

210 From Psychology to Phenomenology
given to the subject. Throughout Part II of this study this position was 
defended as a valid starting point and as logically consistent, given the 
phenomena under investigation that philosophy of mind must examine, 
with a coherent approach to establishing a philosophical understanding 
of the mind. We saw that Brentano conceives consciousness or mentality 
as complex but ultimately identifiable with intentionality.  30 We can 
therefore expand on Brentano’s conceptualization of the basic founda-
tions for cognitive activity in the PES and then proceed to show both 
how the epistemology underlying his philosophical psychology works 
in practice and subsequently assess the virtues it promotes. Finally, in 
chapter 8 we will address its limitations and weaknesses. 
 The following schema (outlined in the chart below) can serve as an 
initial framework for developing Brentano’s doctrine of intentional 
relations.  
 We form beliefs based on many factors. These vary from conclu-
sions formed after reflection on direct experience to opinions arrived 
at through education (in the course of formal studies for example), 
as well as beliefs taken to be important or true after informal influ-
ence from disparate sources.  31 The first aspect of  Figure 1  above covers 
whatever belief forming process may be involved. The arrows connect 
the different steps in the intentional relations grounding the forma-
tion of belief and allowing for judgments that aim at truth. In every 
case the main aspect of the relations are modes of consciousness; and 
it will be recalled that, according to Brentano, in the realm of judg-
ment we are interested in higher-level cognitive acts. Awareness, as 
Brentano points out, is not judgment, but human cognition is essen-
tially judgmental (FCE, 18; 78). In the articulation of his theory of 
judgment in the PES we saw how Brentano consistently separated 
the class of perceptual or presentational acts from judgments proper. 
1) Belief forming process 
2) cause  
3) presentational content/object 
a)  nomological directedness

TRUTH
b)  accidental directedness

TRUTH
(evident judgments)  
(blind judgments)
 Figure 1  

From Psychology to Phenomenology 211
A consequence of this distinction is that no evident judgment has or 
can have a merely subjective necessity or merely subjective evidence. 
Blind judgments, on the other hand, (such as external perceptions) 
can have merely subjective evidence and be true only for the subject 
and therefore possess the nature as well as the characteristic of being 
unjustified. It follows that blind judgments can easily be taken for 
what they are not. We may perceive the stick as bent in the water but 
later realize that it is straight. In a philosophically critical approach to 
grounding our beliefs, by contrast, we must begin only with evident 
judgments and build from there.  32 According to Brentano, inner 
perception is the foundationalist key to unlocking the limits of the 
mental. Inner perception is said to be connected to the perception of 
psychic phenomena as they are. In relating to mental phenomena as 
such, inner perception is also said to have both a special object and to 
reveal, simultaneously, the unity of consciousness and the real versus 
merely phenomenal truth of its presentations (PES, 164; 172–73). 
 On a foundationalist epistemology, the ultimate reasons for accepting 
something as true are the evidence realized through apodictic judg-
ments. Not surprisingly, the source of this evidence will be seen to be 
connected to truths arrived at immediately and presented in inner 
perception. The nomological ground of truth, therefore, might be 
articulated as follows: “A” is true when it is judged, that is, affirmed 
as existing, correctly and with evidence; and “A” is false when it is 
evidently denied or judged not to be or exist with evidence. Finally, we 
can add that “A” is neither true nor false (‘A’ is a mere presentation or 
content of possible belief) when no judgment whatsoever is involved. 
Brentano clearly accepts a principle of bivalence regarding the truth 
value of judgments, although the above understandings of the founda-
tion of truth might be met with hesitation and taken to articulate what 
can be called a radically internalist and even psychologistic account of 
truth and falsity. In what follows we must examine these matters, while 
also exploring the objectivist source for the metaphysical foundation of 
the explanatory power of concepts and beliefs, that is, the causal model 
of understanding established by Brentano in his system. 
 The causal structure of the directedness of belief to truth as under-
stood by Brentano is premised on his understanding of how concepts 
and mental acts are directed to the world. The section of the chart 
numbered “2” in  Figure 1  and marked “Cause” should be understood in 
a formal and very general sense. In other words, it should be taken not 
merely in the sense of blind physical causation or externalist efficient 
causal mechanisms ( Ceteris paribus physical laws) but also as applying 

212 From Psychology to Phenomenology
to a variety of external or non-immediately evident conditions. 
Many of these so-called external conditions (i.e. conditions external to 
the immediate noetic activity of the reflective thinker) can, nonethe-
less, be inferred through indirect evidence, which shows them to be 
necessary factors for obtaining knowledge. In other words, the objective 
correlate of the intentional act must be posited because it is required 
in order to sustain the cognitive relation as well as to allow for the 
attainment of objective knowledge. An objective correlate of inten-
tional acts therefore, frequently plays a role in determining the beliefs 
we hold. Nonetheless, the object side of the act can always be seen to be 
essentially dependent on the non-physical or rather non-objective and 
non-transcendent or noetic sense of how the internal (and for Brentano 
“intentional”) relations relate as “causes” to the formation of beliefs 
and propositions or judgments. The latter or internal aspect of belief 
formation, within Brentano’s system, is of greater importance in order 
to determine how the connection between a belief and the truth for 
that belief are formed and applied. 
 In logic or mathematical investigations, judgments can proceed 
from truth to truth. We usually call this “deduction”. In empirical 
science, on the other hand, any organized system of propositions or 
beliefs for determining truth about the world (as it is or appears to 
us outside of our immediate representations) seems to entail reliance 
on extra-logical factors, most notably: mental contents, a posteriori 
facts and inductive laws. In Sections 6.4–7, we outlined the founda-
tions of Brentano’s epistemology and his theory of judgment. There it 
was seen that Brentano’s system embraces a classical version of foun-
dationalism for grounding beliefs. Fundamental beliefs or apodictic 
judgments must be simply accepted, otherwise we are faced with theor-
etical inconsistencies as well as contradictions between how we argue 
and reason and what we are saying about the world.  33 Nonetheless, 
inductive relations and Brentano’s grounding of the law of causality 
are also said to rest on axiomatic foundations. Whether this means 
that all induction is actually deduction for Brentano requires some 
clarification. 
 In the Aristotelian tradition, which forms the theoretical foundation 
of the PES, induction and all knowledge begin with perception.  34 The 
beginning of induction, is the move from particular cases to the universal 
or general belief. This same understanding of induction was criticized 
by John Stuart Mill but accepted by thinkers like William Whewell 
and Alexander Bain, the latter of whom Brentano cites in the PES (and 
see Section 3.4). These and other similarities between nineteenth-

From Psychology to Phenomenology 213
century positivism and neo-Aristotelian approaches to science can 
shed light on Brentano’s epistemology. For example, the distinction 
and hierarchical ordering of different disciplines was a common motif 
among Aristotelians, as it was in Comte and Brentano. In traditional 
Aristotelian thought the understanding of nature as causal and quali-
tative and teleologically ordered was also commonplace. Starting with 
Galileo, however, we encounter more of an attempt to apply math-
ematics to natural processes and reliance on mechanistic models (cf. 
Wallace, 1992). This Platonic moment, of what has been called “the 
mathematization of nature”, is actually accepted by Brentano, however, 
underlying his acceptance of the quantitative methods of experimental 
science can be found a metaphysical or substantial, and not merely 
procedural, account of reason and causality respectively. Brentano’s 
understanding of all knowledge as causally informed therefore is, once 
again, an Aristotelian one. In his lectures on the existence of God this 
causal understanding of the attainment of knowledge is spelled out. 
Brentano writes:
 We find ourselves reminded of what Aristotle said, that everything 
stands in some causal relation or other to everything else, and every-
thing also stands in some teleological relation or other to everything 
else (OEG, 170).  
 The first aspect of Aristotelian science would be accepted by positiv-
ists and scientistic thinkers today, the second just as forcefully rejected. 
Both points are accepted by Brentano and for this reason he can write 
that, “The appearance of teleology seems established, but there are 
many who would deny even this, as merely a fanciful projection of our 
own desire for order and patterns” (OEG, 170). Through inner percep-
tion, however, we glean that the normative grounds of our judgments 
and beliefs are anything but projections of our desires. 
 For Brentano, evident judgments of reason are based precisely on 
the analysis of concepts attained in reflection on inner perception 
and are therefore said to be descriptive of inner experience (i.e. having 
an intuitive component). These rational judgments are also said to be 
reliable precisely because they are grounded on descriptions given in 
inner perception. The paradigm for these evident judgments of reason 
are what Brentano calls “apodictically true” judgments. In stressing 
the existential and singular character of evident judgments, however, 
Brentano writes of how immediately evident judgments of reason reject 
something not merely as factually false or not the case but as impossible 

214 From Psychology to Phenomenology
(AWV, 28). For Brentano, immediately evident but negative judgments 
precede even the use of logic. The negative modality of the judgments is 
said to stem from the psychological insight that, when we grasp a logical 
law, we cannot but use it and see it to be evident through inner percep-
tion. Logic, therefore, is often said by Brentano to be a  Kunstlehre or an 
art of thinking (cf. Brentano, EL80\12956–57).  35 For this reason, logic 
can be grounded in psychology, although the insight into the laws of 
valid argumentation cannot be explored by genetic psychology or any 
empirical science. Logical judgments are defined on Brentano’s view 
as a system or collection of immediately evident judgments that are 
either reducible to, or result from, an analysis of the [negatively derived] 
principle or Law of Non-Contradiction (LNC). In clarifying Brentano’s 
notion of evidence therefore, it can be stated that outer perceptions, 
thoughts, or ideas cannot be said to be that which is evident, nor can 
emotions (TE, 58–59). What is evident rather, pertains only to contents 
given in inner perception related to the act of judgment.  36 Nonetheless, 
evidence is an intrinsic element of the justified affirmative or nega-
tive judgment as intuitively confirmed through reference to inner 
perception, and as such, it is the basis of all truth and knowledge. If 
we compare this model of the foundations of knowledge with existing 
ones in philosophy of mind, we see that for Brentano the normative 
ground of evident judgments is not reduced to external factors.  37 The 
problem is that Brentano holds the ground of evidence to be empirical 
or a posteriori (inner evidence) but claims that the judgments made on 
the basis of it are a priori in their epistemic status, that is, necessary and 
universally valid. 
 The immediate questions that must be raised here are related to 
how Brentano secures justification of necessary judgments. How can 
the criterion for justification within evident judgments come about? 
Is the justification of apodictic evidence: a) internal (phenomeno-
logical) or b) external (logical) to the mental act? If we accept that 
no a posteriori experience (phenomenological activity) can be said to 
be necessary, it seems that the justification must stem from evidence 
that holds with greater certainty than any internal psychological 
or phenomenological insights. The answer to this question will be 
important for understanding the nature of beliefs and also for deter-
mining how, on Brentano’s system, immediate insights relate to our 
understanding of the world. Applying this question to the two belief 
forming mechanisms mentioned above, we might be tempted to say 
that 1 is internal while 2 is external (cf. Fig. 1). Does this distinction 
hold for Brentano?  

From Psychology to Phenomenology 215
 7.5  Brentano’s system ii: evidence and justification 
 In notes from his  Introduction to the Human Sciences , Wilhelm Dilthey 
summarizes that the psychic process or act and its objects can be char-
acterized by distinguishing between the direct content of experience 
in each individual case and the consciousness of the content arrived 
at by “the application of memory”. Dilthey goes on to characterize 
Brentano’s position in the PES as one in which, “every psychic act is 
connected with an inner perception in which the subject of the act 
attains a reflexive awareness of the act as his own” (Dilthey, 1989, 289). 
Dilthey then comments,  
 ... this can be neither proved nor refuted. When we direct our atten-
tion to the act, we bring out either one aspect or the other [either act 
or content] of what is contained in it. In many cases, memory shows 
only one aspect of a psychic fact, but this does not exclude the possi-
bility that the scarcely noticeable other aspect is simply no longer 
remembered. And when we notice the very definite difference in the 
degree of awareness in precisely this regard, this possibility cannot 
be considered insignificant. (Dilthey, 1989, 290)  
 Dilthey’s worry is that to ascribe self-consciousness or the unity of 
psychic life (reflexive awareness) to consciousness itself may overlook 
that there is, perhaps, a hidden physiological basis maintaining the 
so-called unity of mental life. This might derive from “feelings of the 
sense organs” or “feelings of motion” (Dilthey, 1989, 290). Dilthey is 
led, from the above, to characterize Brentano’s system as intellectualist 
and paradoxical. It is intellectualist because it builds up a classification 
of mental acts out of an inference that there is always inner perception 
of psychic acts that can be reflexively apprehended, and it is paradox-
ical because, according to Dilthey, experience shows us that the direct-
edness to contents is multiple. Furthermore,  
 it is self-contradictory to seek to distinguish in terms of relations – 
especially to differentiate the whole domain of psychic phenomena 
on their basis ... .a psychic act, by its very nature, can include all three 
of the relations that Kant distinguished. (Dilthey, 1989, 298–99)  
 Dilthey’s characterization of Brentano’s position merits response. 
Closer analysis will show that it is a distortion of what Brentano actu-
ally says in the PES. There we find that “memory” is clearly separated 

216 From Psychology to Phenomenology
from awareness of our own psychic activity in inner perception (cf. PES, 
35). For Brentano, it would be better to say that inner perception or the 
intrinsic self-awareness that accompanies all acts of consciousness is the 
possibility condition for memory. Furthermore, Dilthey’s worry about 
psychic acts containing all the relations that Brentano mentions is actu-
ally very close to what Brentano says in the PES, where he writes that 
even the simplest mental act has four aspects:.  
 It may be considered as a presentation of its primary object, as when 
the act in which we perceive a sound is considered as an act of 
hearing; however it may also be considered as a presentation of itself, 
as a cognition of itself, and as a feeling toward itself. (PES, 154)  
 What can be said to truly distinguish Brentano’s from Dilthey’s 
approach to establishing knowledge of the self and of experience, is 
instead Brentano’s theoretical rather than hermeneutic justification 
of the basic principles of investigation. Brentano holds it that “[t]he 
contention that a matter of fact can be established indirectly only on 
the basis of a causal relation is decidedly false” (OEG, 95). It is, however, 
Dilthey and not Brentano who is known as the defender of the human 
sciences. In actuality the foundation for a defence of lived experience in 
scientific or philosophical practice is clearly articulated by Brentano in 
the PES. There are, however, important differences between Brentano’s 
system and Dilthey’s hermeneutic approach. On the hermeneutic 
position, all facts are indirectly arrived at: more precisely there are no 
facts that are not really interpretations of experience. Brentano argues, 
however, that we can attain direct inferences concerning matters of fact 
(as Kant claimed) without mention or assumption of causes or effects 
outside of the mental sphere. As an example, Brentano lists purely 
mathematical relations (OEG, 96). In this way, it can be said Brentano 
appreciates how radical empiricists such as Hume and his successors 
arrive at the conception of philosophy and causation, that is, namely by 
empirically seeking intuitive examples from which relevant concepts 
are abstracted. Nonetheless, in denying that a theoretical justification 
exists for causal knowledge, Brentano would subject the hermeneutic 
and non-theoretical theory of induction of facts to criticism. 
 If we amend Dilthey’s position with insights from Brentano, the 
problem of the empirical basis of experience can be better articulated. 
To highlight how Brentano’s exploration of lived experience to scien-
tific explanation complements Dilthey, we can take Hume as a model 
for a consistent anti-foundationalist position and show how Brentano’s 

From Psychology to Phenomenology 217
understanding of evidence and justification of facts differs. For 
Brentano, as for the Humean (and for Dilthey), all concepts – including 
obscure and controversial ones – can only be clarified by going “back 
to experience as their source” (OEG, 96). Brentano also states, however, 
that nothing that we cannot analyze can be a priori. In other words, 
the necessity and viability of the causal principle cannot come from 
mere perception.  38 We reach the limits of the system of the PES, as 
Dilthey maintained, when we examine its defense of phenomenological 
evidence in inner perception and the problem of unifying what can 
be called the phenomenological sphere or the unity of consciousness. 
Notwithstanding Dilthey’s criticism above, however, the jump from a 
posteriori or phenomenological facts to universal laws that hold a priori 
might very easily be challenged as illicit.  39 The first challenge stems 
from the immediacy or quality of the evidence Brentano works with. 
Inner perception as infallible or incorrigible source of insight is said to 
be grasped “on the side” as an immediate consequence of phenomeno-
logical reflection. Brentano also writes of how, although it is a matter of 
fact, the apprehension of inner perception is nonetheless the descrip-
tive ground leading to insight into analytical laws such as those of logic 
or the principle of causality. The first obvious criticism is that inner 
perception is given immediately, although the acts within which it is 
given must be said to be temporal. Temporal determinations are indeed 
said to condition the modes of presentation and therefore, judgments 
for Brentano (PES, 135). In the PES Brentano’s formulization of the time 
relation was quite similar to that of J. S. Mill.  40 The objects or contents 
of presentation are conceived of and judged differently if present to us 
unlike if they are experienced as merely past moments in memory (TPB, 
38–39). However, the temporal givenness of presentations themselves 
would later come to obtain greater significance for Brentano than it 
did for Mill. It was however, Brentano’s student, Husserl, who pointed 
out (in his criticisms of Brentano’s philosophy of inner time conscious-
ness) that temporality itself must be assessed and analyzed phenomeno-
logically if any attempt to circumscribe what is evident and apodictic 
within experience is to be rigorously attained (cf. Husserl, 1969). We will 
examine the transcendental aspects of the temporal flow of conscious-
ness in Section 8.3. Here it can be mentioned that, as pertaining to 
inner perception, the temporal flow underlying all presentational 
contents must be said to transcend and make possible the evident and 
static moment from which epistemic insight is attained. If this is true, 
then that moment of immediacy and certainty relies on conditions 
that cannot be completely given or accounted for in an empirical way. 

218 From Psychology to Phenomenology
The dynamic and non-intuitively given temporal flow is what allows 
me to individuate contents in the first place, such that I cannot get 
behind it or objectify it as a given object without very strong qualifica-
tions. This effectively opens a horizon and places a dynamic cipher into 
the givenness of any content or immediate apprehension of evidence 
and inner perception. How can time be immediately and intuitively 
given in inner perception? 
 Perhaps Hume’s skepticism and phenomenalist rejection of individual 
contents, therefore, was not treated seriously enough by Brentano? For 
Hume, it will be recalled, causation was both the strongest and the most 
important so-called “associative relation” (Hume, 1975, 61–62). This 
was, according to Hume, because only by means of causation, can we be 
said to make judgments that move beyond our own immediate present 
ideas (and sensations or memories for that matter) and say something 
relevant and important about the apparent order of the objective world. 
Causation is therefore the fundamental basis for all reasoning involving 
what Hume calls “matters of fact” (Hume, 1975, 26–27). Brentano’s 
summary of Hume’s theory of causation is as follows: starting from an 
empirical methodology and declaring that causality or connections of 
cause and effect are based on the a posteriori connection of impressions 
made by the mind (stemming from what can effectively be described 
as a force of habit), Hume, accepts the above as the facts and goes on 
to propose the following. First, he divides all truths into two classes: 1) 
matters of fact and 2) relations of ideas. This distinction, later popu-
larly known as “Hume’s Fork”, is according to Brentano best understood 
thus:
 The first of Hume’s two classes represents what can be called “analytic 
a priori cognitions” and these can be known either directly or indir-
ectly. Among those known directly are mathematical axioms; indir-
ectly known are mathematical theorems (OEG, 93).  
 The second of Hume’s class of truths correspond to the “a posteriori” class. 
These a posteriori truths of experience can be known by us directly and 
therefore known with certainty or indirectly and, according to Hume, 
on the basis of a causal relation. For Brentano, the problem of causation 
is intimately related to what can be called the problem of the empirical 
basis of all truth. Unlike Hume, however, Brentano refuses to reduce the 
source of all concepts to either psychological impressions or reflection 
and conjunctions of associations of ideas. Causality, Hume concluded, 
is derived from the union of several impressions – none of which 

From Psychology to Phenomenology 219
could yield the concept alone. On Hume’s analysis, however, the very 
empirical basis for the logical justification of any factual or inductive 
inference is rendered suspect. Cause becomes the “regular antecedent 
which awakens the expectation that a certain consequence will occur” 
(OEG, 93). But this connection is not a rational one in any sense, even 
if declared by Hume to be “natural for us”. Hume’s position is ultim-
ately a form of academic skepticism because, according to Brentano, it 
“contends quite a lot further than just to the issue we address [i.e. the 
rational proof of a highest or necessary being] ... if [Hume] had his way, 
there would be not only no proof of God’s existence but also no natural 
science” (OEG, 94). Hume’s position is therefore extreme and also highly 
counter-intuitive. As Kant later pointed out, the fact of the existence of 
science cannot really be put into question, and therefore Hume’s prem-
ises must somehow be faulty or mistaken. Brentano’s response to Hume 
is as follows. 
 Applying the insights of his descriptive psychology, Brentano main-
tains that cause is not always an empirical antecedent. Hume’s defin-
ition of causation is said to be flawed in two ways. First, “it goes beyond 
what belongs to the concept of cause” and second “it fails to render 
the concept fully” (OEG, 96). Many things that ought to be called 
“causes” fail to satisfy Hume’s definition of cause and others that do 
satisfy the Humean definition should not be called causes at all (OEG, 
96). Brentano amends Hume as follows. First he notes how, before we 
see one thing follow another with any regularity we are aware  prior to 
the relation of succession of a temporal succession. This is especially 
true if we are dealing with events in outer perception. Inner experi-
ence, however, shows us another mode of succession and a different and 
special relation (OEG, 97). Syllogistic deduction, for example, reveals 
the thought of a conclusion entering consciousness and following the 
premises by “means of which”, rather than “after which” the conclu-
sion is validly drawn. The principle of bivalence (called an axiom by 
Brentano) that what is true is not false, is said to follow with the same 
evidence drawn from inner experience (ibid). An apodictic judgment 
renders the insight true a priori – the judgment has its source in ideas 
presented in consciousness. In cases of willing as well, where I desire 
something as the means to a certain end, the end is willed and I am 
said to be immediately aware that the willing of the end causes me to 
will the means simultaneously and without having to notice that one 
must be willed after the other as Hume believed. These above examples 
are, however, not fully compelling if only because alternate cases can 
be given. 

220 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 For example, in the twentieth century different axiom systems arose 
for grounding logic, some of which reject the principle of bivalence.  41 
Our desires, furthermore, according to doctrines in psychoanalysis, 
can often cover up hidden motives and unknown objectives. The valid 
point that I think is contained in Brentano’s examples and argument 
against Hume (and Dilthey) is that our concepts (or some of them at 
any rate) arise closely related to observation of the operations brought 
forth by experience from which we draw to form them in the first place. 
Causality is one of these so-called objectivity or idealizing concepts (cf. 
Körner, 1987, 16).  42 As Brentano rightfully maintains, we do not see, 
hear or taste causes – the phrase “as a result of” is one with multiple 
meanings and effects denoting a universal concept under which all 
real things that are determined to move, from non-being to being, fall 
(OEG, 97). How the experience of succession and necessity inhere in 
the causal concept is a matter of controversy but the fact that when we 
analyze causal relations we must, of necessity, be selective about what 
aspects of the world we apply the concept to, seems to be beyond refu-
tation. For Brentano the concept of necessity is said to be contained in 
the concept of causation, but on his explanation the source of necessity 
seems dubious (cf. OEG, 98). This is both for the reasons that his analysis 
of the temporal flow cannot be made evident or brought into the intui-
tive present and also because we can take issue with Brentano’s articu-
lation of the descriptive ground that forms the evidence of objectifying 
perceptions or concepts. These reservations will be explored in greater 
detail in the final chapter below.  

221
 In the final chapter we continue the critical exposition of Brentano’s 
system of 1874. The important theme of the representational nature of 
consciousness in the PES is taken into account and the challenge posed 
from higher-order theories of representation is taken up. Thereafter, 
a criticism of Brentano’s deflationary semantic theory and the role of 
presentations as immanent bearers of truth-values will be outlined. We 
will find that there are relevant and compelling challenges to Brentano’s 
position not so much from materialist alternatives as from other meta-
physical and philosophical points of view. We then briefly show how 
the deflationary semantic doctrine inherent in Brentano’s theory of 
intentionality and existential theory of judgment can be criticized. This 
latter challenge strikes at the heart of Brentano’s empiricism in the PES 
and points to the threat that can be leveled against his system from 
within. After a deeper analysis of what can be called “the transcen-
dental criticism” of Brentano’s epistemology we conclude by giving an 
overview of the insights for philosophy of mind that are still valuable in 
Brentano’s system. This will include providing suggestions for moving 
beyond Brentano, while applying some of the important strategies that 
his system has to offer to contemporary philosophy of mind.  
 8.1  Brentano’s representationalism 
 Representationalism is a difficult topic in philosophy of mind with a 
somewhat checkered history. Historically, arguments from analogy and 
 8 
 The Intentional Dynamic and 
Phenomenology: The Relevance 
of Brentano’s Epistemology 
and Philosophy of Mind  

222 From Psychology to Phenomenology
the representational nature of language and thought played a central 
role in categorizing meaning and cognition as essentially represen-
tational.  1 Later, criticisms of traditional theories of mind and logic 
allowed terminalist and deflationary views to become more acceptable. 
In much modern and contemporary philosophy, the notion of represen-
tation is frequently attacked as a distortion of the facts of mental life 
or unnecessary, illicit or all of the above. Another option for exploring 
representation in philosophy of mind, therefore, is to view the imme-
diate subject\object relation as mediated by a non-representationalist 
source. Although few philosophers deny the intimate connection that 
seems to exist between representation and meaning, some nonetheless 
want to eschew any representationalist or epistemological foundation 
for the contents of consciousness. In line with the criticism of trad-
itional representationalism, therefore, has come about a dominant 
belief that representations can be accounted for by higher order acts (we 
can refer to this view as “standard representationalism” in modern phil-
osophy of mind). What can be represented (i.e. our immediate mental 
contents in phenomenal consciousness) is made possible by other lower 
or higher level “intentional” acts and these can be somehow reduced 
to non-conscious and perhaps ultimately physical and therefore, 
token functionalist networks, states or processes (cf. Dretske, 1995 and 
Harman, 1990).  2 As we have seen, Brentano rejects higher level theories 
of consciousness and maintains a reformulated representationalism 
basing his position on the intrinsic intentionality of all properly mental 
acts. It remains to be explored why this strategy should be viewed as a 
viable and living option in current philosophy of mind. 
 Starting from the problem of representation, therefore, we can 
explore the potential merit of Brentano’s approach by addressing how 
the foundation of cognitive life is explained. To begin, it seems very 
difficult to deny that some kind of representation of the world beyond 
our thoughts or sensations is necessary to explain both: higher-order 
cognitive acts and the nature of language and meaning. Precisely what 
is involved in representing the world or how the representational prop-
erties that are supposed to connect us to the external world actually 
function and relate to biology and physics, however, are difficult and 
complex problems in semantics and philosophy of mind. When we 
add to the above how the fact that Brentano holds a representationalist 
theory of mind is frequently mentioned in a dismissive way, the lack 
of interest surrounding Brentano’s contributions in this area becomes 
more easily understood. In the previous chapter we examined some of 
the criticisms and challenged the claims that Brentano’s formulation 

The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology 223
of the representational nature of the mental somehow compromises 
his one-level theory of consciousness or makes redundant the funda-
mental basis of his phenomenological claims for the unity of conscious-
ness. However, we also pointed out problems with Brentano’s notion 
of inner perception, and in what follows, we must continue the crit-
ical assessment of problems with his philosophy of mind. Here we 
will examine the representationalist understanding of meaning that 
Brentano’s system works with. The kind and the nature of represen-
tationalism that Brentano promotes will first need to be more clearly 
spelled out and explored. This is especially crucial where the under-
standing of meaning as relating to acts of presentation is at stake. What 
is of value in Brentano’s doctrine (his one-level theory of conscious-
ness and his doctrine of the intentionality of the mental) must also be 
defended from non-intentional theories of representation and attempts 
to explain away the essential connection between representation and 
intentionality. 
 Limiting our investigation of representational states to what can 
be called “the mental” and “the linguistic” we can see that Brentano 
emphasizes the former. In doing this he is not alone, other thinkers 
(some directly influenced by Brentano’s writings) also maintain that 
mental or primitively intentional states are prior to and a necessary 
condition for so-called derivative and symbolic kinds of represen-
tation. (X) is a representational state if x is intrinsically about some-
thing (y) or if x is intrinsically directed to an object or content.  3 On 
this view, representation is an intrinsic property or characteristic of 
mental or intentional states, which are, in turn, said to underlie and 
make possible acts of representation. Therefore, the intentional relation 
is the possibility condition for what can be called the individuation of 
a “thought content”, but also for the apprehension and communica-
tion of meaning. As Brentano writes, there is no desiring without some-
thing desired, no hating without something hated (cf. PES, 88–89). The 
representation or act of presenting, however, in all the above cases, 
can be said to be determined by the irreducibly mental feature of the 
thought and experience that manifests itself, i.e. the act’s intentional 
directedness. If I am thinking of an apple, that which makes my “apple 
thought” a thought  about an apple, and not just any red edible fruit, is 
precisely the intentional content present for (and to) me and analyz-
able as containing the content “apple”. It can, of course, be argued 
that what allows for the intentional reference outside of any represen-
tation is the association of a group of sensations to their correlative 
impression caused by the apprehension of objectively existing property 

224 From Psychology to Phenomenology
instances. Thus, I can think about apples because I have, at some point 
in my life, been exposed to entities called “apples” and the causal rela-
tion to the external object (perhaps in an initial “baptism” or external 
causal tie) is what formed the mental token that is my thought about 
“an apple”. The intentional relation, therefore, might be said to be 
determined or conditioned and  reducible to lower\higher level actions 
and processes that allow for the thought content and other seem-
ingly basic representational properties to emerge. To this view it can 
be objected (and Brentano’s system would raise the objection) that I 
can form the thought content “apple” without ever having come into 
contact with an existing apple. For example, I may have only seen or 
learned about apples from magazines and books, through pictures, 
movies or paintings, etc. If this is the case, I would nonetheless be able 
to both identify and recognize an apple upon later seeing it for the 
first time. The external or causal source of the thought token, it can 
be argued thus becomes far more complex than any straightforward 
externalist and non-intrinsic/non-intentionalist view of representa-
tion makes it out to be. More importantly, the externalist or objectivist 
causal account also fails to answer how an essentially non-conscious, 
non-representational and non-intentional source can enter my experi-
ence or become conscious for me in the form of a “thought content” in 
the first place. This is a problem that becomes more difficult to resolve 
and more perplexing when it is taken into account that my thought 
content intrinsically contains all the properties that the transcendent 
causal source of which my thought is “about” ostensible lacks. 
 Brentano’s system therefore displays a decided advantage in explana-
tory terms that must be explored here before we examine its weaknesses. 
To come to clarity on the above it is perhaps a good idea to begin with 
terminological distinctions. An important initial distinction is that 
between things and terms. Things, for our purposes here, can be defined 
as all spatial-temporal entities or entities that can be classified as occu-
pying spatial-temporal co-ordinates. Terms can be (and often are) about 
things, but are essentially mind-dependent. Terms are the correlates 
of intentional acts in Brentano’s system, more precisely the content of 
the act of presentation in what can be called an improper sense that 
designates and signifies either proper presentations or things outside the 
mind. While Brentano’s distinction between presentation and judgment 
is central for understanding the cognitive role of the above terms (such 
as names in language), there is also present in his work a less well known 
and less frequently discussed distinction between how the respective 
mental classes are directed towards objects. Brentano’s analysis of mental 

The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology 225
reference, for example, allows him to speak of a theory of different 
proper contents for different intentional relations (cf. Part II above). 
The important point is that as a representationalist theory, Brentano’s 
account does not privilege the external object or “thing in itself” and 
then work backwards to try to explain representation through exter-
nalist presuppositions that dogmatically takes consciousness and experi-
ence to be passive epiphenomena of the physical. 
 Although all properly mental states can be characterized as inten-
tional, an important further distinction among acts and states that 
are mental (in Brentano’s sense) can be mentioned. This is the elem-
entary relation that can be said to hold between so-called  de dicto (of 
the dictum, i.e. propositional or belief state) and  de re (i.e., of the thing 
or object) contents.  4 We have shown already that Brentano formulates 
a non-propositional theory of judgment (cf. Chapter 6 above); and 
for this reason his philosophy of mind can help bring to light both 
tensions within existing alternative or propositional theories and also, 
I argue below, shed light into what can be viewed as essential features 
of mental acts conceived as robustly intentional and how they refer 
to objects and contents. In the PES this intentional reference can also 
be seen to be multi-layered. There exist cognitive and non-cognitive 
acts all sharing an intentional structure but also manifesting different 
levels of reference. Amongst these different levels of reference can be 
listed: objective or object related references, sensation or kinesthetic 
intentionality, and lower level or passive physiological correlates to 
mental activity. Brentano attempts to account for higher levels of refer-
ence phenomenologically before any fully scientific or metaphysical 
explanation can be given. How the intentional structure is accounted 
for, however, requires further examination of the internal and logical 
distinctions that shape Brentano’s analysis. The most important of these 
distinctions, for semantic purposes, is the relation of the act not to itself 
(i.e. the secondary relation) but to its presentational correlate. Here we 
will defend the claim that the problem of meaning in philosophy and 
semantics is, to a large extent, a problem of representation and how the 
latter is to be understood in relation to our beliefs and conceptual know-
ledge. In radical empiricism (such as Hume’s model noted above and 
later widely adopted by the so-called logical positivists), meaning was 
essentially the subjective result of the connection of sense impressions 
by the mind to ideas and representational contents or the non-empirical 
connection of ideas in conventionally established conceptual systems 
(through the utilizing of some form of the association of ideas in pres-
entations derived from habitual exposure to contents subjectively 

226 From Psychology to Phenomenology
apprehended and apperceived together). According to the strict exter-
nalist model of the radical empiricists (also known as the verificationist 
model of meaning), meaningful statements are either matters of fact 
(empirical observation statements) or associations of ideas (analytical 
and tautological truths that reveal nothing about the non-conceptual 
world). In some ways, Brentano’s approach shares many assumptions 
with the empiricist model, especially where the focus on meaning as 
built up from presentations or representations (and therefore, redu-
cible to an originally psychological origin) is concerned. Brentano 
differs, however, in one fundamental but crucially important respect 
from the radical empiricists – namely that his understanding of sensa-
tion and acts of knowledge is more developed and more sophisticated. 
This allows for his system to make distinctions that are often blurred 
together by earlier and later empiricists. These include the difference 
between act and content, sensations and acts of sensation, content and 
object, and primary and secondary contents. When we add to the above 
that Brentano’s neo-Aristotelian ontological framework is one that 
allows for richer conceptual analysis of both the conceptual (formal) 
and extra-conceptual (material) aspects of experience and world- it can 
be shown how his approach has much about it to be preferred over that 
of the logical empiricists (& cf. Part II above). 
 Before moving on to examine the tokening of different types of 
thought contents in properly psychic activity within Brentano’s system 
we can here take up a serious objection to what can be called the funda-
mentalist intentionalist thesis holding that mental presentations are 
irreducibly intentional and directed towards immanent contents. This 
objection can be called the problem of “phenomenal naiveté”.  5 According 
to the position of phenomenal naiveté’ (under which Brentano’s thesis 
of immanent objects characterizing relations in consciousness falls), 
it is proper and correct to accept that phenomenal contents are made 
possible by intentionality but wrong to think that intentionality or the 
immediate directedness of thought is a sufficient condition for repre-
sentational consciousness. The consequences of rejecting the above, as 
Benj Hellie writes, means that,  
 The correct view ... is that consciousness consists of bearing a nonin-
tentional relation of awareness to a diversity of mental features, 
some intentional, some not ... nonintentional mental properties can 
be conscious; and ... the way such properties get to be conscious is by 
being the object of a nonintentional relation of awareness (Hellie, 
2007).  

The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology 227
 The motivation for accepting intentionality as the mark of the mental is 
therefore said by Hellie to rest on a dilemma and paradox that faces the 
non-intentionalist or externalist and higher-order theorist and makes 
both the intentionalist position and intrinsically representational 
nature of consciousness seem compelling. Namely, that if the exter-
nalist denies phenomenal immediacy of mental experiences, a highly 
counter intuitive and not very compelling position seems to follow (i.e. 
there just is something that it is like to be conscious but the structures or 
possibility conditions for having this experience do not exist). However, 
the alternative, accepting the external directedness of thought, seems 
to make the claim “[a]n ordinary visual experience is, phenomenally, at 
least ostensibly of a property-instance which is external” (Hellie, 2006, 
3) unavoidable, but nonetheless equally,  prima facie counter-intuitive. 
Therefore, the positions seem to be, on the face of things, aporetically 
opposed to one another. How can the internal claim of the intention-
ality of all representations give us external access to non-immanent 
property instances of transcendent objects? 
 Hellie’s argument for making sense of the above dilemma is to say 
that, in general, phenomenal character can mislead. This is said to 
happen not phenomenologically however, but rather objectively or 
philosophically. Therefore, a phenomenological approach to clarifying 
epistemology (such as Brentano offers) should be questioned. If percep-
tual experience has the phenomenal character of a “presentation” (to a 
subject) and an ordinary visual experience is, phenomenally, ostensibly 
an instance of an external property-instance or “trope” (as phenom-
enal qualities are sometimes called by some modern philosophers) then 
the above “conjunction assumption” results in an irresolvable conflict 
about the immediately experienced nature of external properties. If we 
accept that how things are phenomenally should be distinguished from 
their qualitative properties and that the latter are, in turn, somehow 
dependent upon the mental “activities” of an apprehending subject, it 
then follows that what are commonly called “secondary qualities” (e.g. 
colour and shape) are not ostensible or phenomenal properties of an 
experience, that is, they are not properties experienced  in the experience , 
but rather they are apprehended through the experience and can there-
fore be said to be independent of the intentionality of mental acts. 
 For Hellie, furthermore, unlike the usual views maintained by other 
externalists or higher-order thought theorists, the so-called phenom-
enal naiveté described above is incompatible with skeptical doubt 
regarding the evidence pertaining to the apprehension of the phenom-
enal experience. Hellie writes: “ ... while the phenomenal character 

228 From Psychology to Phenomenology
of an experience might leave crucial gaps as to its nature, there is no 
way that phenomenal character could mislead; if an experience has a 
certain feature phenomenally – if that feature is among its phenomenal 
characters – it has that feature in fact” (ibid, p.2). This makes the threat 
to Brentano’s account and system quite serious as it refutes both the 
one-level theory of consciousness it offers and the theory of the inten-
tionality of the mental as essential to what we would call “conscious-
ness”. The externalist who accepts phenomenal consciousness but 
rejects it as immediately evident (even insofar as it is indirectly experi-
enced) might argue as follows. 1) a hallucinatory experience presents a 
“phenomenal character” that need not hold in “reality”, and is, external 
to the subject experiencing the hallucination; therefore 2) in this case 
the phenomenal experience deceives us vis-à-vis its ostensible presen-
tation of a factual content that is in reality nothing of the sort. From 
the above, the skeptic about phenomenal contents will conclude that 3) 
phenomenal contents are inherently deceptive: “phenomenally F and 
not F” (cf. Hellie, 2006, 2),  6 Hellie, by contrast, like Brentano, maintains 
that the real problem rests with the  description of the phenomenal char-
acter of visual experience itself. 
 Unlike Brentano, however, Hellie wants to re-articulate what he calls 
phenomenal representationalism (of which Brentano’s theory can be 
taken as an example) and challenge the intrinsic representationalism 
of intentional acts of consciousness. According to Hellie, it is our 
pre-theoretic view of the phenomenal character of experience (as given 
by phenomenal naiveté) that must be questioned. Hellie maintains 
that phenomenal naiveté derives its allure from our tendency to ignore 
proximal qualities (i.e. immediate contents in phenomenal conscious-
ness representing properties of objects in experience). Once we turn our 
attention to proximal qualities and reinterpret them, he maintains, the 
allure of phenomenal naiveté will hopefully evaporate (Hellie, 2006, 
20–21). 
 We need not explore the details of the deconstruction of what can 
be called act contents, to evaluate the success of the above strategy as 
a criticism of Brentano’s position. From Brentano’s point of view, it is 
enough to ask, by virtue of what kind of mental activity or representa-
tional quality the proximal qualities (similar to what G. E. Moore and 
Bertrand Russell called “sense data”) are represented to us. If the activity 
is either unconscious or physical and non-representational (i.e. non-
intentional) the onus falls on the non-representationalist and higher-
order theorist to provide an account of how states or activities that are 
non-intentional can give rise to the emergence of intentionality and the 

The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology 229
immediate directedness towards our own proximal thoughts and thought 
contents. Therefore, by rejecting so-called phenomenal naiveté we are 
back to a higher-order thought doctrine, and this doctrine succumbs to 
all the ambiguity that accompanies these theories. Although a distinc-
tion between modes of immanence is useful and important (a hallu-
cinatory experience is, in fact, different from a veridical perception), 
on Brentano’s theory the intentional object or content is given in every 
psychic or mental act precisely as a correlate of our properly mental 
activity. External objects (presenting so-called distal qualities) can be 
said to be sensed and presented but not always given. In the latter case, 
that is, of a non-transcendently given perceived object (such as a hallu-
cination), there is indeed an object given to phenomenal consciousness 
and it is precisely the intentional acts and the actual experience that 
serve as an intrinsic prerequisite for the presentation (cf. PES, 126ff). 
When a perception is veridical, by contrast, the existing external object 
is the object of a proper act of presentation and reference is to the object. 
However, in the latter case the status of the object can be said not to be 
merely immanent to the act. In both cases, the phenomenal experience 
of being intentionally directed holds true. In the above way, phenom-
enal naiveté can be affirmed but the physicalist or externalist frame-
work for accounting for experience and consciousness challenged.  
 8.2  Problems with Brentano’s semantics in the PES 
 The above analysis shows clearly that in Brentano’s system in the PES, 
there are distinctions made in modes of presenting, but also in kinds or 
quality of the presenting act. This latter quality is a direct consequence 
of Brentano’s phenomenological approach that takes direct experience 
seriously. For example, Brentano writes,  
 We speak of indistinctness of a presentation in two senses, in a proper 
one and in an improper one. When we say, “ Objects that we saw in 
the distance appeared indistinctly to us”, what we mean is: “The 
visual presentations that they caused in us did not allow for a judg-
ment about how the  objects would appear up close, and did not allow 
us for this very reason to come to an assured conjecture regarding 
other peculiarities”. Which  content they had may be completely clear 
to us. Thus they are indistinct in an improper sense. In the proper 
sense, by contrast, we call those presentations indistinct in which 
we are unable with assurance to give an account of the  content itself. 
(PS 530003 as cited by Rollinger, 2009)  7 

230 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 This analysis of presentation acts is articulated in great detail and forms 
the context of the intentional model of reference in the PES. In the 
Würzburg lectures on logic from the 1870s and 80s Brentano even 
maintains that different mental classes have unique relationships to 
their objects or contents, thus dismissing the frequently leveled charge 
that Brentano’s doctrine of mental reference is largely phenomeno-
logically deficient. Brentano writes of how language serves the logi-
cian much as the characters and symbols of the mathematician do 
in helping to improve his method (EL80 12978.7). Subsequently, the 
progress of logic will make it clear how language mirrors the essential 
nature of thinking (EL80 12978.9). Turning our attention to language, 
the basis for its examination is what Brentano describes as the funda-
mental or basic classification of mental phenomena (EL80 13003.1ff). 
On this view, names express (psychological) acts of presentation and 
the meaning of a name can be derived from the content of its associ-
ated presentation (EL80 13012–19). The content of the act of presenta-
tion, as the content of a psychic act, is distinguished and separate from 
the object the presentation relates to. The relationship of a presenta-
tion (the presented as such) is therefore not interchangeable with the 
relation towards the same content that a judgment takes (the judged, 
as such) (EL80 13.003–06). The content is just what we are immedi-
ately directed to and cannot be confused about. In this way, Brentano 
develops what can be called a narrow reference to an object as separate 
from the wide reference of acts to transcendent objects, for example, in 
external perception. “Names” are said to relate to presentations in an 
analogous manner to how “statements” relate to judgments. Meaning, 
on this view, is therefore linked to presented contents and objects. For 
example, the meaning of a proper name is the presented content as 
such (i.e. as presented), rather than the object the content refers to via 
the name. Brentano notes that names can have the same object but 
differ in meaning, “the ‘son of Phaenerate’ and ‘the wisest among the 
Athenian’ both name (refer to) the same individual, that is Socrates, but 
their meanings (senses) are different” (EL80 13.013.3). 
 According to Brentano’s position, underlying the system of 1874, there 
are therefore universal and individual concepts or terms that relate to 
both thought (that is, judgments) and intentional presentations. The 
individual terms have only one object that corresponds to them, while 
universal concepts or terms have many. Here it must be noted that the 
concept for Brentano is the same as the content of the presentation. 
Statements and their meanings are both judged, on this view, by their 
given contents or mental terms as correlates to the act of judgment, 

The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology 231
and not according to the object designated by the statement (i.e. the 
linguistically determining “name” only indirectly corresponding or 
referring to the content of a presentation). The content of the judgment 
is the presentation as judged and is said to have its existence affirmed 
precisely in the correct or affirmative existential act of judgment. On 
this position the content of the judgment is what takes on the role of 
truth maker. 
 Brentano’s theory of judgment stresses the direct connection of the 
subject, through “presentational contents”, with objects in the world. 
 Vorstellung is Brentano’s term for presentation, and he seems to have 
consciously stressed the non-symbolic or non-representative sense of 
the term (in contrast, for example, to Kant who frequently likened 
presentations to the “ rapraesentatio ”, that is, the ability of the mind 
or consciousness to “represent” the world cf. Kant,  Critique of Pure 
Reason [CPR], A320). Earlier connections of the term  Vorstellung to 
“representations” related to sensations apparently smacked of the “way 
of ideas” to Brentano. Although, as we have argued above, Brentano 
accepts the epistemological turn to the subject, and subsequently holds 
a basically Cartesian theory of the mind, he also weds the above to 
a neo-Aristotelian ontology. That an “idea” or “image” in the mind 
mediating our presentations is not what Brentano focuses on when he 
articulates his notion of “intentional inexistence”, can be inferred both 
from his theory of judgment and his description in the PES of objects 
and contents as directly presented through a kind of non-objectifiable 
mental reference ( Beziehung ). That the connection between the act 
of presentation and its object is not always an internal relation for 
Brentano (as it is for Hume or Locke, for example) seems evident when 
we consider that a “relation” implies the existence in the mind of both 
terms of the  relata . In an intentional reference, however, as we can 
infer from his descriptions of mental phenomena and their contents, 
Brentano seems to be saying that one aspect of the reference or relation 
need not exist (cf. PES, 88–89, 274ff). 
 As was argued in Part II above, in the PES Brentano stresses that when 
we have or are aware of a presentation, the intentional directedness to 
the object or content is what constitutes the act. Thus Brentano invokes 
the Scholastics and the “species” theory of knowledge, along with the 
notion of the “ intentio ” relating the mind directly to objects or species 
in reality to characterize his position. This point should be stressed as 
by far the most common view of Brentano’s position is that of Husserl 
and Meinong who both read his doctrine of intentionality as repre-
sentative or immanentist through and through regarding the object 

232 From Psychology to Phenomenology
of consciousness. This view is not fair to Brentano’s position as many 
instances of direct or non-mediated connection with objects form the 
basis for his theory of mental life; as highlighted within the theory of 
judgment as existential directedness to objects in the world (cf. Chapter 
6 above). Nonetheless, although Brentano was aware that we can have 
objects or contents presented in different ways, and although he placed 
great emphasis on the role of language and its effects on the forma-
tion of our theories (stressing for example how language is essentially 
symbolic in nature); his understanding of the semantic role of the 
intentional reference nonetheless wavers. Here it will be argued that the 
priority given to inner perception and phenomenological evidence as 
directed to singular or existential concrete objects leads to problems for 
Brentano’s position regarding meaning. The inability to clearly articu-
late the status of truth claims in connection to general presentations, for 
example, is one of the most telling shortcomings in Brentano’s position. 
The former was pointed out even in Brentano’s own lifetime by some 
of his more talented students (Anton Marty and Kasimierz Twardowski 
amongst others). Here it will be argued that Brentano’s theory of mental 
reference gives an inadequate explanation of the direct intentional rela-
tion to the givenness of meanings (beyond nominal ones) and that this 
affects the account of his theory of truth. We will therefore focus here 
on the ambiguity generated by Brentano’s failure, within his theory of 
judgment, to clearly and coherently distinguish logical reference from 
intensional or belief statements that are also intentionally “about” the 
world. It will be seen that problems are manifested on the semantic 
and logical levels by Brentano’s theory because of his failure to clearly 
distinguish between the object affirmed as content or correlate of the 
immediate presentation and what can be called the “state of affairs” and 
the content as meaning given in the act. To a large extent my criticism 
of Brentano in what follows builds on criticisms first made by Husserl in 
his Logical Investigations (1900–1901). Where my criticism differs from 
Husserl is in rejecting his strict and radical dismissal of all representa-
tionalist theories of intentionality in the LI and elsewhere. 
 To provide evidence that justifies the above claim, we can here 
examine the case of a simple name – or what Brentano would call a 
“categorematic” expression. According to Brentano, names are almost 
always said to be able to be correlated to descriptions of things given 
in acts of presentation. Names are, in fact, intimately tied to presenta-
tions in the PES (cf., p. 199). While in the PES itself there is no explicit 
distinction made between contents and objects of acts, or differences 
noted between how objects as opposed to meanings are given, as we 

The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology 233
saw, elsewhere we are told how “names” are said to relate to presen-
tations, just as “statements” relate to acts of judgment. Meaning, on 
Brentano’s view, is linked to presented contents or objects, however, the 
meaning of a proper name is said to be tied to the presented content as 
such (i.e. as presented), rather than to the object the content refers to  via 
the name. We noted that for Brentano, names can have the same object 
but differ in meaning, however; and because of his deflationary reduc-
tion of the meaning to the content of the presentation, his position 
becomes unable to separate what can be called “the truth maker” of the 
act of judgment from the “truth claim”. 
 Brentano’s theory of truth therefore, is deflationary and semantically 
reductionist. Instead of holding that there are propositions or substan-
tial and analyzable (ultimately abstract) grounds “mirroring” the struc-
ture of the world and acting as the bearers of truth – on his view truth 
instead becomes a quality necessarily given simultaneously with (and 
therefore mostly reducible to) the essentially psychological act of judg-
ment. By contrast, a metaphysically substantial theory of truth, such 
as a correspondence theory that embraces propositions, holds that the 
truth or belief claim (the proposition) is distinguishable from both the 
concrete things [of which it is said to represent] and states of affairs 
[relating to our judgments], and therefore makes distinctions that are 
not made by Brentano. We can subsequently class this propositional 
theory of truth and judgment as non-deflationary or substantial. On 
the substantialist theory of truth, the objects of which truth is affirmed 
or denied act as what can be called “truth makers”. Some philosophers 
call these “facts”. Brentano, by contrast, makes the act of judgment 
itself the truth bearer and the object (intentionally) affirmed or denied 
in the act, what is true or false. What complicates Brentano’s position, 
however, is not his deflationary reinterpretation of truth per se, but 
rather his deflationist account when tied onto his realist ontological 
position and grounded on his intuitionist epistemology. 
 These mutual commitments lead to strange consequences for 
Brentano’s position. For example, we certainly do not want to say that 
if a state of affairs, such as one expressed in the statement “the moon is 
385, 000 km from the Earth”, is true it is because the truth making factor 
about the above assertion hinges on a judger (or, even perhaps more 
enigmatically, an ideal judger). This is because it seems highly unsatis-
factory to say that the judger affirming x to be the case is what  makes x 
true. If the above is correct it rubs against both the common sense (and 
Aristotelian) intuition that the act of a subject predicating “the moon 
is 385,000 km from the Earth” stands in reality according to a certain 

234 From Psychology to Phenomenology
objective  relation and does so independent of any judgment that any 
thinker (real or ideal) may have. Brentano, in many respects agrees with 
the above. In the PES he embraces a correspondence theory of truth and 
maintains that the existential judgments clarify ontological categories 
that determine the being and reality of things in themselves (as given 
to the thinker). However, Brentano’s correspondence relation for deter-
mining predication, because it is tied to the narrow givenness of the 
object for the thinker (unlike the intentional directedness of presen-
tational acts) can also be said to be deflationary. Brentano’s theory of 
judgment, therefore, as deflationary simultaneously denies that there 
are any propositions or “states of affairs” which the mental act or pres-
entation is related to, and against which the true judgment corres-
ponds. This makes any deeper analysis of the notion of truth beyond 
the analysis of the act of judgment itself and the act of affirmation 
grasped in “inner perception” unnecessary. But, as mentioned, this also 
creates problems for the coherence of this theory and the philosophical 
understanding of semantic relations in the PES. In the system of the 
PES, all relations can be said to stem from intuitions derived from inner 
perception of either mental or physical phenomena. This means that 
relations are far closer to conceptual presentations or symbolic pres-
entations for Brentano, however, since the existential act of judgment 
gives preference to the thing existing as a  concretum , this analysis of 
relations gives priority to the internal relation of the thinker to his or 
her own act content. 
 To help spell out one of the problems with Brentano’s position, and 
in order to expand on his theory, let us here take a clue from Bertrand 
Russell and maintain that a definite description, i.e. what a name signi-
fies (the content of the presentation in Brentano’s language), need not 
quantify a domain of objects [with which Brentano would agree], but 
also [and  pace Brentano] that the name need not be directly related to 
the presentational act of a thinker. Holding the above, we arrive at a 
position Brentano would reject. Namely, that is, if “Pegasus” does not 
exist then, for Brentano, Pegasus becomes a non-real or intentional 
object, existing only as a correlate or content in my own or another 
thinker’s act of presentation. Yet the  description of Pegasus can be true 
or false. For example, “Pegasus is a winged horse” is certainly a true 
description (validating the facts about Pegasus drawn from mythology 
and literature) while “Pegasus is two-legged” is equally false. But it 
then appears that we can have or predicate truths about non-existent 
objects — beyond the mere fact that they do or do not exist and are 
given with adequate or inadequate evidence in a presentation. More 

The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology 235
importantly, as Husserl would later point out, these truths commu-
nicate a  meaning which appears by no direct means to reduce to my 
private mental imagery or intentional reference to a self-given (imma-
nent) presentation. If we were to hold the thought that “Pegasus is a 
winged horse” before the mind (achieved within what Husserl calls 
a “positing act”) we are effectively related to an act of presentation 
in which we affirm but do not believe in the existence of what we 
affirm. The above are some of the serious shortcomings within the 
system of the PES. Brentano himself later moved beyond the position 
he held in 1874; however, his later thought does not seem able to 
provide any compelling answers to the above difficulties. For the most 
part this was due to Brentano’s subsequent abandonment, in his later 
writings, of anything like the content of a judgment. Brentano’s later 
theory of semantic reference was therefore equally unable to coher-
ently explain the difference between truth makers and truth claims as 
related to statements and presentations. What is more, the difficulties 
become even more pronounced in Brentano’s later thought because 
with anything like the content of the judgment abandoned, only indi-
vidual concrete objects or things can comprise the correlate of the act 
of judgment (cf. KL, 3–11). In its later development, Brentano’s theory 
(featuring a reist reformulation of mental reference) runs into quite 
serious conceptual difficulties in accounting for relations of any kind. 
For the later Brentano, the contents of indirect or non-intuitive pres-
entations (such as concepts) can be expressed in statements with the 
declarative statement corresponding to a higher level act of judgment, 
thus determining the truth or falsity of the statement, but there is no 
propositional or judgmental core – that is, there is only the concrete 
thing and its existence or non-existence as determined by the psycho-
logical act immediately apprehended by the subject. 
 For the later Brentano, it would have to be maintained that, in the 
above “Pegasus” instance, we are making a “double judgment”, i.e. first 
affirming the presentation of “Pegasus” but then judging immediately 
that its existence is a property of myth and not actual. But it can be 
argued that the treatment of the predication of properties holding of 
truly existing (not merely intentionally presented) things cannot easily 
be viewed as the same as the predication of the existence of the thing 
“outside of” or transcendent to the mental act. Subsequently, the affirm-
ation of meanings or senses cannot be reduced to the connotation of the 
name. In these cases it appears that Aristotle’s [and to an extent even 
Frege’s] categorical form for judgments of existence seem not only apt, 
but also more coherent and compelling than the existential translation 

236 From Psychology to Phenomenology
and reduction that Brentano wants to give (a point also made by Moritz 
Schlick in his criticism of Brentano).  8 
 To say that no property or no real predicate but that instead a meaning 
corresponds to the claim “Pegasus is a flying horse”, does not work as 
naturally nor blend as coherently with the existentialist theory of judg-
ment and deflationary semantics and ontology that Brentano promotes 
in the PES and elsewhere as it does on a categorical or linguistic model 
distinguishing intensions and senses of linguistically formulated state-
ments from intentional acts and contents of judgments as truth bearers 
or propositions. Furthermore, because names and quantifiers work 
differently on the logical and linguistic (as well as psychological) levels, 
it would seem that Brentano’s theory of quantification and the predi-
cation of existence and truth (which, as was stated, is conservative and 
deflationary) can lead to undesirable consequences in semantics. Formal 
truths and abstract meanings are not nearly as susceptible to reduction 
to contents of presentations as are concrete or autosemantic nominal 
terms representing things. In short, the distinction between objects 
unrelated to mental contents and objects that only exist as mental 
contents is inadequately dealt with in Brentano’s mature ontology. 
 One consequence of this is that it is only with much  ad hoc modifica-
tions, as well as awkward formulations, that certain aspects of predi-
cate logic can be adequately addressed within Brentano’s framework.  9 It 
was precisely to account for some of these shortcomings that many of 
Brentano’s students developed divergent positions. This began with the 
work of Brentano’s Polish student Kasimierz Twardowski whose clarifi-
cations of the distinctions between object and content was a revision 
of Brentano’s theory of presentation (Twardowski, 1977). Thereafter, 
Alexius Meinong would go on to characterize certain objects of refer-
ence or intentional objects (said by Twardowski to be the basis of formal 
ontology as  daseinsfreie Wissenschaft i.e. as existing beyond being 
[ Sosein ]) in a more thorough manner than his teacher. And finally 
Edmund Husserl, the founder of the modern phenomenological move-
ment, would describe how the act of presentation directs us to any 
object (even a contradictory or impossible one)  via the meaning of the 
content of the presentation. Husserl thus reintroduces propositions as 
well as  abstracta such as “ideal species” in his early ontology (cf. Husserl, 
2000, vol. 1, 201–02), in this way amending Brentano. 
 Nonetheless the important point that must be stressed here is that 
Brentano’s descriptive methods and intentional understanding of the 
mental are developed and not abandoned by his followers. And it is the 
connection between experience and the study of mental acts, as well 

The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology 237
as the relation of both to logic, that makes Brentano the indisputable 
forerunner of both the modern phenomenological approaches and the 
development of object theory described above and gives his doctrines a 
relevance to modern concerns about the nature of truth and its relation 
to mental reference.  
 8.3  The transcendental challenge to 
Brentano’s system 
 We can here point out another serious threat to Brentano’s formulation 
of the foundations of knowledge and inner perception, this one stem-
ming from Kant’s alternative understanding of the unity of conscious-
ness. Although Brentano was avowedly anti-Kantian in his writings and 
program, with the distance of time many recent commentators have 
come to see similarities and compatibility with Brentano’s system in the 
PES and Kant’s critical philosophy.  10 
 As Maria van der Schaar points out, Brentano’s empiricist program is 
quite compatible with neo-Kantian attempts to reconstruct the Kantian 
critical philosophy on scientific grounds (Van der Schaar, 2003, 128). 
The connections and similarities between Brentano’s act psychology 
and Kantian critical philosophy have also been pointed out by other 
thinkers.  11 At the heart of the neo-Kantian program (whether Marburg, 
Southwest or Phenomenological) was the goal of reforming Kant’s intui-
tions and insights in order to bring them into greater conformity with 
models that ruled in the empirical sciences (see Section 2.1). There 
was an overlap and common goal in the strategy adopted by Brentano 
in his formulation of empiricism and the “back to Kant” movement. 
For example, in both Brentano’s neo-Aristotelian approach and the 
neo-Kantian position, intuition or immediate acquaintance with the 
normative grounds of objective knowledge was assimilated to percep-
tion and judgment. Similarities also existed between Kant and Brentano, 
including criticism of the Cartesian ontological proof for the existence 
of God. For Kant, no less than Brentano, existence is not a predicate 
of a thing or “real predicate”, so that “God exists” cannot be analytic-
ally derived from “God is the most perfect being” (cf. A592/B620-A603/
B631). Also, much like Brentano’s act psychology, the Kantian phil-
osophy begins with the immediate fact of the unity of consciousness and 
the givenness of a manifold. For Kant the “I think” or  cogito of Descartes 
is not discarded but instead read very much like Brentano interprets 
it, with direct awareness of objects of experience and of our acts of 
knowing said to be made available to us in reflection.  12 Nonetheless, 

238 From Psychology to Phenomenology
as was pointed out in Chapter 5 above, and must be returned to here, 
there is a difference regarding the conceptualization of consciousness 
and the intuitive certainty of our immediate acts of inner perception in 
the writings of the two thinkers. 
 Kant posits that the sphere of evidence given to the thinker in 
reflective judgments is both limited and removed from any immediate 
intuitive awareness that can reveal it as a “thing in itself”. Brentano, 
aware of Kant’s rejection of rational or speculative psychology, was 
nonetheless in a very similar way trying to establish a critical epistem-
ology that began from the unity of consciousness. Brentano’s reading 
of Kant was, however, was such that it led him to strongly reject the 
earlier thinker’s positions. Some words about why this was the case may 
help to show that the differences between Brentano’s project and Kant 
have been exaggerated and a more objective picture should help us in 
understanding both thinkers more fully. 
 To begin, an important moment in the rise of neo-Kantianism was the 
debate about the pure intuitions of space and time between Brentano’s 
teacher in Berlin, Adolf Trendelenburg and Kant’s defender Kuno 
Fischer. For Trendelenburg, as he articulated in his  Logical Investigations 
(1840), genuine objective knowledge has to be of things in themselves. 
It was for this reason that Trendelenburg criticized what he called the 
“neglected alternative” of Kant’s transcendental idealism, that is, for 
Kant time and space were either “subjective” forms of pure intuition or 
they were “objective” properties of things in themselves but could not 
be both (Trendelenburg, 1867, cited in Bird, 2006). Nonetheless, this 
reading of Kant denies the possibility that the terms “subjective” and 
“objective” are being used in the CPR in any other than in a common 
sense or pre-critical way. Examination of the CPR by contrast, points 
to evidence that Kant instead claimed that space and time were valid 
beyond private psychological intuitions but not when the objects of 
apprehension are transcendent in the sense that they are objects beyond 
any possible experience (cf. for example B 148–49).  13 
 Brentano follows Trendelenburg and ascribes the subjectivist under-
standing of space and time to Kant, thereby downplaying the latter’s 
empirical realism and rejecting his transcendental idealism (OEG, 88, 
90–91).  14 For this reason Brentano seems to miss alternate readings of 
Kant that, it can be argued, highlight similarities in his approach with 
those of Kant. For example, both thinkers want to answer Hume and 
both start from the immediate givenness of the unity of conscious-
ness. They also reject any kind of facile introspective breakdown of 
the contents of experience as a reliable method for gaining genuine 

The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology 239
epistemological insight. Finally, they want to forego any strict ration-
alist deduction or intellectual intuition of truths beyond experience as 
the beginning of philosophical reasoning (cf. Fréchette, 2012, 9). Both 
Brentano and Kant therefore, start from intuitions or representational 
contents and build logical and conceptual truths from the evidence 
of what is given phenomenologically. The important difference lies in 
how each conceptualizes givenness and its limits. Kant’s transcendental 
approach, as we’ve seen, places much more severe constraints on the 
direct givenness of the structures of the self or inner sense. Brentano 
opts for what can be called, from a Kantian perspective, a form of intel-
lectual intuition pertaining to the cognitive ground and the content of 
presentations grasped using inner perception. 
 As was pointed out above, however, in the PES; Brentano’s doctrine 
of inner perception is static. We noted above how in the PES he ignores 
the temporal ground of the evidence given in inner perception. If we 
ascribe an immediate intuitive component to the same evidence, then 
Brentano’s reliance on this static internalist or intuitive criterion for 
epistemic warrant becomes equally problematic. One reason why this is 
so, and a consequence of Brentano’s method itself, is that if intuitions 
do not correspond (or fail to arrive) at the same interpretation of the 
immediate evidence of inner perception as apprehended, for example, 
by different thinkers, then it is difficult to decide how controversy over 
precisely what the given is can be decided. This becomes especially 
problematic if the irreconcilable immediately grasped insights are also 
held to be carefully arrived at through reliance on the evidence of inner 
perception. To face this challenge, Brentano offers only his inductive 
covering law model of science as a communal activity that, in carefully 
observing the facts, will function as a self-correcting system of explan-
ation as it aims at universal truth. Tensions revealed with the foun-
dations of this model of science make it clear that it is not sufficient 
safeguard against systematic theoretical challenges. For this reason, 
Husserl, following Kant, believed that a synthetic element was involved 
in Brentano’s immediately intuitive evidence grounding mental acts as 
well as the ontological conditions permitting the unity of consciousness. 
Furthermore, according to Husserl, the foundations of logical and math-
ematical axioms also included, he decided, after applying Brentano’s 
act psychology to the available evidence; a synthetic and non-analytic 
component (cf. Husserl, 1900–01 [2000]). Given the synthetic aspect to 
what Brentano took to be the structures of experience, Husserl also even-
tually embraced a transcendental reading of consciousness as a neces-
sary step in epistemologically clarifying the ground for the appearance 

240 From Psychology to Phenomenology
of evidence (cf. Husserl, 1913). Brentano could never bring himself to 
accept Husserl’s transcendental transformation of his empirical psych-
ology. In certain ways this is regrettable as Husserl’s penetrating studies 
of consciousness and the epistemological foundations of logic and 
psychology are still important and relevant corrective accounts of these 
matters. Nonetheless, where Husserl develops Brentano’s thought in a 
transcendental direction focused on his methods of reduction, there 
is less useful material for philosophy of mind. Husserl’s later use of the 
epoché, for example, tends to dissolve any connection of the mind from 
nature or ontology. The epoché or reductions are carried out in such a 
radical manner that causal accounts of cognition and reference to tran-
scendent conditions for experience become problematic in Husserl’s 
transcendental phenomenology. Furthermore, in Brentano’s defence, 
in not taking a Kantian turn, his system provides a challenge to Kant’s 
project. The Kantian synthetic a priori, for example, can indeed be seen 
to be troublesome especially where the categories of the understanding 
are said to be established on essentially the same “synthetic a priori” 
ground that Kant uses to prove the validity of his schematism.  
 8.4  Relevance of act psychology to contemporary 
philosophy of mind 
 Here we will summarize the problems and articulate what is still of value 
in Brentano’s framework. Aristotle distinguished between processes and 
events by saying that the latter were complete in themselves at every 
moment and not merely parts of an underlying movement or chain in a 
causal series (Aristotle, 1999, 279–80\NE, Bk X, 1174a 15–1174b 15).  15 In 
most contemporary philosophy of mind we find the above Aristotelian 
distinctions completely lacking. There are only events and the mental 
is a kind of event. As an event it is not quantitatively different from any 
other. Mental acts are part of a series of events that can be reduced to 
the ultimately non-mental foundation of the physiological correlates of 
the body and these in turn reduced to material forces explained by laws 
that are broadly physical. The problem of mental causation, in other 
words, is not only avoided but is subsumed under  ceterus paribus laws of 
physics conceptualized in a closed way. All genuine scientific explan-
ation of the mind is also somehow said to be reducible to these explana-
tory models of the hard sciences (which can be said to utilize physical 
efficient causes alone in their attempts to provide the ultimate, even if 
unknown, explanation for phenomena like consciousness and mental 
reference). On this view not only does mental causation cease to be 

The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology 241
a problem but the reality of consciousness and thought, volition and 
meaning itself can be ignored and reduced to (as yet) unknown physical 
sources or laws that will eventually make sense of the strange properties 
manifested by these higher level phenomena. 
 Brentano’s system provides an alternative framework for analyzing 
the mental and its relation to the physical but, as outlined above, the 
system is not without its own problems. Despite the achievements of 
Brentano’s system, outlined in the PES, we have criticized it on several 
grounds. These criticisms included the epistemological foundations 
established by the theory of inner perception and the deflationary 
semantic doctrines presented therein, which are connected to an exist-
ential theory of judgment. The latter positions (indirectly related to the 
former) stated that both intentional and intensional meanings could 
be accounted for through the reduction of meaningful terms to pres-
entation contents affirmed as existing by the thinker. At this point a 
viable strategy to modify Brentano’s doctrines in order to advance a 
neo-Brentanian position that rejects the intuitionism and semantic 
reductionism of the 1874 system can be offered. In this way it can be 
shown how contemporary philosophers can expand on the doctrines of 
the PES and use its doctrines to fruitfully engage with existing positions 
in contemporary philosophy of mind. 
 The basic challenge to Brentano’s doctrine of inner perception was 
said to be the ultimately temporal conditions under which evidence was 
presented to a thinker. As extending beyond the present moment, the 
givenness of insight or retrospective certainty obtained in evident judg-
ments appeared too limited to count as infallible or apodictic. Therefore, 
the intuitive connection to the thinker’s own mental activity has to be 
interpreted or mediated by judgments that cannot, however, be said to 
be the absolute foundation of all available evidence. Nonetheless, we 
defended Brentano’s one-level theory of consciousness and maintained 
that it was a proper foundation for establishing the unity of conscious-
ness. This, in turn, was said to be a necessary condition for higher level 
thought. Further tensions were introduced when Brentano joined the 
evidence for the unity of consciousness to inner perception and makes 
the phenomenal unifying intentional acts, which are non-substantial, 
ultimately self-unifying and persisting conditions for personhood and 
thought. According to Brentano’s view, this Humean or Millian under-
standing of the unity of consciousness is threatened if inner perception 
is called into doubt. Instead, the unity must be shown and revealed 
through the immediate intuitive certainty that is only provided by 
inner perception. That Brentano himself noticed a problem with the 

242 From Psychology to Phenomenology
system of 1874 is evident from his later writings. Brentano himself 
eventually attempted to overcome these tensions by conceding that 
the self or the unity of consciousness is a substantial thing or entity 
(albeit non-physical in nature). Brentano’s later solution was formulated 
by theoretically keeping with his nominalist emphasis on immediate 
presentations as directing us to things and thus avoiding  abstracta or 
non-concrete or what can be called “Platonic” entities in his ontology. 
For the later Brentano,  
 the expression “to think” ( vorstellen ) is univocal. To think is always 
to think of something. Since “to think” is univocal, the term “some-
thing” must also be univocal. But there is no generic concept that 
can be common both to things and to non-things. Hence if “some-
thing” denotes a thing at one time, it cannot denote a non-thing-an 
impossibility, say-at another time. (TE, 122)  
 Preserving the infallible givenness of the act to the thinker (in inner 
perception), the later Brentano is therefore pushed to accept that the self 
is indeed a substance or real thing (and only realia or concrete things 
can be said to exist in Brentano’s mature ontology). However, the notion 
of substance is interpreted in a quite un-Aristotelian way. In his later 
thought, through his use of descriptive psychology, Brentano came to 
hold that the Aristotelian notions of  substance and  accident were unsatis-
factory. The original Aristotelian definition of substance was said to be 
something that contains, or has, accidents. This is opposed in Brentano’s 
later views, according to which an accident can contain another acci-
dent and certain substances may not have accidents at all.  16  
 This solution to tensions present in the PES is, however, less than 
satisfactory. It exacerbates the problems inherent in the need for articu-
lating a coherent semantic theory (see Section 8.2). Meaning, on the 
above reist view, becomes a species of irrealia, connected only to the 
thinking substance known as the person. Nonetheless, the PES contains 
other suggestions for extending its doctrines without needing to move 
the system in the reist position the later Brentano takes. If we examine 
the doctrine of intentionality, we see that the underlying directedness 
of mental acts (described in Sections 4.2ff) presents a dual emphasis 
of intentional directedness constituting both an ontological (or hori-
zontal intentionality) and psychological (or vertical) sense of presen-
tations of objects. Objects, on this view, can be viewed as maximally 
general or, in Reinhardt Grossman’s words, “systematically ambiguous” 
(cf. Twardowski, 1977, ix). The ontological unification of mental acts, 

The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology 243
we propose, should be taken as providing for the unity of phenomenal 
consciousness without being limited to the psychologically revealed 
evidence, narrowly conceived as it is in Brentano’s system, to inner 
perception alone. Once this is done, we see that Brentano’s one-level 
conception of the unity of consciousness can be made compatible with 
existing attempts to account for the identity of the self and the persist-
ence of phenomenal consciousness in recent philosophy of mind. 
 Writing on this matter, Barry Dainton and Tim Bayne for example, 
have argued that what is essential to unifying the identity of a thinker 
or conscious subject is a criterion that runs deeper than mere (Lockean 
or neo-Lockean) psychological identity of memories or different mental 
states reduced to functional or computational aspects of the body. In 
their paper “Consciousness as a Guide to Personal Persistence” they take 
the position that the unity of consciousness, the necessary condition 
for personal identity, must be established on a foundation of phenom-
enal continuity of self. This phenomenal unity of consciousness will 
subsequently underlie physical and psychological persistence and unify 
the experiences of the subject (Dainton and Bayne, 2005). 
 According to Dainton and Bayne,  
 Rather than regarding persons as primarily things that are conscious, 
we regard them as things that are capable of being conscious, as beings 
that possess capacities for experience. A typical human person possesses 
a vast range of experiential capacities, only a few of which are active 
at any one time. When a person becomes unconscious, none of their 
experiential capacities are active, but the capacities nonetheless remain 
in existence: the irretrievable loss of the capacity for consciousness is 
what differentiates being merely unconscious from being dead. Or at 
least, this is a plausible view for anyone who inclines to an experience-
based account of what persons are. (Dainton and Bayne, 2005, 565)  
 However, while Dainton and Bayne’s theory provides a sufficient frame-
work to account for the psychological conditions that must be met for 
philosophically explaining the possibility of thought or “higher-order” 
consciousness and persistence of self, the ontological framework they 
present to ground their insights is less than satisfactory. For example, 
we are told that an “experience producer” [EP], must be introduced. 
This is, in turn, described as,  
 any object or system which is capable of generating experience, of 
one or more specified kinds, when appropriately stimulated, by virtue 

244 From Psychology to Phenomenology
of the laws of nature. Your brain currently qualifies as an EP, but so 
too (probably) are lesser parts of it, e.g., the right and left halves. 
Since to qualify as an EP an object must actually be able to produce 
experience, your brain is not essentially an EP: it seems unlikely that 
a typical human brain is capable of producing experience during the 
first few weeks of its (foetal) existence, and adult brains can survive 
damage which completely eliminates their experiential capacities. 
Of course there may well be EPs very different from your brain or any 
of its parts. (Dainton and Bayne, 2005, 565)  
 In other words, the possibility of consciousness is reduced to a vague 
attempt to move possibility conditions in the direction of an emergence 
view or higher-order account that will somehow instantiate conscious-
ness in an object or system in a physicalist framework. Although Brentano 
would not dispute the fact that human consciousness requires a physio-
logical substratum, he would add that the phenomenological qualities 
the mental possesses, such as intentionality, require a non-reductive 
account of its possibility conditions in order to be properly accounted 
for by a sufficiently sophisticated ontology that will take normative 
claims and the transcendent properties inherent to the objectivity of 
conceptual thought into account. 
 On a reformulated Brentanian account of these matters, we can say that 
the mental is intrinsically representational in that it can present objects 
or contents within the real unity of consciousness without the represen-
tational basis for consciousness being reduced or simplified to physical 
states or events. Psychical activities, however, can be said to be necessary 
but not sufficient conditions for accounting for the representational role 
of consciousness. Objects and meanings can be said to be represented 
because of the intrinsic intentionality and representational status of 
consciousness. In the PES however, we do not start by moving behind 
experience and building a model of mental life on an objectivist view of 
the mental, interpreted as emerging as a consequence of the instantia-
tion of physical laws. This last point is important because, on currently 
existing models of physics, questions of teleology and meaning cannot be 
articulated. If we follow Brentano and attempt to account for the inten-
tionality of the mental and its revealing of normative structures on an 
ontological framework, we can highlight the relationship of psycholog-
ical phenomena to less obvious attributes such as intensional reference in 
speech acts and belief states. On this model of understanding, perception 
and belief, the meaning of different terms and the language within which 
reference to objects is expressed in propositional terms is not reduced to 

The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology 245
merely physical laws. Although Brentano’s semantic theory was regarded 
as problematic above, this does not mean that his framework cannot be 
developed in a different direction. A Brentanian approach to developing 
a theory of mental reference in philosophy of mind would ground the 
intensional reference (the contentfulness of our thoughts) on the inten-
tionality (their mental directedness) of consciousness. In contemporary 
philosophy of mind, however, the validity between valid and invalid 
forms of argumentation is said to be greatly facilitated only by a closer 
examination, and better understanding, of logical and linguistic forms 
of expressions. Following the lead of Gottlob Frege, and later, Bertrand 
Russell, twentieth-century philosophers worked hard to elaborate a new 
mathematical logic that, in ideal cases, it was hoped would replace both 
traditional representational accounts of the mind and natural language 
itself in providing a better evaluation of philosophical claims (such as 
existence claims for objects of experience). This emphasis on linguistic 
and logical form was anticipated by Brentano, although, by contrast, 
his approach preserved an interest in ontology and intentionality. To 
highlight the value and importance of the above aspects of Brentano’s 
philosophy, we can compare it to still influential alternative theories of 
judgment, namely those of Russell and Frege. 
 Taking the same non-existent object example that was used above [i.e. 
“Pegasus”]; we can here say something about mental reference and the 
connection of thought to objects. We saw above how Brentano’s posi-
tion, for all of its shortcomings, nonetheless allowed for a focus on the 
mental and the logical simultaneously. This was facilitated through his 
psychological/philosophical thesis of intentional inexistence of objects. 
According to Frege’s ontology, however, the name or term correlating to 
the presentation of “Pegasus” must instead be reduced to its extension 
in a symbolically quantified domain of objects. As the mythological 
creature Pegasus has no real extension or class or domain that it refers 
to, it must therefore be placed in an empty domain. Thus, Frege writes, 
“[t]houghts in myth and fiction do not need to have truth-values”. For 
Frege a sentence containing a meaningless proper name is neither true 
nor false and if it expresses a thought at all, then that thought belongs 
to fiction. In any case the sentence using a reference to the proper name 
Pegasus has no meaning (cf. Frege, 1997, 194). But is it not only coun-
terintuitive to say that “I am thinking of Pegasus” has no meaning 
whatsoever, but also very limiting for philosophy of mind. According 
to Bertrand Russell, similarly, on his own theory of definite descriptions 
(mentioned above), it is impossible for a person to have a thought about 
something unless he or she knows which particular individual in the 

246 From Psychology to Phenomenology
world they are thinking about. Our fictional horse “Pegasus” on the 
Russellian view, would therefore, not be found in the world and subse-
quently could only be possible as what can be classed as an “indefinite 
description” or more precisely a description of nothing. Because no defi-
nite description or acquaintance could be had of Pegasus, Russell would 
conclude that the object we are directed to in this case is, once again, 
meaningless (Russell, 1993, 48). Both Frege’s and Russell’s positions are 
less intuitively plausible than a development of Brentano’s claim that 
when we have Pegasus before the mind we are related to “Pegasus” as 
an intentional (not an existing) object. Thus the relationship of logic 
and logical syntax to cognition and perception can be accounted for on 
Brentano’s view (with certain necessary modifications given the short-
comings outlined above) as they cannot on the strictly extentionalist 
positions. Furthermore, because of Frege and Russell’s linguistic focus 
on terms and signitive intensions (as opposed to the “intentional” in 
Brentano’s sense), we can only very narrowly relate to objects insofar 
as they are quantified and correspond to the extensions of objects in a 
delimited logical domain. Nonetheless, while it is a domain that mirrors 
the categorical structure of the subject and predicate form of language,  17 
it is a narrow and artificial language that this system creates. While the 
extensionalist model has the virtue of being maximally general and 
truth preserving; it has the misfortune of reducing all conceptual and 
cognitive apprehension of meaning to an impoverished ontological 
model of irreducibly private and subjective mental acts. For Brentano, 
these acts are separated from the non-mental or self-contained objects 
or logical terms of reference. Connecting the divide between thought or 
presentation and truth-value and “proposition” on this model presents 
a challenge just as perplexing as the reductionism of Brentano’s existen-
tial theory of judgment read as relating mental acts to the objectivity of 
truth, and perhaps more so as these later theories reject the ontology of 
the mental as intentional that Brentano introduces.  

247
 Franz Brentano’s writings have not received the attention they 
deserve in contemporary philosophy of mind. The above study has 
attempted to make the case that there is no objective reason why 
Brentano’s contributions in this area should not be actively taken 
up by contemporary thinkers. Outlining the original Aristotelian 
context of Brentano’s studies allowed us to contextualize the system 
established in his magnum opus the  Psychology from an Empirical 
Standpoint (1874). In the presentation of the system developed in the 
PES, we showed how Brentano’s doctrines touch on still important 
matters in contemporary philosophy of mind. Amongst these were 
discussed: the intentionality of mental acts, the identity and unity 
of the stream of consciousness, the problem of representational 
consciousness, the mind-body problem, and matters pertaining to 
the individuation of thought contents. In giving a critical overview of 
the PES, it was also shown how Brentano’s introduction of a descrip-
tive method and his theoretical focus on phenomenal consciousness 
can present a viable alternative to leading theories in psychology and 
philosophy. Higher-order theories about thought and perception, for 
example, are prone to both  ad hoc assumptions about the ontological 
relationship of the mental to the physical and also frequently beg the 
question against what is arguably a philosophically important point 
about how to properly articulate the foundations of philosophy of 
mind. As a discipline exploring mental phenomena, philosophy of 
mind must give a coherent and consistent account of what are osten-
sibly phenomenal relationships (interconnected mental acts) rather 
than focus primarily on physical or psychological events. Brentano’s 
thought, in doing the above, is therefore a much needed corrective 
source in modern philosophy of mind. 
 Conclusion  

248 From Psychology to Phenomenology
 Tim Crane has commented that, “it is hard to see Brentano’s discus-
sions of intentionality as something which we can interact usefully 
with today in any depth” (Crane, 2007, 33). Given what was said above, 
however, we can conclude that Crane’s comments are, perhaps, prema-
ture.  1 Nonetheless, even with the virtues listed above, we did not hesi-
tate to point out problems with Brentano’s system in the above study; 
amongst them was noted the epistemological problem of securing 
immediate or intuitive evidence for the foundations of knowledge in 
Brentano’s system. This problem was claimed to be due to Brentano’s 
reliance on inner perception as the immediate infallible and adequately 
given source of epistemological evidence for his system. We argued that 
the intuitive givenness of this descriptive “ground,” upon which axio-
matic foundations for both formal and philosophical principles could be 
“established,” is prone to the challenge that even the most self-evident 
of insights can be interpreted in divergent ways. This interpretative 
challenge against the viability of Brentano’s central epistemological 
tenet of “inner perception”, can be corroborated on purely phenomeno-
logical grounds as well. According to Brentano all consciousness and all 
properly conscious or mental acts are intentional. This claim was chal-
lenged above, where it was pointed out that there are mental acts (angst, 
indefinite moods, etc) that are not explicitly or immediately intentional 
at all (cf. 5.1 above). Although this fact may be viewed by some as a 
rejection of the intentionality criterion for demarcating the mental, 
we argued instead that it is better seen as an indication that the prop-
erly or intrinsically intentional properties that inhere in phenomenal 
consciousness need not present themselves intuitively and immediately 
in all our experience with the strict distinctness and clarity demanded 
by Brentano. Therefore, in connecting the challenge of what can be 
called Brentano’s essentially “Cartesian formulation of inner percep-
tion and principle of intuitionism” in his epistemology to “the problem 
of the givenness of evidence in immediate insight” substance is given 
to the transcendental critique of the sphere of evidence articulated in 
Part III above. 
 This leads us directly into the final important criticism leveled against 
Brentano in our study, namely that the meaning of the concepts he 
works with, as well as the treatment of meaning in general, is inad-
equately dealt with in the PES due to the narrow and deflationary 
empirical foundation (highlighted by Brentano’s privileging of the pres-
entational ground) upon which all meaning is reduced. Nonetheless, 
even with the above shortcomings, several positive insights are worth 
noting about the system in the PES. 

Conclusion 249
 First, there is a fundamental difference in both methodological 
approach and underlying assumptions towards the understanding of 
philosophy of mind present in Brentano’s system in the PES versus 
existing alternate models. In much of Part III of our study, aspects of 
these differences were elucidated and arguments were provided for why 
the system of the PES is still useful in providing resources for exam-
ining the mind in a philosophical manner. Amongst the most useful 
of these resources was said to be Brentano’s doctrine of the unity of 
consciousness as forming a basis for intentionally directed mental acts 
as a model for establishing a significant criterion for distinguishing 
conscious from non-conscious activity. The descriptive analysis of these 
mental acts was deemed important by Brentano to establish a theoret-
ically coherent empirical psychology. Before the experimental methods 
and laboratory findings of physiological or genetic research and object-
ivist findings of neuroscience (or other research into the mental) can be 
properly interpreted, Brentano maintained, we need to first understand 
the phenomena under investigation. Brentano’s philosophical and 
phenomenological investigation into immediate experience and mental 
life, we can conclude, can still prove useful especially now that research 
into brain physiology is advancing at a faster pace than ever before. 
Brentano’s understanding of consciousness as intrinsically representa-
tional and (against structuralist and functionalist readings) teleogically 
directed to both its own contents and the mind-transcendent world is 
a topic that deserves more serious consideration by contemporary phil-
osopher’s and psychologists. 
 Writing over forty years ago, David Bakan gave testimony to the 
victory of experimental psychology of content over Brentano’s phenom-
enological focus on experience in his act psychology.  
 Brentano ... , at the time of the founding of modern experimental 
psychology, argued that psychology should be empirical rather 
than experimental; that the experiment was too far removed from 
experience to be able to tell us much that was significant. The very 
distinction – let alone comparison – between the empirical and the 
experimental is one which many psychologists today may find hard 
to understand. In the culture of contemporary psychology the words 
are used synonymously (Bakan, 1967, xii).  
 We can conclude by stating that Brentano’s system makes an implicit 
distinction, and a still valuable one, between the general natural sciences 
and the special sciences arguing that the special sciences (such as act 

250 From Psychology to Phenomenology
psychology and metaphysics) have legitimacy but a different scope than 
the positive sciences. Within psychology Brentano’s focus on imme-
diate data or the given as phenomena (i.e. both external and internal) 
presents a still relevant challenge to mechanistic and behavioristic 
paradigms. The focus on internal or mental acts that characterize act 
psychology however is not a method that relies on introspection and 
in this way it avoids the most egregious short-comings of internalist 
approaches to examining the mental. Brentano’s work, in effect, moves 
beyond psychology and opens the door to phenomenology. Brentano’s 
descriptive method can provide a valuable tool for examining the data 
of experience and how our experience relates us to transcendent objects. 
This latter aspect of his project eschews reductionism and therefore, 
can be viewed as an anticipation of recent attempts to broaden empiri-
cist methodology using conceptual analysis. Brentano’s broadly causal 
and ontological framework for grounding experience, furthermore, is 
one that was both downplayed and often ignored by much subsequent 
phenomenology and hermeneutics. We have suggested that this is an 
aspect of his thought that can be exploited to help advance both phil-
osophy of mind and modern philosophy in general.  

251
 Introduction 
 1 .   Psychologie vom empirischen  Standpunkte, originally published in 1874 by 
Duncker & Humblot, Leipzig. The Second expanded edition  Psychologie vom 
empirischen  Standpunkt appeared in 1924 and was published by Felix Meiner, 
Leipzig. The standard and only widely available English translation is by 
A. C. Rancurello, D. B. Terrell, & L. McAlister, first published in 1973; the 
latest edition, edited with an introduction by Peter Simons, is published 
as  Psychology from an  Empirical Standpoint , London: Routledge Press, 1995. 
Henceforth the English edition will be referred to simply as  Psychology or 
PES, the German text will be cited as PES-G. Where the available English 
translation has been changed or altered in any way, this will be noted, 
following, the quoted text.  
 2 .  Although there are always exceptions, in the case of Brentano’s PES they 
do seem to prove the rule. That is, while there have been many full length 
studies of Brentano’s descriptive psychology and analyses of its philosophical 
import, such as those by Antos Rancurello (1968), Liliana Albertazzi (2001 
& 2006), Robin Rollinger (1999), Arkadiusz Chrudzimski (2001), etc., many 
of these studies either view the PES as merely a stepping stone in Brentano’s 
development or read contemporary or non-Brentanian interests into the 
system he introduces there. Thus, while valuable, they do not make any 
sustained effort to evaluate the importance of Brentano’s 1874 work as a 
systematic framework for understanding philosophy of mind.  
 3 .  And it should not be forgotten that Brentano’s writings also had a strong 
influence on the early thought of Husserl’s one-time research assistant: 
Martin Heidegger. Heidegger claimed to have originally derived his famous 
focus on the meaning of “Being” from his reading of Brentano’s first book 
on Aristotle.  
 4  .   In the realm of philosophical semantics Brentano’s ideas directly influenced 
the theory of reference of Kazimier Twardowski and the semantic and linguistic 
theories of Anton Marty, Alexius Meinong, and Alois Höffler as well as the 
early research into semiotics and philosophy of mind conducted by Edmund 
Husserl. Regarding classical logic, beside his own attempts to reform and 
clarify traditional syllogistic theory, Brentano’s importance can once again 
be seen through his influence on Meinong and Höffler, and also, very indir-
ectly, on Lesniewski, Lesniewski and other founders of the so-called Polish 
school and other founders of the so-called Polish school in formal logic, who 
were influenced by Brentano’s student Twardowski. Regarding the develop-
ment of modern logic, Brentano’s influence is, therefore, even more indirect 
but nonetheless present in Polish logic and can be traced directly to the later 
theories of Alfred Tarski. Brentano’s influence on object theory and ontology 
are notable through his very direct influence on Meinong, Carl Stumpf and, 
once again, the early Husserl. Finally in Gestalt psychology, Christian von 
 Notes 

252 Notes
Erhenfels was a student of Brentano’s and so, again, was Meinong. Through 
Meinong’s influence many Brentanian ideas went on to influence the thought 
of Stephan Witasek who in turn transmitted this influence to Vittorio Benussi, 
a collaborator with Köhler and Koffka – the pioneers who set the foundations 
of the modern Gestalt school in Berlin. Various studies have been put forward 
concerning the connection and influence of Brentano’s doctrines and lectures 
on the writings of Freud. See Merlan 1945 & 1949, Barclay, 1964, Fancher 1977, 
Heaton, 1981, Wertz 1993, Cohen, 2000, and Tauber, 2009 for only some of the 
extant studies (and see for details, SB, 1–25, CCB, 277–97 and Part III below). 
Rudolf Steiner, the German philosopher and spiritualist, was also a student of 
Brentano’s in Vienna (see Steiner, 1973).  
 5 .  The inheritors and developers of Brentano’s project, that is, the later phenom-
enologists and the psychoanalysts who, by contrast, have had a direct and 
marked impact on much twentieth-century philosophy of mind.  
 6 .   See for example Titchener, 1921; Murphy, 1949, 149–73; Boring, 1950, 
316–44; and Hothersall, 1984, 83–99. And see Teo, 2005, 40, for an account 
of Wundt’s significance for later historians of mainstream psychology, and 
Kusch, 1999, for Wundt’s place and importance in the social history of psych-
ology in Germany in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.  
 7 .   For example, in Boring’s influential and still readable  A History of 
 Experimental  Psychology , Wundt and his students receive the most attention, 
while the contributions of Brentano and his students are marginalized. In 
the preface to the 1929 edition, Boring writes, “Naturally the words ‘experi-
mental psychology’ must mean, in my title, what they meant to Wundt and 
what they mean to nearly all psychologists for fifty or sixty years – that is 
to say the psychology of the generalized, human, normal, adult mind as 
revealed in the psychological laboratory” (Boring, 1950, x).  
 8 .  Wundt writes, “Physiological psychology is, therefore, first of all  psych-
ology . It has in view the same principal object upon which all other forms of 
psychological exposition are directed:  the investigation of  conscious processes 
in the modes of connexion peculiar to them . It is not a province of physiology; 
nor does it attempt, as has been mistakenly asserted, to derive or explain the 
phenomena of the psychical from those of the physical life.”  
 9 .   Which would later be present and fruitfully exploited (albeit in a radic-
ally transformed way) in the writings and theories of Brentano’s one-time 
student Sigmund Freud and also in thinkers such as Wittgenstein.  
 10 .  Therefore it can be argued that it was Brentano who helped establish 
the foundations for the above distinctions between the natural and the 
human sciences. Brentano’s assessment of the distinctions would influ-
ence Dilthey and indirectly shape his thought through his adaption 
of Brentano’s understanding of mental acts as distinct from physical 
phenomena. Brentano would also influence Dilthey and others in treating 
of and in making the study of direct experience the foundation of epistem-
ology. And the above, it will be shown, was largely the focus of Brentano’s 
PES. It is well known that the early Dilthey showed an awareness of 
these works (see Dilthey 1894, for example). Later it will be argued that 
Brentano’s writings (including his published writings) form a very useful 
complement and contrast to the work of Dilthey. It was probably no acci-
dent that the merging of central ideas from the two thinkers, in the forms 

Notes 253
of a synthesis between phenomenology and ontology, on the one hand, 
and the joining of  Lebensphilosophie and historicism, on the other, formed 
central features of the thought of Heidegger and what later came to be 
known as “existentialism”.  
 11  .   Essentially, and at its deepest level, this is the problem of making sense of the 
foundations of the intellectual structure of the human world. In Brentano’s 
philosophy of mind the easy appeal to objective and quantifiable structures 
or contents for understanding purposeful mental life is forsaken. Brentano 
attempts instead to begin by descriptively attaining important insights into 
less easily explained, more complex and less fully objectifiable or determin-
able phenomena, such as the will and consciousness. Although Brentano 
begins with description, he usually moves from there into analysis and 
classification, all the while giving what can be called the a priori aspects 
of certain fundamental elements of cognition their full due. Much of the 
tenability of the above method will be seen to hang on how we can inter-
pret the controversial notion of “phenomena” and also how Brentano’s 
essentially neo-Aristotelian reading of scientific knowledge is understood. 
It will be argued below that Brentano’s work still has profound implications 
for philosophy of mind.  
 12  .   Brentano tackles the problem of the epistemological foundation of know-
ledge by distinguishing between what he calls cognitive and non-cognitive 
psychic acts and distinguishing both from content-less physical phenomena. 
The underlying structure of the problem of relating the two classes of experi-
ence and justifying our subject-dependent beliefs with their objective corre-
lates has not, I will argue, changed significantly from how it is elaborated by 
Brentano in the PES.  
 13  .   It is not for nothing that Gustav Bergmann writes about how Brentano’s 
thought anticipates the linguistic turn in later thinkers (see Bergmann, 
1967, 234). Nonetheless, in linking intentional relations to conscious-
ness, Brentano’s work is decidedly mentalist, without, it will be argued, 
succumbing to subjectivist or strong psychologism in epistemology. The 
avoidance or proper incorporation of the mental-dependent or irreducibly 
subjective from the non-mental or non-psychological aspects of science and 
experience are still a pressing theoretical problem. For later examples of 
accounts attempting to reconcile the two, see the writings of C.P. Snow 
where the above distinction forms what he called “the two cultures”. In 
philosophy of mind, a more recent reworking of Snow’s distinctions was 
made by Thomas Nagel in his book  The View from  Nowhere (Nagel, 1985).  
 14  .   For recent attempts to do justice to the intrinsically representational aspects 
of certain cognitive or psychological and phenomenal states, see Searle, 
1980; Dennet, 1991; and Chalmers, 1996.  
 15  .   This is especially true in the social sciences and specifically in psychology; 
but the tension between the subjective and the objective has implications in 
other fields including ethics, economics, physics and, of course, philosophy. 
See Chapter 7 below for more on this subject.  
 16  .   See Chisholm and Haller (eds), 1978; and Smith, 1994.  
 17  .   In this regard, see Zahavi 2004, who turns away from Brentano with the 
conclusion that his work has been superseded by that of Husserl, Heidegger, 
and Sartre. See also Crane 2006, who rejects Brentano as unable to provide 

254 Notes
the rigor and clarity that contemporary analytic approaches to the phil-
osophy of mind have developed.  
 18  .   Here we can touch on only some of these problems and in a cursory manner; 
later, in the course of what follows, they will be more directly addressed and 
dealt with, see especially Part III below.  
 19 .   Such as the radically nominalist features of entities Brentano arrives at in 
this later approach. See Terrel, 1966; Bergmann, 1967 (especially Book Two, 
Part III, 221–320); Smith 2006; and Chrudzimski, 2002/03.  
 20  .   See Chrudzimski 2001, 3. While sharing Chrudzimski’s belief that the 
published writings (more specifically the posthumously published works of 
Brentano with their heavy editorial revisions) can distort Brentano’s devel-
opment (and nowhere more so than when it comes to insights into his earlier 
theory of intentionality); I will distance my approach from Chrudzimski’s 
insofar as he casts a distinct modern analytic mold onto Brentano’s theories. 
This is so both regarding the aims as well as the objectives and interpret-
ation of certain Brentanian doctrines. By contrast, I will assume below 
that however many aspects of Brentano’s semantics and epistemological 
analysis anticipate later trends and methods in, for example, philosophy 
of logic, philosophy of mind, and philosophy of language; nonetheless the 
attempted solutions Brentano outlines must be viewed in their historical 
context first and foremost and only afterwards should critical reconstruc-
tion be attempted.  
 21  .   However amongst later thinkers (and especially much more recent thinkers 
influenced by Brentano in both the analytical as well as the phenomeno-
logical traditions) frequent borrowings of Brentano’s doctrines are often 
read through later explicitly non-Brentanian concerns. Therefore the 
reading of the PES is frequently (perhaps even unintentionally) changed 
from an objective assessment of the project Brentano was trying to estab-
lish in the PES to interpretations and distortions that can be very one-sided. 
All the while it is often simultaneously claimed that these interpretations 
represent Brentano’s thought faithfully (for more on this see Bartok, 2005).  
 22  .   There is a case to be made that the misunderstandings and misinterpreta-
tions actually began in Brentano’s lifetime; some even carried out by his 
very own reinterpretation of his thought, no less so than by the borrow-
ings and transformations of his doctrines made by his students and imme-
diate followers. See for example, Albertazzi, Libardi, and Poli (eds) (1996); 
Rollinger (1999); and Poli (ed.) (1998).  
 1 Brentano’s Intellectual Background 
 1  .   For a fuller biographical overview see Oscar Kraus’s (1919) and the intro-
ductory essay “Biographical Sketch of Franz Brentano” in McAllister (ed.), 
1977 (TPB, 1–9). See especially both Carl Stumpf’s and Edmund Husserl’s 
recollections (collected in both Kraus & McAllister  opus cited supra ), 
Chapters 2 & 3 (“Reminiscences of Franz Brentano”, TPB, 10–55) for an 
account of Brentano’s early and late teaching activity. The memoir by Mario 
Puglisi (Puglisi, 1924), contains a short history and sketch of Brentano’s 
life. Another good source for information on Brentano’s early intellectual 

Notes 255
background, collecting letters from family members, and giving an account 
of his academic development can be found in Chapter One of Albertazzi 
(2006).  
 2 .   For an overview of German history during this period, cf. Orlow, 1999 and 
Robinson, 1952. Hailing from the liberal central south-west of Germany, 
Brentano would never support the Prussian dominated agenda of German 
unity, and in fact until the end of his days he was a critic of Prussian mili-
tancy. In 1919, after his teacher’s death, Husserl would write of Brentano’s 
political views: “He stayed aloof from current politics, but the idea of a 
Greater Germany (in the old South German sense) was dear to his heart; it 
was something he had grown up with, and something which, along with 
his antipathy toward Prussia, he retained all his life” (Husserl, 1976, 49). A 
relative of Brentano’s, the lawyer Lorenz Brentano, participated indirectly 
in the Baden revolutions of 1848–49. On 21 September 1848, after riots 
broke out in Frankfurt, an aristocratic Republican minded journalist by the 
name Gustav Struve (who had been banished to Switzerland for helping to 
organize the first Baden revolution), marched back into Germany and took 
control of the city hall of the small town of Lörrach. From there he led a 
march to Freiburg in an attempt to usher in a German Republic. Arrested 
by Prussian troops, he was defended, along with other revolutionaries, by 
Lorenz Brentano. When the third revolution broke out, on 15 May 1849, 
Lorenz Brentano was declared head of the constitutional assembly of the 
new dictatorship. He quickly renounced the position, however, and subse-
quently fled, first to Switzerland then to the United States (cf. Robinson, 
1952, 173–6).  
 3  .   Information confirmed verbally to the author by the current Baroness 
Frau Angela Baronin von Brentano on a tour of the  Brentanohaus in 
Oestrich-Winkel im Rhiengau, early January 2011. See Krauss (1919), Puglisi 
(1924), and Libardi (SB, 25), amongst others, for reports of this claim.  
 4  .   Goethe, who was a frequent visitor to the Brentano’s home, referred to his 
hosts as “the beloved and esteemed Brentano family”. Goethe’s quote is 
cited in the German by Albertazzi: “ geliebten und vehrherten  Familie  Brentano ” 
cf. Albertazzi, 2006, 8).  
 5 .   The dissertation was later published as Brentano’s first book:  On the  Manifold 
Senses of  Being in  Aristotle (1975), see below for an outline and discussion of 
this work. The German title is  Von der mannigfachen  Bedeutung des  Seienden 
bei  Aristoteles (1862). This text has an interesting history of its own. For 
example, it was said to provide the inspiration for the younger German 
thinker Martin Heidegger’s initial excursions into metaphysics and phil-
osophy. Cf. Heidegger, 1959, 93).  
 6 .   This view of Brentano as groomed early on for the priesthood is impor-
tant to note, as many commentators and intellectual historians view his 
interests in philosophy as arising indirectly from his training in theology. 
Friedrich Stadler, for example, writes of how “Brentano studied theology at 
Munich, Berlin and Würzburg and was ordained as a priest ... [and] imme-
diately afterwards he decided to study philosophy, particularly Aristotle, 
as a contrast to speculative German idealism” (cf. Stadler [1991]/2001, 95). 
The above merits citation because this view, i.e. Brentano as philosophizing 
priest or neo-Scholastic thinker, is so pervasive in the secondary literature. 

256 Notes
For example, the renowned historian of psychology Edwin Boring (cf. 
Boring, 1950, 356) writes that, “from early youth he was destined for the 
Priesthood.”. However, as Liliana Albertazzi (2006), 12–18, and especially 
Richard Schaefer (2007), point out 479n (and in Schaefer’s words) “ ... the 
facts do not support the idea of a strictly youthful, uninformed involve-
ment [on Brentano’s part] in the religion of his parents”. Only relatively 
recently have these attempts at the correction of this common misunder-
standing about Brentano’s motives and intellectual background, as it relates 
to his identification as a “Catholic philosopher”, come to be acknowledged 
in the secondary literature.  
 7  .   In a letter by Brentano sent from Münster to his aunt Gunda Von Savigny 
(dated the 31 May 1859), Brentano writes of Clemens that “He is the professor 
I esteem the most” (cited in Albertazzi, 1999). And see the entry “Franz 
Jacob Clemens” in  The  Catholic Encyclopedia , New York: Robert Appleton 
Company, 1913; public domain. Available online at: www.newadvent.org/
cathen/04012a.htm. There it is noted how Clemens’ students displayed 
great loyalty: “So great was his popularity as a teacher at Bonn that, when 
he removed to Münster, he was followed by some seventy students. The 
attendance at his lectures in the Westphalian capital was an extraordinarily 
large one; but his health failed after a few years.”  
 8  .   The so-called habilitation thesis is a post-doctoral teaching requirement in 
German universities to show readiness for teaching and consideration for a 
possible future full-time professorship (cf. ZF, 133ff).  
 9  .   A striking example of the Thomistic inspiration in Brentano’s reading of 
Aristotle is the attribution of “creationism” to the Prime Mover. This act of 
creation is said to be based on Aristotle’s theory that a direct creative act 
of the divine is manifested at the point where the human embryo develops 
in the womb and just before it is ready to be delivered. This was said to 
be not a creation of the spiritual soul as a distinct substance but rather 
a  Mitwirkung , i.e. a cooperation, between the Prime Mover and natural 
forces, which produced man as a unified total creature endowed with 
reason not to be found elsewhere in the sublunary realm (cf. PA, 162–80). 
Zeller disagreed with this reading and polemical exchanges between 
Brentano and the latter on this matter were prolonged.  
 10  .   We know that Brentano was acquainted with the writings of Bolzano on 
the authority of Brentano’s students, such as Husserl, who mention how 
Brentano made use of Bolzano’s text  Paradoxen des  Unendlichen (1851) in 
his lectures at Vienna in the 1880s (cf. Husserl, 1976, 49, and cf. Rollinger, 
1999).  
 11  .   Both the doctrine itself and the history of this controversial aspect of 
Catholic policy are more complex than a cursory glance at the story might 
suggest. In a reaction to the above noted challenge to Church authority in 
the forms of modern liberalism and secularism, the then pope, Pius IX took 
the position known as “centralistic Papalism”. As a policy, Friedrich Gontard 
points out, “ ... it meant it was the pope who had finally to determine what 
was of faith. Herein lay the dogmatic preliminaries that were to find their 
fruition at the Vatican Council of 1869” (Gontard, 1964, 502). Brentano’s 
most active role in the debate was his authorship of an anonymous memo-
randum against the doctrine of Papal Infallibility written for the German 

Notes 257
anti-Ultramontanists. This was produced at the behest of Baron von Ketteler 
the Bishop of Mainz (1811–77). This same memorandum was also later to be 
presented by the German bishops at the conference of Fulda (cf. Albertazzi, 
2006, 15; and Schaefer, 2007).  
 12  .   That Brentano himself had no sympathy for Schelling or German idealism 
as a whole is evident and reinforced when we take a look at his 1876 publica-
tion,  Was für ein  Philosoph manchmal  Epoche macht . There Brentano compares 
Schelling to Plotinus, classifies him as a mystic and places his thought as 
symptomatic of the phase of the decline in modern philosophy (Plotinus 
is said to characterize the decline of ancient thought from its Aristotelian 
heights).  
 13  .   See Brentano’s letter to Stumpf of November 30, 1872 cited in TPB, 32.  
 14 .   Although some commentators claim that Brentano only formally broke 
with the Church at a much later date, cf. Burgess, 1974, 84n. Nonetheless in 
the absence of other evidence we can take the 1873 date, corroborated by 
Stumpf as valid (cf. Sumpf, 1976, 33, where he cites an oral communication 
from Brentano to Krauss as his source).  
 15  .   The neo-Kantian philosopher Hermann Lotze helped facilitate Brentano’s 
attainment of the Viennese post by a good word about his abilities and char-
acter in a letter of recommendation sent to the Austrian education minister 
(Stremayer) (cf. Albertazzi, 2006, 19).  
 16 .   Brentano’s eye troubles became especially pronounced especially after 1903, 
and he underwent eye surgery at least twice in failed efforts to prevent a 
growing loss of vision. I have been unsuccessful at discovering the precise 
nature of the illness that led to his loss of sight.  
 17  .   This changed only in 1878 when the faculty of philosophy was dissociated 
from that of the natural sciences. Before then the University of Würzburg 
was true to its medieval origins in drawing the humanities and science facul-
ties together. Founded unofficially in 1402 on the river Main, the university 
soon had to be closed, reportedly due to a lack of funding, only to officially 
re-open 180 years later, on 2 January 1582. At this time an endowment was 
granted by the Prince-Bishop of Würzburg Julius Echter von Mespelbrunn. 
Würzburg, in the late sixteenth century, served as a counter-reformation 
institution, and as such, many Jesuits featured among faculty members. In 
1802 the University was transformed into a state school with a secular curric-
ulum soon after the territory of Würzburg became a part of Bavaria ruled by 
Maximillian Joseph, (Maximillian I). Among the notable faculty members 
who were associated with the school, other than Brentano himself, can be 
listed the idealist philosopher Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling (1775–
1854) as well as a long list of famous physicians and scientists including the 
“father of modern pathology” and anti-Darwinist Rudolf Virchow (1821–
1902), the great advancer of histology Albert Von Kölliker (1817–1905) as 
well as the discoverer of the X-ray Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen (1845–1923). At 
the time Brentano arrived as a lecturer the University was quickly growing 
(the number of its students, for example, would triple between 1853 and 
1896). See www.graduateschools.uni-wuerzburg.de/uwgs/general_informa-
tion/the_university/ Last accessed: 4/17/2012.and www.uni-wuerzburg.de 
/en/ueber/university_of_wuerzburg/history/sanderringuni/ Last accessed: 
4/17/2012.  

258 Notes
 18  .   What follows is necessarily tentative and relies on the  Nachlass manuscript 
material whenever possible. No completely accurate picture of Brentano’s 
early Würzburg thought will be possible until the  Nachlass material from 
this period is completely transcribed and made available, a project that 
is currently underway at the University of Salzberg in Austria. Brentano’s 
psychological manuscripts from this period are being prepared under the 
aegis of Robin Rollinger with the collaboration of Thomas Binder. Johannes 
Brandl and Arkadiusz Chrudzimski are also working on organizing  Nachlass 
material. See http://gandalf.uib.no/Brentano/  
 19  .   Turning to unpublished lecture notes from this period is especially 
important once it is realized that, in many cases, the posthumous editions 
of Brentano’s writings (including the early Würzburg notes) have been 
heavily edited and revised. Furthermore these later editions are, unfortu-
nately, also edited in a manner that leads to a blurring and distortion of 
Brentano’s intellectual development. Brentano’s later writings and post-
humous collections have subsequently been the topic of controversy and 
scholarly debate. See Srzednicki 1962, Mayer-Hillebrand 1963; and more 
recently Tomasi, 2007, and Albertazzi 2006, especially Chapter 10, 313ff. 
The debates about posthumous editions of Brentano’s writings hinge 
mainly on the mode of editing that the early material underwent as well as 
how the inclusion of later material was frequently used by editors to revise 
writings from Brentano’s earlier period. In this way a blurring and distor-
tion of Brentano’s intellectual development occurs and objective informa-
tion about the content of his earlier thought is lost. Furthermore, some of 
the earliest material (such as lecture notes and student lecture notes) has 
been lost or destroyed and much of Brentano’s  Nachlas s material remains 
unpublished, thereby greatly increasing the possibility for distortion and 
misinterpretation of the development of his thought. These criticisms, 
which pertain to the editing of the posthumous editions of Brentano’s 
works, are well-heeded. Thus even in later editions of the PES the quan-
tity and style of Oscar Krauss’s explanatory notes, running throughout the 
entirety of even the English translation, are very often less than helpful at 
attaining a coherent and objective understanding of what Brentano was 
attempting to accomplish in 1874. Currently, large portions of Brentano’s 
 Nachlass are being edited and prepared for release by Robin Rollinger and 
Thomas Binder at the University of Salzburg in Austria. Much light will be 
shed on both Brentano’s early thought and the above matters as these writ-
ings become more widely available.  
 20  .   Among the most complete of these available notes are the original outlines 
for Brentano’s logic courses (lettered ES in the  Nachlass ), which collects the 
notes Brentano made before, during and just after the publication of the 
PES, and the large number of additional notes collected under Psychological 
topics, including subsequent amendments and outlines of Parts III to VI 
of the PES (collected under the PS in the  Nachlass folders). Cf. Tomasi, 
2007, who describes the fortuitous discovery of Brentano’s “The History of 
Philosophy” lecture notes in a Dominican Convent Library [Unpublished 
manuscript:  Geschichte der  Philosophie  von  Franz  Brentano (WS 1866/67), 
handwritten bound volume (952 pages) in the library of the Dominican 

Notes 259
Convent of St. Anna at Graz, Austria]. Other unpublished manuscripts 
from the period include the  Transzendentalphilosophie , MS N. 96, 1868 at 
 Universitätsbibliothek  Innsbruck;  Handschriftenabteilung (N. 31753–31921); 
and finally, many of the lecture notes from Brentano’s logic courses survive 
in later notes collected from lectures of the same subject given in Vienna.  
 21  .   See the summary and outline of medieval philosophy, for example, which 
appeared in 1867 in J. A. Möhler’s  Kirchengeschichte ( Church  History , in two 
volumes, cf. vol. 2, 539ff.).  
 22  .   Stumpf’s assessment continues: “But in his inmost soul metaphysical inter-
ests predominated over all others. “I am at the moment wholly a metaphys-
ician” he wrote me from Vienna in 1886. “I must confess that, after having 
been exclusively a psychologist for a few years the change makes me happy.” 
(Stumpf, 1976, 16).  
 23  .  See  The Collected Works of  J.S. Mill, vol. XVII;  The Later Letters of  J.S. Mill 1849–
1873 Part IV, Letter (1709); and Brentano’s lecture “Concerning the Reasons 
for Discouragement in the Philosophical Field”, delivered in Vienna, 1874, 
as quoted by his student Rudolf Steiner (cf. Steiner, 1973, 299).  
 24  .   English edition:  On the   Existence of   God,   Lectures given at the   Universities 
of Würzburg and   Vienna 1868–91  (1987).  
 25  .   Brentano’s reform of logic was therefore largely, already developed in 
his Würzburg lectures. As the Würzburg context of his initial reform of 
traditional logic testifies, his innovations were worked out in response to 
Aristotle. After 1869 and starting from the 1870–71 semesters, the logic 
lectures were, as we once again know through Stumpf, the courses for which 
Brentano drew his largest audiences.  
 26  .   Especially important here is manuscript material under the code LS 1 and 
LS 23, as well as the Ps or psychology notes in the Brentano  Nachlass (these 
materials and their relation to the project of the PES have been discussed by 
Rollinger, 2011).  
 27  .  In this context, Robin Rollinger writes of how, “in his lectures in Würzburg 
(1867–73) Brentano already developed views in the areas of metaphysics, 
logic, psychology, and the history of philosophy. All of these branches of 
philosophy for him involved psychology, for he indeed conceived of philos-
ophy by definition as essentially concerned with psychological issues” 
(Rollinger, 2011, 6). This claim, however, has to be qualified. Brentano 
did not begin lecturing exclusively on psychology until 1871. As Mauro 
Antonelli points out, Brentano’s Lectures of Metaphysics from 1867 (MS 
M 96) feature a scheme that concedes “no space to psychology because of 
the specific framework of analysis in which [Brentano’s] enquiry was to 
take place”. Psychology, like other scientific disciplines, “is engaged in the 
analysis of a specific order of phenomena, metaphysics is concerned with 
the whole of reality, with “being qua being”. (Antonelli, 2002, 18). There 
is also very little indication that his earliest lectures or publications were 
concerned with psychology, except very indirectly as it deals with ontology 
(cf. Chapter 2 below). Whether this means that Antonelli is correct, however, 
that Brentano’s conception of psychology was originally a very narrow one, 
is open to debate. There are, as Rollinger notes, certainly aspects of explic-
itly psychological themes in Brentano’s lectures on logic from 1869 and 

260 Notes
Brentano’s psychological study of Aristotle, as was noted above, dates from 
1867.  
 28  .   Brentano’s lectures on Practical philosophy at the University of Vienna 
from 1876 to 1894 largely make up the collection  Grundlegung und  Aufban 
der  Ethik [English translation:  The Foundation and  Construction of Ethics ] and 
his most famous single work on ethics,  Vom Ursprung sittlicher  Erkenntnis 
was an address delivered in 1889 before the Vienna Law Society [translated 
into English originally in 1902 by Cecil Hague and later re-translated in an 
updated edition by Roderick Chisholm]. Brentano’s mature views on meta-
physics, by contrast, are articulated in the posthumous work  Kategorienlehre 
1933 ( The Theory of  Categories, 1981).  
 29  .  For a full-length study of Brentano’s ethical doctrines and their develop-
ment see Linda McAlister’s dissertation published as  The Development of 
 Franz  Brentano’s Ethics (1982). Unfortunately, McAlister’s book mentions 
only the doctrines Brentano held following the publication of the PES and 
how these developed from the Vienna period until his death. The main 
difference, according to Stumpf, between his Würzburg and Vienna ethical 
doctrines is that the Würzburg lectures were more straightforwardly utili-
tarian in their content. The ethical position in both periods, however, is 
complemented by Brentano’s theistic foundation for the human soul and 
his proofs of God’s existence (an outline of which were cited above from the 
Psychology lectures).  
 30  .  See the “Introduction” above for a brief overview of this influence. Here it 
can be added that it is not at all an exaggeration to state that Brentano’s 
work is effectively a foundational source for both what came to be called 
“analytic” and so-called continental philosophy. He has been rightly cited as 
a founding source for the later school of philosophers known as  phenomeno-
logical but his influence on prominent figures in what later became “analytic 
philosophy” such as Moore and Russell is less well known. See also Peter 
Simons’ “Introduction” to the second English language edition of the PES 
(1995) where the importance and influence of Brentano’s thought is traced. 
Dale Jacquette’s “Introduction” and Karl Schuman’s essay “Brentano’s impact 
on twentieth century philosophy”, both in Jacquette (Editor) 2004, are also 
very useful in this respect.  
 31  .  Different thinkers took very different ideas and messages away from 
Brentano’s influential Viennese lectures and they often also read their own 
concerns and projects onto that of his later “descriptive psychology”. And the 
latter point is especially understood when it becomes evident that Brentano’s 
subsequent influence was – to paraphrase Roberto Poli – frequently trans-
mitted “invisibly” ( see Poli, 1998, 1). In his study Poli explains that this is 
largely a consequence of what he calls “The Brentano Puzzle”, and he subse-
quently states explicitly and gives reasons for Brentano’s so-called invisibility 
in his introductory essay to the collection of essays in the same volume (cf. 
Poli, 1998, 1–13 for details). Even if Brentano is not completely “invisible”, 
many philosophers and psychologists, for example, know something of his 
work, I would still argue that he is frequently misunderstood or not read 
objectively, and this fact alone merits a more objective examination of his 
thought and its development.  

Notes 261
 2 Brentano’s Aristotelianism and Early Writings 
on Aristotle 
 1  .   Rolf George and Glen Koehn comment on how it was only “[a]fter several 
years of intensive study of Aristotle and his medieval interpreters, especially 
Thomas Aquinas”, that Brentano wrote his doctoral dissertation that later 
became his first book, cf. CCB, 21–22). Actually the young Brentano origi-
nally contemplated submitting a dissertation on the Spanish Jesuit philoso-
pher Francisco Suárez (cf. Moran, 2000, 26) (and cf. Chapter 1 above). Under 
the influence of Clemens (his philosophy professor at Münster) at that time 
the Scholastic readings of Aristotelianism were the central focus of Brentano’s 
philosophical studies. These early studies, as we will show, can be seen to 
influence both his metaphysics lectures and early approach to philosoph-
ical psychology. Brentano apparently changed his mind about a Scholastic 
re-appropriation of Aristotle after Clemens’ death and perhaps as a result of 
his studies with Trendelenburg (cf. Albertazzi, 2006, 13 and see below).  
 2  .   While large sections of the manuscript writings in the “Aristotelika” collection 
remain untranslated and unpublished, many other of Brentano’s Aristotelian 
writings are available in English translation. Some of Brentano’s other texts 
and writings on Aristotle include:  Über den Creationismus des Aristoteles , 
Vienna: Tempsky, (1882), and  Aristoteles Lehre vom Ursprung des menschlichen 
Geistes , Leipzig: Viet & Comp, (1911). For an overview of Brentano’s, oft times 
critical application of Aristotelian themes throughout his career cf. Rolf 
George and Glen Koehn “Brentano’s relation to Aristotle” in CCB, 20–45.  
 3  .   The PES will explore many of the same themes with a different emphasis, 
and against a slightly changed background context than what is given in 
his earlier writings. Nonetheless, these earlier Aristotelian texts are without 
doubt the most important single philosophical influence on his mature 
system. Some of the other influences on Brentano’s early thought (namely 
Comte and positivism, Descartes and Cartesianism, the philosophy of 
Leibniz, J. S. Mill and British Empiricism, etc.) will be explored in subse-
quent chapters.  
 4  .   See the entry “Aristotle and Aristotelianism” in the  Encyclopaedia Britannica 
(1995 edition). For the influence of Aristotle on modern philosophy see 
also Pozzo, 2004. While accounts of what has been called an Aristotelian 
Renaissance in Germany during the latter half of the nineteenth century is 
commonplace in history of philosophy texts, relatively little work has been 
done on documenting the specific historical context of Aristotle’s influ-
ence on this period. The fact that an Aristotle resurgence is spoken of at 
all might make it seem as if the influence of the ancient Greek philoso-
pher had in some sense died out or was completely eclipsed in Germany 
and subsequently rediscovered. Although fruitful critiques and criticisms 
of Aristotle’s views were evident in European philosophy from the four-
teenth century onwards, engagement with Aristotle’s writings throughout 
the centuries was constant. The critical attack of Aristotelianism in Europe 
culminates in the middle to late Renaissance in Italy and is later taken up 
by many of the German idealists. On this point cf. Kristeller, 1961, Cassirer, 
1963, and Heimsoeth, 1994.  

262 Notes
 5  .   The main force for undermining the influence of Aristotelianism in Germany 
was almost certainly German idealism. For this reason it can be speculated 
that the origins of Brentano’s highly critical engagement with idealist 
thought were, at least in part, ideological and based on his ongoing efforts to 
restore Aristotelian thought. However, and regardless of Brentano’s penchant 
for viewing anti-Aristotelian thought as degenerative and “non-scientific”, 
the actual history of philosophy and philosophical epochs are never so 
clean-cut. At the same time,, two salient additional points about German 
anti-Aristotelianism in the nineteenth century can be stated: 1) almost all 
the German idealists were Protestant, and Aristotelianism (largely due to 
the influence and attempt at appropriation of his system made by Thomas 
Aquinas) was more central to Catholic thought. 2) Even when the German 
idealists, in some form or another, challenged certain fundamental tenets 
of Aristotelianism, there was still very often an ongoing level of engage-
ment with Aristotle. For example, Aristotle is mentioned fairly frequently 
by Kant and it is well known how Hegel finds much to admire and adopt 
as his own from Aristotle’s system (even if he is often disparaging of later 
Aristotelianism in its Scholastic form, cf. especially Hegel’s  Lectures on the 
History of Philosophy ,  Werke, 19, 132–249: and cf. Stace, 1955, 18–29). Here it 
can be noted that Brentano himself encountered the influence of German 
idealism first-hand in the 1850s as a student in Würzburg. According 
to his writings, Brentano rejected idealism not primarily because the 
theories behind it were anti-Aristotelian, but rather because he took many 
tenets of idealist thought to be “irrational” and not compelling from his 
neo-Aristotelian standpoint. The prevalent idealism at Würzburg, a lingering 
presence and holdover from the time of Schelling’s teaching days there, may 
have been one of the factors that led to Brentano’s transfer from Würzburg 
to Berlin to study with Trendelenburg (cf. Chapter 1 above). Later, when 
Brentano returned to Würzburg as a professor, he was ready to debate with 
the idealists on their own terms. This was somewhat complicated, however, 
by the critical reaction against his thought and person that was motivated 
by a variety of factors, amongst which could be found anti-Aristotelian senti-
ment, (cf. Schaefer, 2007a, 477). The upshot was that Brentano, although a 
lifelong admirer of Aristotle, was also no stranger to modern philosophy. 
Brentano’s evaluation of idealism and more precisely Kantianism will be 
treated in greater detail in Part III below. In fact the nineteenth century has 
been characterized as a fragmentary one in terms of philosophical outlook 
(cf. Windelband, 1958, 624). The manifold movements and competing 
schools may be yet another factor towards explaining the frequent hostility 
and at times outright polemical tone in Brentano’s writings whenever the 
topic of German idealism was brought up.  
 6  .   For a somewhat whimsical but nonetheless insightful overview of the differ-
ences and interaction of neo-classical (mostly French) intellectual traditions 
and indigenous German thought cf. Heinrich Heine’s  Religion and Philosophy 
in Germany from 1835.  
 7  .   And therefore it is hardly a coincidence that many of the influential 
nineteenth-century figures in psychology, such as J. F. Herbart, Hermann 
von Helmholtz, Rudolf Lotze, etc., were either neo-Kantians or heavily influ-
enced by Kant. However, here we can only give a very brief overview of the 

Notes 263
Aristotelian versus Kantian aspects of the new philosopher-psychologists. 
How this topic relates to Brentano, will be addressed in Part III of this work. 
For an overview of the tensions between philosophers and psychologists, 
and the birth of so-called experimental psychology that contributed to 
the ensuing battle for the new chairs of psychology in the Universities, cf. 
Kusch, 1995. For a historical overview of neo-Kantianism cf. Köhnke, 1991, 
and more recently the introduction to Makkreel and Luft (2010).  
 8 .  Cf. Köhnke, 1991. Furthermore, if Kant’s philosophy had to be reinterpreted 
and made more compatible with discoveries in modern science, this did 
nothing to take away from the acrimony between the Aristotelians and 
Kantians; not that the relationship between the two traditions was clear-cut 
or unambiguous. In brief, Aristotle’s transcendent realism and broad 
empiricism are at least prima facie, incompatible with Kant’s Copernican 
turn and transcendental idealism. However, as Otfried Höffe observes “Kant 
contributes to the further undermining of Aristotle’s authority”, although 
it is nonetheless true that “in long passages, especially in the  Critique of 
Pure Reason, [Kant] makes use of Aristotelian and Aristotelist concepts trans-
mitted to him via the German Aristotelian tradition, in particular Christian 
Wolff. Among Kant’s successors, especially Neo-Kantianism, the rejection 
of Aristotle was to prevail” (cf. Höffe, 2003, 201).  
 9  .  This ideological battle would also have much in common with what was 
later called (albeit in a different context) a  Methodenstreit i.e. a conflict of 
methods. The term  Methodenstreit was used by the Austrian thinker Ludwig 
Von Mises to describe the differences between the German historicist 
approach to economics or what was then called “Political Economy” and 
the less deterministic and more individualist approach of Von Mises and 
his students (cf. Von Mises, 1964). Martin Kush has described the tensions 
between the psychologists and the philosophers in the German university 
departments during the psychologism debates from the1880s to the 1920s 
in a very similar way cf. Kush, 1995. This ideological shift and the challenge 
posed to philosophy by the sciences is important to keep in mind when 
assessing Brentano’s project of merging the methods of philosophy with 
that of the natural sciences. Whatever else Brentano meant by his claim, 
it must be stressed that there is no evidence that he supported “scientism” 
which can be described as a radical form of positivism.  
 10  .  Brentano’s first book on Aristotle was in fact dedicated to Trendelenburg 
with the words: “in veneration and gratitude to Dr. Adolf Trendelenburg 
Professor of Philosophy at the University of Berlin, My most revered teacher, 
the scholar so highly distinguished in the advancement of our under-
standing of Aristotle” (cf. OSS, v).  
 11 .  F. A. Trendelenburg,  Aristoteles de anima libri tres: Ad interpretum graecorum 
auctoritatem et codicum fidem recognivit, commentariis illustravit (Jena: Walz, 
1833; Berlin: Weber, 1877; Graz: Akademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt, 
1957 and 1964); and  Logische Untersuchungen vol. I–II, Berlin: Bethge, 1840 
( LU ), second and third, enlarged editions, 1862 and 1870).  
 12 .   For Trendelenburg’s criticism of Kant and the reasons behind his 1865 
polemical exchange with Kuno Fischer on the proper interpretation of 
Kant’s doctrine of space, see  Kuno Fischer und sein Kant (1869). For his 
sustained critique of Hegel, see Trendelenburg’s  Die logische Frage in Hegel’s 

264 Notes
System. Zwei Streitschriften, Leipzig: F.A. Brockhaus (1843), first published in 
 Neue jenaische allgemeine Literaturzeitung, April 1842, no. 97ff, and February 
1843, no. 45ff). Translated into English as “The Logical Question in Hegel’s 
System” in  The Journal of Speculative Philosophy, trans. T. Davidson, ed. W. 
Harris, vol. v, 849ff, vol. vi, 82ff, vol. vi, 163–75 and vol. vi, 350–61 (nos. 
20 (1871), 21, 22, and 24 (1872) and see also his  Logische Untersuchungen 
( op .  cit .,  sup. ).  
 13  .   Edoardo Fugali writes of how: “In [Trendelenburg’s] epistemological view-
point, psychology is a methodological study of the conditions that consti-
tute the ground of all subjective knowledge” (cf. Fugoli, 2009, 180).  
 14  .   In the  Logical Investigations , Trendelenburg even notes how this insight into 
first principles of knowledge will be grasped by an “ideal intuition” ( ideale 
Anschauung ), cf. Trendelenburg, 1870, 248.  
 15  .   Such as, to name only one, Johannes Peter Müller (1801–58), who held the 
chair of anatomy and physiology at the University of Berlin.  
 16 .   cf. Fugoli (2009) and Köhnke (1991), 20–26.  
 17  .   And here we are following Aristotle and using those terms in their broadest 
logical and ontological senses, i.e. a species is what falls under a genus and 
is determined by a specific difference. The specific difference is what indi-
viduates the species, etc. In the Aristotelian tradition all of these terms 
are said to be directly representative of and reflected in reality where, for 
example, no specific difference can differentiate more than one genus (cf. 
 Metaphysics , Book VII, 12, 1038a 5–35).  
 18  .   As Thomas Aquinas puts it, “being cannot be contracted by any diffe-
rence. Being is, therefore, not a genus” (Aquinas,  Summa Contra Gentiles , bk 
I, ch. 25; trans. A Pegis, 127). Thomas’s words above [not quoted or directly 
cited by Brentano] summarize what Aristotle says in the section of the 
 Metaphysics (bk III, 998b, 22) where the above is discussed.  
 19 .   This passage continues, “Another enumeration of concepts to which the 
appellation “being” is attached in different ways is given in Met. VI. 2. 
1026a33. In that passage, one kind of being is said to be accidental being [ on 
kata symbebekos ], another being in the sense of being true [ on hos alethes ], 
whose opposite is non-being in the sense of being false [ me on hos psuedos ]. 
Besides, there is said to be another kind of being which divides into the 
categories, and in addition to all of them, potential and actual [ dynamei kai 
energeia ] being” (OSS, 4). These distinctions will be important when we turn 
to an examination of the intentional inexistence of objects in presentations 
in Chapter 4 below.  
 20  .   And see  Metaphysics Book IV (Γ) 1005b 35–1006b 10.  
 21  .   Later philosophers, such as the seventeenth-century rationalists (Descartes, 
Spinoza and especially Leibniz) argued that metaphysics was grounded 
to a large extent on both of the above logical principles. And we can find 
even a much later (and more quintessentially modernist) thinker such as 
Arthur Schopenhauer stating that the significance of the principle of suffi-
cient reason for grounding the intelligibility of being is what allows for the 
fundamental categorical distinctions marking the possibility of systematic 
study of being.  
 22  .   This ontological stress on the importance of the categories is present even 
in Brentano’s last major work on Aristotle, where we find him maintaining 

Notes 265
that: “In dealing with the categories we are concerned with the highest class 
of positive predicates whose distinctions are easily brought out in the inter-
rogative mode. Some of them are still equivocal (Aristotle is well aware of 
this, as we can see from what he teaches about the four senses of quality in 
the  Categories ), while others are very complex. They serve well, though, to 
show the several senses of being ... ” (AWV, 37–38).  
 23  .  Brentano writes: “it is substance which has the pre-eminent sense, i.e., 
which is not only something, but simply is. There are many senses in which 
something can be first, but substance is among all being the first in every 
sense, in concept, in cognition, as well as in time” (OSS, 148).  
 24 .  This approach very clearly anticipates what would later, under Leśniewski 
and Ajdukiewicz, come to be known as “mereology”, i.e. the formal study of 
part-whole relations, stemming from the Greek for part,  meros . In practice, 
the drawing out of a consistent mereology or part-whole ontology is contro-
versial and hinges on many factors, cf. Varzi, 2009, for details.  
 25  .   Cf. Kusch, 1995 for an overview of this complicated term and its history and 
various meanings. Brentano was called a psychologistic thinker in his life-
time, sometimes even by his own former students; but he always protested 
against the label and denied the charges. This issue will be returned to 
below where we examine Brentano’s notions of intentional relations and 
the objectivity of judgment.  
 26  .   This reading goes back to Alexander of Aphrosias who takes the discussions 
about immortality to refer to the prime mover or pure thought, not the 
human soul. A later reading, that personal immortality is incompatible 
with Aristotle’s hylomorphic framework, was maintained by Werner Jaeger 
in his 1923 study of Aristotle’s intellectual development.  
 27  .   In the first books of the PES there is likewise a sustained analysis on 
Brentano’s part of what prominent German and British thinkers hold about 
psychology. This Aristotelian tactic of presenting a wide range of different 
expert opinions in order to secure a thorough analysis of the relevant 
matters at hand is rarely acknowledged as put to use by Brentano, let alone 
as utilized in his most famous work. But this is yet further evidence of the 
profound influence of Aristotle on his thought.  
 28 .  The above are called, respectively, second and first philosophy by Aristotle.  
 29  .   In the sense, we are told, that an individual sailor is a part of a ship, i.e. a 
non-essential part.  
 30  .   To put it another way, matter and form in hylomorphic unity can be read 
as corresponding to the principle of potency and the principle of actuality 
that make any “real” thing an actual entity. All living beings share the 
above hylomorphic composition.  
 31 .   These include, wax and its imprint (you cannot separate the one without 
fundamentally altering or destroying the other), and an axe and the act of 
cutting. In other passages, Aristotle refers to the relationship between the 
soul and body as analogous to that between an eye and the act of seeing (cf. 
Aristotle, 1986, 157–58).  
 32  .  cf. Here Brentano directs the reader to Aristotle’s  De generatione animalium , 
1. 23. 731 a33, and  De Anima, 2. 4, section 1 and 3. 9.  
 33 .   As Aristotle mentions in  De Anima (bk 3, ch. 9, 432b 4–10) “The division of 
[the desiderative] part is a patent absurdity, as there is then wishing in the 

266 Notes
rational part, and appetite and passion in the irrational, and on a tripartite 
division, desire in all three parts of the soul” (Aristotle, 1986, 212).  
 34  .  “ Hier ist nicht blos das Bewegen ein anderes, auch die Neigung, aus welcher es 
hervorgeht, ist, als bewusstes Streben, völlig versheiden von der Neigung, aus der 
die Wirksamkeit der Pflanzen und der leblosen Körper stammt, und die Form 
dessen, worauf die Bewegung gerichtet ist, ist als Vorstellung in dem Wirkenden ” 
(PdA, 65).  
 35  .  And although he appears to take this doctrine directly from Aristotle, 
Brentano will in fact go on to claim that representations (conceived in a 
manner subtly different from how Aristotle conceives of them) are central 
to all human mental life.  
 36 .  “ Wir haben in uns den Begriff der Farbe, den Begriff des Tones im Allgemeinen, 
und diese Vorstellungen können unmöglich zu den Sinnenbildern des Gesichtes 
und des Gehöres gerechnet werden. Denn das Gesicht erkennt wohl das Weisse und 
Schwarze und jede der Farben im Einzelnen, die Farbe aber als solche erkennt es 
nicht ” (PdA, 113).  
 37 .  In essence we must somehow recollect a previous state of intimacy and 
connection between the soul and the forms, according to Plato, as this is the 
only possible explanation for how the essentially intelligible forms (Platonic 
essences) can enter the non-material soul in the first place (cf. Plato’s  Phaedo 
72e–77a). 
 38  .  In the  Posterior Analytics , Aristotle writes of how demonstration or objective 
knowledge is grounded on principles that are presupposed by any rational 
thinker yet (denying Platonic recollection) that we cannot already be in 
possession of. The same first immediate principles of demonstration are 
therefore said to lead us into an  aporia , in the sense that we both have 
the principles in mind and yet arrive at them without explicit cognitive 
activity or the actualization of any intellectual processes taking place (i.e., 
in Aristotle’s words, from no pre-existing knowledge). Aristotle’s somewhat 
cryptic solution to the problem is as follows: “we have some capacity, but 
do not have one type which will be more valuable than these in respect of 
precision” (cf. Aristotle 1984, 165/ Anal. Post . 2. 19, 99b30–35). Obviously 
the above distinctions between types of alteration help make this claim 
more clear and also see below.  
 39  .  Later Brentano will say that this knowledge is gained in passing or “on the 
side”, but the notion is clearly present in Aristotle and emphasized here 
already.  
 40  .  And see also PA, 144–45 and Aristotle,  Metaphysics , (bk 1 A), ch.1, 981a5.  
 41  .  These passages are important if only for highlighting the dynamic richness 
of Aristotelian psychology – with its still valuable approach to attempting to 
account for how theoretical knowledge and practical knowledge; dependent 
on life and activity, are connected – notwithstanding that the two spheres, 
the intellectual or theoretical and the practical, are always said by Aristotle 
to be different. 
 42  .   And at this point the active intellect is likened by Brentano to a magnet that 
attracts the iron filings to itself by exercising an attracting influence. In the 
case of the active intellect, what is attracted to itself is the passive sensitive 
part of the soul, which in turn, “strives towards it ... and brings forth that 
change to which the origin of the concepts is tied” (cf. PA, 107\PdA, 164).  

Notes 267
 43  .  PA, 107\PdA, 164.  
 44 .   The distinction between divine thought and human thought is said by 
Aristotle to lie in the fact that the former must be without change, “hence if 
its object were something other than itself, it would be forever pulled down 
and fettered in baseness. But its object is itself, but not in the way in which 
we have something as an object, we who are affected and moved by it; no, 
without becoming movement of whatever kind, it rests in the knowledge 
of itself, which is pure knowledge, and by virtue of this perfect mode of 
knowing it comprehends itself, the principle of all being, so perfectly, that 
it sees all being, every effect in its cause” (PA, 130–31), and cf. Aristotle’s 
 Metaphysics , 12.7, 1072b 15–9. 1074b 34.  
 45  .   This explicitly metaphysical reading of the Aristotelian doctrine of the active 
intellect, along with Brentano’s fundamentally Thomistic and creationist 
view of the soul, i.e. his belief that a direct divine cause endows the human 
soul with spiritual powers and immortality, at the moment of conception, 
would lead to much debate in subsequent scholarship. In Brentano’s case, 
the metaphysically engaged reading led, in his own lifetime, to tensions 
and a polemical exchange with the Protestant Aristotelian Eduard Zeller. 
Brentano’s position has also found few takers in subsequent commentaries. 
For the Brentano-Zeller debate cf. Brentano’s  Aristoteles’ Lehre vom Ursprung 
des menschlichen Geistes (1911) and his “ Offner Brief an Herrn Professor Eduard 
Zeller” contained therein.  
 46  .  Cf.  De Interpretatione (16a9) and see also  Metaphysics E, 4. 1027b17–28.  
 47 .  This notion of the verb as a sign of things said of something else is made 
more complicated, however, by the temporal factor that Aristotle introduces 
for it. The object a verb points to must exist and hold in the present (16b8). 
One of the most interesting aspects of the  De Interpretatione is undoubt-
edly its treatment of modal propositions (see especially chapter nine, which 
deals with future contingencies).  
 48  .  As Allan Bäck writes, “ ... mostly in  On Interpretation , Aristotle develops 
Plato’s theory of the statement, begun in the Sophist” (Bäck, 2000, 31). 
And Deborah Modrak makes a compelling case for the influence of Plato’s 
 Cratylus lingering in the background of  De Interpretatione (Modrak, 2001, 
3–5; 13–21).  
 49 .  Cf. Aristotle’s  Prior Analytics . Book I, 1. 24b 16–18, Aristotle 1941, 66; Aristotle 
also ambiguously holds that the term is simultaneously the premise and 
what it is resolved into, i.e. the being of the term, which is added later (as 
a third thing). This ambiguity in the status of terms and Aristotle’s treat-
ment of judgment will play an important role in Brentano’s revision of the 
Aristotelian theory of judgment.  
 50  .  For more details on the relationship between Aristotelian logic and science 
see Smith (2011).  
 51  .  And along with the “turn to the subject” Brentano also seems to defend 
the concomitant position that (methodologically speaking) epistemology 
precedes and prepares us for metaphysics, at least insofar as psychology is 
concerned.  
 52 .  Sorabji writes in his essay “Body and Soul in Aristotle” that: “In a very 
un-Cartesian way, Aristotle insists that in some sense of “is” every mental 
act is a physiological process. Thus anger is a boiling of the blood or warm 

268 Notes
stuff around the heart, in a sense of “is” analogous to that in which a house 
is bricks, and this relation, extends to intellectual acts as well (Sorabji, 
1993).  
 53  .   It can be noted here that even if Brentano is right about the above distinc-
tions, i.e. between objects of sensation and knowledge of perceptual acts 
in Aristotle’s philosophy of mind, it is difficult to find commentators on 
Aristotle who agree and hold that  De Anima (or any of Aristotle’s other writ-
ings in “epistemology” – insofar as an epistemological theory can be pieced 
together from his various treatises) supports anything like a representation-
alist theory of perception, be it Lockean, Cartesian or some other form. 
For readings that do, however, somewhat support Brentano’s position that 
a distancing of Aristotle’s “epistemology” from straightforward or naïve 
realism, cf. Modrak (1987), esp. pp.127–30 and Owens (2007), esp. ch. 10 
and his “Epilogue”. Aristotle himself not only never used the term “epistem-
ology” but maintained that metaphysics, which he called “first philosophy” 
(although not, of course, in Descartes’ sense of that term), is of primary 
importance to philosophy as a whole; followed closely by “second phil-
osophy”, which, he said, was the study of sensible and natural substances, 
or physics. The study of the soul, and how it knows, was relegated to other 
less ambitious, albeit no less important, treatises such as  De Anima (cf. 
Section 2.4). Finally, regarding the larger question of whether or not some 
kind of representationalism can be derived from Aristotle’s writings in logic 
or psychology – an answer to this is beyond the breadth of this current 
study. Here we can note that a variety of interpretations of even Aristotle’s 
best-known writings exist and in the case of his epistemology, the question 
of whether something like the modernist distinction between primary and 
secondary qualities can be given sense in Aristotle’s writings has also been 
questioned (cf. Caston, 2006, 328).  
 54  .  Cf. Potrc, 1997.  
 3 Psychology as a Science 
 1 .  We are also told in the “Foreword” of the PES that four other books will 
follow Book Two. Book Three, was supposed to treat of the characteristics 
of presentations in general. Book Four of Judgments. Book Five was to deal 
with emotions and acts of will, and Book Six with the mind/body problem 
and the immortality of the soul (cf. PES, xxvii\PES-G, v). The  Psychology from 
an Empirical Standpoint was, according to its 1874 “Foreword”, to be the first 
volume of a six-book work that be presented in two volumes. As it stands, 
the second volume never appeared and the work is therefore incomplete, 
with only the first two books actually present. On the incomplete nature 
of the PES see Peter Simon’s introduction to Brentano’s  Psychology (PES, 
xiv), Albertazzi (2006, 95–6) and especially Rollinger (2011). Later editions 
of the work were published with various appendixes and supplementary 
remarks as well as additional essays. The appendixes, including a lengthy 
work from 1911 called  Von der Klassifikation der psychischen Phänomene (“On 
the Classification of Psychic Phenomenon”), in effect became the second 
part or Volume II of the  PES . It should be noted, however, that as they stand, 

Notes 269
these appendixes and extra notes are not the original final sections of the 
PES as was intended originally by Brentano. Parts of what was to be the 
actual continuation of the text do survive in Brentano’s  Nachlass (these can 
be found in the PES, manuscripts). Later, without Brentano’s guidance or 
supervision, his students, led by Oscar Kraus, compiled  Vom sinnlichen und 
noetischen Bewusstsein (Sensory and Noetic Consciousness), which became 
known as  Psychology , Volume III, (which Kraus et al. claimed to correspond 
to the original Books Four and Five). Volume IV, which never appeared, was, 
according to Kraus, to deal with the spirituality and immortality of the 
soul, (i.e. the original aim of the Sixth Book), and cf. the introduction to 
Brentano’s  Religion und Philosophie (1954).  
 2 .  “[T]he plan of this work embraces all the different and essential fields of 
psychology” (PES, xxvii\PES-G, v).  
 3 .  Cf. Aristotle,  Metaphysics , Book 1, 980 a. There is, for Brentano, a corre-
sponding objective standard and foundation for beliefs and true judgments. 
Nonetheless, the Aristotelian metaphysical framework will be wedded to a 
more modern and empiricist framework for understanding the sciences.  
 4 .   Once established and developed, we are told, the new science of psych-
ology will prove to be a panacea of sorts, contributing to the resolution 
of socio-political problems (PES, 22\PES-G, 27). Brentano also claims, 
in his  PES , that the new science of psychology will be indispensable and 
important for grounding other experimental sciences. The ‘phenomena’ 
psychology studies are said to be better known, more profound, and to have 
a special relationship to us; it follows therefore, that the science of these 
phenomena will lead to more important practical consequences (cf. PES, 
24–27\PES-G, 28–33). Of course, none of the above predictions material-
ized. Some attempts were made, especially in the early twentieth century, 
to apply psychological theories to society; among the more memorable 
of which, the applications of psychology to advertising and industrial 
production by Hugo Münsterberg come to mind (cf. Münsterberg, 1913 and 
Hothersall, 1984, 123–26). Also the influx of so-called pop-psychology and 
the language of psychological theories, such as psychoanalysis, later perme-
ated American and eventually global society. One wonders what Brentano 
would have made of these developments. On the one hand, he would no 
doubt have been dismayed by the fact that, for the most part, psychology, 
after the end of the nineteenth century, continued on its way into becoming 
‘many psychologies’, and focusing for the most part on behavior and stat-
istical observation of facts or so-called ‘mental contents’ with only very 
indirect general but more pronounced direct or individual clinical appli-
cations in areas like medicine and education. The above would be a more 
or less positive account of the direction in which mainstream or experi-
mental psychology grew. For a far more pessimistic assessment we can cite 
Thomas Teo who writes that it was and is: “trivial, biased and arbitrary 
and has no significance for the majority of humans” (Teo, 1999, 441). The 
later Brentano returned more and more to philosophy but never seems to 
have abandoned the position that a genuine psychology would be a philo-
sophically engaged  descriptive method that could become the proper ground 
for metaphysics, ethics, logic and even aesthetics. This distinction between 
pure or descriptive and genetic psychology (the latter closer to the kind of 

270 Notes
experimentalist kind promoted in Brentano’s day by Wilhelm Wundt and 
his followers) is implicit but not clearly stated in the 1874 text.  
 5 .  The metaphysical context, against which the science of psychology will be 
understood, in Brentano’s case, is once again far closer to the Aristotelian 
rather than any purely positivist view.  
 6 .   The phrase is taken from the neo-Kantian F.A. Lange’s  The History of 
Materialism : Lange writes, “Calmly assume, then, a psychology without a 
soul! And yet the name will still be useful so long as we have something 
to study that is not completely covered by any other science” (cited by 
Brentano, PES, 11\PES-G, 13).  
 7 .   One thinker who Brentano criticizes for not properly clarifying his doctrines, 
and therefore relying on unexplored metaphysical prejudices in the study of 
the mind, is J. F. Herbart (1776–1841). Herbart, unlike Brentano, starts from 
principles that are explicitly metaphysical and subsequently attempts to 
clarify his model of the mind by applying mathematics to psychology. And 
cf. Huemer and Landerer (2010) for a comparison of Brentano’s methods 
with those of the Herbartian approach. Herbart is a frequently cited figure 
in the PES, although his relationship to Brentano is generally ignored by 
recent commentators. Earlier psychologists and philosophers, such as, 
Oswald Külpe, by contrast, noted how both Herbart and Brentano were 
more similar than not as both attempted to erect “a consistent theory of 
psychical phenomena upon the basis of internal perception alone” (Külpe, 
1927). In section 3.6 below, the similarities in Herbart’s and Brentano’s use 
of the term ‘phenomena’ will be spelled out. Herbart is today best known, 
not as a pioneer in the field of psychology, but as the father of scientific 
pedagogy. Subsequently, his influence on the early history of psychology 
is either barely mentioned by historians of psychology or his contributions 
are ignored completely (and cf., for example, David Hothersall who does 
both – ignoring Herbart in the 1984 edition of his  History of Psychology and 
then granting him a very brief mention in the revised 1990 second edition). 
Earlier historians of psychology, however, granted Herbart’s influence and 
importance. Other than Külpe, the above was also the case in Boring 1950, 
250ff, where it is mentioned how Herbart wrote two full texts dealing 
exclusively with psychology. According to Boring, “ ... what Herbart gave to 
psychology was status. He took it out of both philosophy and physiology 
and sent it forth with a mission of its own” (ibid, 252).  
 8 .  Wundt maintained that the practice of introspection was essential to the 
analysis of consciousness into sensory elements see Boring 1950, 315ff. for 
details.  
 9 .   De Anima , III, 2, 425b 20–426 a20. Aristotle there refers to  perception έν 
παρεργω. According to Brentano, Aristotle also reiterates this claim in the 
 Metaphysics, Book XII, 7, 1072 b 20. There Aristotle writes, “thought thinks 
on itself because it shares the nature of the object of thought; for it becomes 
an object of thought in coming into contact with and thinking its objects, 
so that thought and object of thought are the same”. And in Book XII, 
Chapter 9 of the  Metaphysics , which deals with thought and divine thought, 
Aristotle remarks of how, “evidently knowledge and perception and opinion 
and understanding have always something else as their object, and them-
selves only by the way” (1074 b 35–37) (& cf. PES, 132) and Section 2.4.  

Notes 271
 10  .   Brentano cites J. S. Mill on this point. In his  Auguste Comte and Positivism , Mill 
writes of how studying a mental presentation by referring to the memory 
left in the mind after it has occurred is “the mode in which our best know-
ledge of intellectual acts is generally acquired. We reflect on what we have 
been doing, when the act is past, but when its impression in memory is still 
fresh” (Mill, 1866, 64). 
 11  .   In these passages Brentano clearly anticipates later descriptions of these 
matters by William James. In his  Principles of Psychology , for example, 
James describes the ever changing ‘stream’ of consciousness as “one great 
blooming, buzzing, confusion” (James 1890, vol. 1, 488). Furthermore, 
James’s theory of emotion (known today as the James-Lange theory; the 
latter being not the German neo-Kantian cited frequently by Brentano but 
rather Carl Lange the Danish physiologist) stresses the innate and insep-
arable relation between reflex adjustments of the nervous system and 
perceived emotions. James writes, “the bodily changes follow directly the 
perception of the exciting fact ... our feeling of the same changes as they 
occur IS the emotion” (James, 1890, 375). Brentano will give a somewhat 
different account of mental or psychic acts of feeling in Book Two, Chapter 
8 of the PES.  
 12  .   In fact, these supplementary sources and approaches were never made use of 
by Brentano in writings and research after the PES. Although here Brentano 
goes on to give examples and lists: conscious lives simpler than our own 
(including those of children and the mental lives of peoples from different 
cultures); the study of abnormal psychology and clinical cases, and finally 
the reliance of reports from e.g. congenitally blind persons later granted 
sight due to successful operations. All of the above would not only become 
standard sources of research topics for psychologists in the early decades 
of the twentieth century, but some of the above ‘adjunct’ methods and 
sources of facts about psychology listed by Brentano would later become 
full branches of research in their own right.  
 13  .   In works such as  Novum Organum (1620) for example, Bacon argues that 
the discovery and explanation of the hidden properties of substances or 
natural phenomena can be facilitated through the use of sustained observa-
tion along with the verification of truth claims in experiments. This process 
would also, according to Bacon, be one that led to discovery and yielded 
explanatory general laws according to rules (characterized as “axioms 
deduced from particulars”, cf. Bacon, 1620, Book II, aphorism 10). These 
general laws, subsequently, would ideally help us both to explain, as well as 
understand, the facts about natural processes in order to better predict and 
control them. Bacon described his method as a two stage process: the first 
stage was called the “process of invention” and the second that of “sugges-
tion” leading to discovery.  
 14 .   It is difficult to find, for example, any case of the use of Bacon’s ‘tables of 
facts’ in the history of science. As Joseph Agassi, commenting on the claims 
of the modern day apologist and promoter of Bacon Peter Urbach, puts 
it: “Were [Bacon’s] tables ever used? As Dr. Urbach thinks they were, why 
does he not name a few instances which may refute [Émile] Meyerson? Just 
naming a few would do!” (Agassi, 1989, 94). Meyerson, a French philoso-
pher of science and student of R. W. Bunsen, is listed as an influence by the 

272 Notes
historian and philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn. Meyerson maintains 
that bold hypotheses, rather than Baconian collection of facts and enumer-
ative induction, better characterize both actual science and the scientific 
method.  
 15  .   In the twentieth century the Baconian method, and inductivism itself as a 
foundation for science, would be challenged far more radically by thinkers 
such as Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn. Of the above listed critics of Bacon 
however, Brentano’s criticism is closest to and most similar to the versions 
proffered by J. S. Mill and Alexander Bain. Bain, whose  Logic (1870) Brentano 
cites approvingly in the PES, is especially notable, and acquaintance with 
his writings can prove useful for better understanding Brentano’s approach 
to the philosophy of science. Unlike Mill, who argued that inductive infer-
ence moves from particular to particular and not from particular to gener-
alization or universal law (cf. Mill, 1884, 185–209), Bain held that general 
propositions are established by induction based on individual statements 
but proposed that we subsequently distinguish between what he called 
improper or incomplete and complete induction (Bain, 1870). In the PES 
when Brentano maintains that the highest most general laws in psychology, 
that is, the laws of the succession of psychic phenomena, “are to be estab-
lished directly by the general laws of induction” he means this in Bain’s 
sense of improper induction; which is, however, said not to be the highest 
kind (PES, 47\PES-G, 58). Where Brentano differs from Bain and Mill is in 
his understanding of what can be called an a priori grounding of another 
kind of complete or, as Brentano will later term it ‘induction in a narrower 
sense’. This is an epistemologically clarified and grounded form of induc-
tion that is different in kind from either Bain’s or Mill’s less analytic and 
more synthetic uses of the term (and cf. Brentano’s VUSE, 107). Induction 
in the narrow sense, according to Brentano, will later be said to be math-
ematically justified according to the probability relation calculus as estab-
lished by “Bayes” in his Theorem. Nonetheless, as will be made clear in 
Chapter 6 below, this reliance on probability calculus and an acceptance 
of a rationally substantial non-empirical principle of sufficient reason for 
understanding the regularities of nature were fixtures of Brentano’s meta-
physics lectures in Würzburg. For a clearer discussion of Brentano’s distinc-
tions between broader and narrower senses of induction cf. Hugo Bergmann 
“Brentano’s Theory of Induction” TPB, 213–23. Of the more recent critics of 
Baconian induction, Brentano’s position would be closer to Popper’s deduc-
tivist view of scientific knowledge and very different from Thomas Kuhn’s 
model. Nonetheless Brentano ultimately differs sharply from both Kuhn 
and Popper regarding his use of, and reliance upon, induction as contrib-
uting to the establishment of what can be called empirical or universal 
scientific laws. And see Chapter 6 of Part II and Chapter 7 of Part III below.  
 16 .   Cf. Crane, 2007, who writes of how, for Brentano, “science does not treat 
of the real, but only of phenomena, which we have some reason to think 
is a causal effect of an underlying reality whose character we do not fully 
understand” (Crane, 2007, 31).  
 17  .   And see again Mill’s  System of Logic where he writes of how, “The names of 
attributes are in their ultimate analysis names for the resemblances of our 
sensations” (II, ii, 3). Mill also maintains that “an observation cannot be 

Notes 273
spoken of in language at all without declaring more than that one obser-
vation; without assimilating it to other phenomena already observed and 
classified” (IV i, 3). But see below for how, Brentano’s treatment of these 
matters in the PES is different from that which Mill adopts in the  System of 
Logic .  
 18 .  An overview of those who, in Brentano’s day, rejected inner experience 
or descriptive psychology, and thus sought to reduce psychology to either 
physiology or another objective science (in some cases even phrenology), 
includes thinkers such as Adolf Horwicz, Auguste Comte and Henry 
Maudsley. Brentano examines their positions and reiterates his claim that 
the rejection of psychic phenomena makes their understanding of psych-
ology both hopeless and absurd. Note the similarities here to Freud’s 
approach and later descriptions of psychoanalysis as a “talking cure” for 
treating the mental life of neurotic patients. In a reference to one of the 
very first patients to be psychoanalyzed, the Viennese social worker Bertha 
Pappenheim (given the pseudonym ‘Anna O.’ by Freud’s then colleague, and 
Brentano’s personal physician, Josef Breuer), Freud recalled “[t]he patient 
herself, who, strange to say, could at this time only speak and understand 
English, christened this novel kind of treatment the ‘talking cure’ or used 
to refer to it jokingly as ‘chimney-sweeping’. It soon emerged, as though 
by chance, that this process of sweeping the mind clean could accomplish 
more than the merely temporary relief of her ever-recurring mental confu-
sion” (cf. Freud, 1977, 13).  
 19  .  Johann Friedrich Herbart (1776–1841) also notable for introducing the 
notion of “threshold” in philosophy of mind and psychology. Herbart’s 
real achievement, however, was to challenge the Kantian position regarding 
rigorous or quantifiable study of mental phenomena. According to Verena 
Zudini, “[i]n the eighteenth century, scientific psychology remained a 
highly speculative discipline as yet unable to accept and apply concretely 
the idea of a psychological measurement and quantification. Whatever was 
said or written about mental measurement attracted little attention in the 
literature of the time; this perhaps explains the idea we have that nothing 
was accomplished in the field of measurement and mathematical treatment 
of mental variables before Herbart and Fechner” (cf. Zudini, 2011, 77).  
 20  .   Brentano included, see the PES, 66ff. for his criticisms. Boring comments 
that, “ ... the premises, though rationally plausible, are not convincing ... it 
is often that the person who works well with mathematics lacks the gift of 
criticism against experimental results or even against his assumed postu-
lates” (Boring 1950, 260ff.). And see Section 3.6, where the influence of 
Herbart’s reinterpretation of Kantian phenomena is discussed in relation 
to Brentano’s use of the term. There has recently been a re-evaluation of 
sorts, by some psychologists, regarding Herbart’s place in the history of 
psychology and the value of his method of statics and dynamics of the soul, 
cf. Boudewijnse, Murray and Bandomir (2001).  
 21  .  Wundt maintained that, “ ... our sensations, thoughts and feelings are  inten-
sive magnitudes which form temporal series. Our inner life, therefore, has 
at least two dimensions which implies the general possibility of expressing 
them in mathematical form”, Wundt,  Principles of Physiological Psychology , 6. 
Translated by E.B. Titchener, as quoted in Brentano (PES, 65).  

274 Notes
 22  .   Liddell-Scott,  An Intermediate  Greek-English Lexicon , Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1992, 854.  
 23  .   See for example the  Metaphysics , Book Four, Chapter 5, 1010b 1–11 where 
Aristotle writes, “Regarding the nature of truth, we must maintain that not 
everything which appears [ to phenomenon ] is true; firstly because even if 
sensation – at least of the object peculiar to the sense in question – is not 
false, still appearance is not the same as sensation. Again, it is fair to express 
surprise at our opponents raising the question whether magnitudes are as 
great and colours are of such a nature, as they appear to people at a distance, 
or as they appear to those close at hand, and whether they are such as they 
appear to the healthy or to the sick, and whether those things are heavy 
which appear so to the weak or those which appear so to the strong, and 
those things true which appear so to the sleeping or to the waking. For obvi-
ously they do not think these to be open questions; no one, at least, if when 
he is in Libya he has fancied one night that he is in Athens, starts for the 
concert hall” (Aristotle, 1941, 746).  
 24  .   For clarification on these matters and for an account of how Brentano is 
going back directly to Aristotle and only critically appropriating the later 
Scholastic or Aristotelian tradition, see Brentano’s letter to Heinrich S. 
Denifle, cited in: Russo (2004), 218–19. Brentano’s Lectures on Metaphysics 
have been preserved in his  Nachlass , cf. MS M 96 (from 1867).  
 25  .   This seems especially necessary as one aspect of Brentano’s use of the term 
‘phenomenon’ that seems to particularly confound interpreters is the 
precise association and relation of the term with how it was used by French 
and British positivists of the nineteenth century.  
 26  .   cf. Hickerson, 2007, where he claims that Brentano follows Comte in 
“treating phenomena as facts investigated by sciences, thereby eschew[ing] 
claims about their causal (i.e. ‘metaphysical’) origins” (132n 34).  
 27  .   See Brentano’s  Die vier Phasen der Philosophie und ihr augenblicklicker Stand. 
(1895). Translated as “ The Four Phases of Philosophy and its Present Status ” trans-
lated and edited by Mezei & Smith, 1998. Describing the difference between 
Brentano and Comte on this matter, Mezei & Smith write, “ ... Brentano did 
not intend his own account as an encompassing and complete description 
of the history of philosophy. His intention was, rather, to offer one type of 
approach to the history of philosophy in cogent fashion which would be 
useful in the evaluation of certain philosophical and historical claims. It 
is to provide a framework, above all, for the proper understanding of the 
process by which philosophical knowledge is gathered ... ” (Mezei & Smith, 
1998, 11). In other words, and attempting to articulate the above claim 
more precisely, we can say that in Brentano’s doctrine of different phases of 
thought, the emphasis is on supporting a philosophical empiricism.  
 28  .   Thus, in the  Psychology Brentano can write that: “Mathematics considers the 
most simple and independent phenomena, psychology those that are most 
dependent and complex” (PES, 28). Here, Brentano seems to be following 
Comte’s encyclopedic law as was outlined above to the letter. According to 
Comte, mathematics is the first science to enter into the positivist phase, 
and it remains in it while other sciences develop. Physics or chemistry, 
for example, dealing with more complex phenomena, need more time to 
develop towards and arrive at the positive stage.  

Notes 275
 29 .   For recent examples of examinations of Brentano’s positivism in the PES 
that downplay the Aristotelian framework through which Brentano reads 
Comte, see Münch, 1989 and Hickerson, 2007.  
 30  .   “Brentano’s concept of a phenomenon was fundamentally of the Comtean 
‘fact’ ” (28); and furthermore, as Hickerson points out as early as 1869, 
Brentano had written of how Comte was the most important thinker of 
modernity (& cf. Brentano’s PP, 99).  
 31 .   But see Jacquette, who maintains that in the PES Brentano practices a 
“Humean methodological empiricism in the interests of an Aristotelian 
metaphysical realism that is also, in a distinct, non-Humean way, empiri-
cist” (Jacquette, 2006, 12).  
 32 .   Mill writes of how, “[T]here remains [in Comte’s philosophy] a further 
and distinct question. We are taught the right way of searching for results, 
but when a result has been reached, how shall we know that it is true? 
How assure ourselves that the process has been performed correctly, and 
that our premises, whether consisting of generalities or of particular facts, 
really prove the conclusion we have grounded on them? On this question, 
Comte throws no light. He supplies no test of proof. As regards deduction, 
he neither recognises the syllogistic system of Aristotle and his successors 
(the insufficiency of which is as evident as its utility is real) nor proposes 
any other in lieu of it: and of induction he has no canons whatever. He 
does not seem to admit the possibility of any general criterion by which 
to decide whether a given inductive inference is correct or not” (Mill, 
1866, 55). Brentano viewed Mill and Comte both as lacking the theoretical 
requirements of exact proof in inductive and deductive inference in their 
respective systems. In his Würzburg lectures, Brentano states that, although 
Mill has a more developed understanding of logical and scientific inference, 
he is nonetheless “to Kant as Comte is to Hume, because [Mill] also denies 
the possibility of any certain inference to a transcendent cause, although 
for reasons which differ considerably from Kant’s” (OEG, 121).  
 33 .   In the PES Brentano describes his position as coming nearer to Mill than 
Kant, while nonetheless “not agreeing [with Mill’s phenomenalism] in all 
essential aspects. What Mill calls ‘the permanent possibilities of sensation,’ 
is closely associated with what we have called forces” (PES, 99n). In his 
Würzburg lectures Brentano writes, “Mill misunderstood the significance 
of the probability calculus in his otherwise praiseworthy logic. He even 
misconstrued the relation between mathematics and induction, since he 
tried to base all of mathematics on induction, whereas really any inductive 
inference requires mathematical considerations for an assessment of its 
validity” (cf. OEG, 122ff.).  
 34  .   And cf. Leibniz, 1989, 292. Brentano’s esteem for Leibniz and appreciation of 
the earlier German thinker’s contributions to psychology and epistemology, 
however, are evident from other sources. For example, in his essay “ The Four 
Phases of Philosophy ” Brentano writes of Leibniz that, he “had ... many a good 
psychological insight” (Brentano cited in Satris ed., 1999, 20).  
 35  .   Citations to Herbart in the index of the PES are plentiful. With 26 mentions, 
he is the most cited figure after only Aristotle (82), Kant (53), J. S. Mill (42) 
and Alexander Bain (29). Comte, by contrast, is cited on 18 pages, Berkeley 
on 6 and Hegel not at all – unless we count Krauss’s note on page xxix 

276 Notes
to the original “Foreword” added to the 1924 edition of Brentano’s text. 
Herbart’s actual influence in Germany and on the German speaking parts 
of the Hapsburg Empire in the mid- to late nineteenth century seem all 
but forgotten today. However, things were different in the late nineteenth 
century as, for example, Zeller points out in an 1873 text, “ Nächst Hegel hat 
während des letzten Menschenalters kein anderer deutscher Philosoph einen bedeu-
tenderen Einfluss ausgeübt als Herbart ” (Zeller cited in Huemer and Landerer, 
2010, 89n 2). Brentano’s disagreements with Herbart are brought home 
most strikingly by an account given in a letter written by his [then] student 
Freud to a colleague. A year after the publication of the PES, Sigmund Freud 
reports of how his one-time teacher had a quite critical attitude towards 
Herbart. “[Brentano] utterly condemned [Herbart’s] a priori constructions 
in psychology, thought it unforgivable that Herbart had never deigned 
to consult experience or experiment to check whether these agreed with 
his arbitrary assumptions, declared himself unreservedly a follower of the 
empiricist school which applies the methods of science to philosophy and 
to psychology in particular ... , and mentioned a few remarkable psycho-
logical observations that demonstrate the untenability of Herbart’s specu-
lations” (letter from Freud to Eduard Silberstein, 13 March 1875. Quoted 
in Cohen, 2000, 110). Brentano’s hostility here has to be balanced with 
both the obvious acquaintance he had of Herbart’s writings and the latter’s 
position in the German philosophical world of the 1870s. Brentano was, in 
a sense, trying to take up Herbart’s project of establishing a scientific psych-
ology and proving Kant wrong, therefore his criticisms of Herbart should be 
read with this awareness of similarities of goal in mind.  
 36  .   However, Crane continues, “This is what distinguishes Brentano from 
phenomenalism proper: he believes that there is something beyond the 
phenomena, although we can never know it. Nonetheless, this knowledge 
can never come through science; so as far as science is concerned, phenom-
enalism might as well be true” (Crane in Textor, 2007, 27–28). But, basically 
following Simons, Crane elaborates, “If one is a methodological phenomen-
alist, one construes intentional relations as relations to phenomena, which 
are mental or mind-dependent. Since every intentional mental act is a rela-
tion to  some phenomenon or other, then there simply is no issue about the 
non-existence, or the possible non-existence, of objects of thought” (Crane, 
2007, 32–33). As will be argued in Chapter 6 below, the PES does indeed take 
account of the fact that thought can be directed to the non-existent, this is 
what the intentional directedness to a content essentially means, that there 
can be a mental representation standing in for a transcendent object.  
 37  .   Hickerson nonetheless claims that physical facts are said not to be 
mind-dependent for Brentano as “ ... in addition to treating physical 
phenomena as mental contents, Brentano treated them as psychophysical 
causes. This pairing of theses, part and parcel of Brentano’s ‘empirical stand-
points’, results in a rather severe theoretical problem: integrating sensible 
contents with judgeable contents” (Hickerson, 2007, 22). The careful reader 
is left curious about a) precisely what Brentano’s “somewhat older under-
standing of the physical” amounts to, and b) how physical phenomena 
can be mental contents but simultaneously strongly independent of the 
mind. I will argue in Chapter 4 below that the Aristotelian context of both 

Notes 277
real existence and all relations directed to, and dependent on, existing 
substances must be taken into account as making possible mental reference. 
At least this connection of Brentano’s earlier ontological writings must be 
taken into account for anything like an intelligible rendering of the posi-
tion of the PES to be arrived at.  
 38  .   Compare G.E. Moore’s account of the perception of an envelope: “But now, 
what happened to each of us, when we saw that envelope? I will begin by 
describing  part of what happened to me. I saw a patch of a particular whitish 
colour, having a certain shape ... These things: this patch of a whitish 
colour, and its size and shape I did actually see. And I propose to call these 
things, the colour and size and shape,  sense-data ... ” ( Some Main Problems of 
Philosophy 30).  
 39 .  Brentano’s later assessment of analytic phenomenalism, which he learned 
from Mach himself was, on the whole, critical and negative. It would also 
follow that Brentano would be critical of analytical phenomenalism in the 
PES, especially given his explicit claims there that science must be grounded 
on metaphysics.  
 40  .  It is even closer to Edmund Husserl’s later transcendental idealist thesis that 
the natural attitude rests on the phenomenological or so-called transcen-
dental attitude, cf. Husserl’s  Ideas I (Husserl, 1913).  
 41  .   This claim will sound controversial and even wrong to many scholars and 
readers of Brentano. Brentano is frequently critical of Kant and Kantianism. 
To these readers I can only say that there are many ‘Kants’. The version of 
Kant’s thought Brentano was most familiar with was the neo-Kantian formu-
lation. Kant’s actual position is often much closer to Brentano than he was 
willing to admit. In Section 8.3, this issue will be explored in greater detail.  
 42  .   There is a strong Cartesian flavor to Brentano’s position as stated here. 
The certainty of inner perception, and the direct knowledge of mental 
phenomena that this allows, sound very much like the certainty Descartes 
derived from the act of doubting and the discovery of the cogito in his 
 Meditations . Although Descartes’ presence is strongly felt in the PES, it is 
seen more in the area of classification of mental or psychic phenomena 
than in any substantial borrowings of metaphysical doctrine.  
 43  .  See the PES bk I, Ch. IV, § 3 (p. 71 in the English translation) and also 
bk II, Ch. I, §7 (i.e. PES, 92–94) where Brentano writes, “it is undoubtedly 
true that a color appears to us only when we have a presentation of it. We 
cannot conclude from this, however, that a color cannot exist without being 
presented” (PES, 93). Although, given Brentano’s conception of the mind 
and the act of sensation, it would be best to characterize Brentano’s position 
as what Herman Philipse calls “hypothetical” scientific realism rather than 
as any naive form of “direct” realism (Philipse, 1995). Philipse writes, 
“According to Brentano, science is concerned with the world  an sich , which 
is assumed as a hypothesis in order to explain our sensations” (Philipse 
1995, 316n). Although in his Würzburg lectures on metaphysics and logic, 
Brentano clarifies that the probabilistic assumption of the existence of the 
external world is so high as to constitute essentially a self-evident or certain 
truth. 
 44 .   In this regard Tomassi is more accurate about Brentano’s thought when he 
writes, “Brentano’s own theoretical views or works were mostly based on 

278 Notes
Aristotle and Thomas’ thoughts on metaphysics ... [Brentano’s] main inten-
tion was to develop a scientific demonstration on this topic, and ... this 
issue occupied his mind until his death” (Tomassi, 2007, 107). Much of the 
confusion surrounding Brentano’s understanding of both science and the 
inductive generalization of laws in the PES stems, I think, from a failure to 
take into account this basic Aristotelian outlook and its influence on his 
approach to philosophy and science.  
 4 “Intentional Inexistence” and the Separation 
of “Psychic” from “Physical” Phenomena 
 1 .  “Mental Phenomena in General” is in fact how this title is rendered in the 
Rancurello, Terrell and McAlister edition of the existing English translation 
which, as mentioned, is a more or less acceptable translation. Nonetheless 
it should be stated here that by “ psychischen ”, Brentano frequently means 
conscious and immediately apprehended or genuinely psychological 
phenomena that can be known or grasped with immediate evidence. In 
philosophy of mind this loosely corresponds to a distinction that was later 
made between the psychological and the phenomenal concepts of mind 
(cf. Chalmers, 1996, 25–27). The former is a wider category than the latter 
(once again loosely corresponding to Brentano’s category of certain psychic 
or mental and certain “physical” phenomena), while the category of the 
phenomenal or what is also known as “phenomenal consciousness” is actu-
ally far closer to what Brentano means by  psychischen , i.e. immediately 
apprehended aspects of experience that are said to make mental or psychic 
phenomena irreducibly conscious. More about this will be said below, here 
we can only add that, because Brentano uses the term “phenomena” to cover 
both aspects of the psychological and of the immediately apprehended 
conscious aspects of experience, we will continue to use both mental and 
psychic to translate  psychischen and it will be stressed throughout that many 
aspects of so-called physical phenomena are, in fact, broadly psychological 
for Brentano.  
 2 .   “Die gesammte Welt unserer Erscheinungen zerfällt in zwei grosse Classen, 
in die Classe der physischen und in die der psychischen Phänomene” 
(PES-G, 101).  
 3 .  Also Brentano cites the case of Alexander Bain, who in the third edition 
of his book  Mental Science , claims that the proper realm of study of psych-
ology should be grounded on self-consciousness and introspection. In 
his text Bain was attempting to delimit the subject matter of psychology. 
After holding psychology to be the science of the subject, or science of 
the “mind”, Bain goes on to maintain that, although we know the phys-
ical world through our organs (our eyes, ears, sense of touch, etc.), the 
perception of matter or “object consciousness” is nonetheless intim-
ately connected with the putting forth of muscular energy on the part 
of the body. This “object consciousness” is distinguished by Bain from 
the passive “feelings” that characterize so-called “subject consciousness”. 
Having established the above difference, Bain finally gives examples 
of “subject consciousness”. Bain’s examples run along the lines of: the 

Notes 279
perception of light, the perception of colors, the sensation of warmth felt 
while taking a bath, etc. In effect, Brentano notes, Bain conflates object 
and subject consciousness in an inextricable way. On Bain’s classification, 
the exact same phenomena (sensations) can, and do, indicate both object 
and subject consciousness as he earlier defined them (PES, 77n\PES-G, 
101–02).  
 4 .  For a classic dismissal of Brentano’s project as “mentalist” and unnecessary 
for formulating a consistent philosophy of mind, see Bertrand Russell’s  The 
Analysis of Mind (1921). There, Russell, like the later William James (whom 
Russell quotes approvingly), gives an explicitly phenomenalist account of 
what he calls “sense-data” as the only possible correlates or objects of direct 
awareness. Russell not only rejects Brentano’s notion of mental or psychic 
act but also the very notion of the intentionality of the mental, claiming 
that it is a mere theoretical construct. “[T]he  act seems unnecessary and ficti-
tious. The occurrence of the content of a thought constitutes the occurrence 
of the thought. Empirically, I cannot discover anything corresponding to 
act; and theoretically I cannot see that it is indispensable” (Russell, 1921, 
17–18). Russell then cites Ernst Mach’s  Analysis of Sensations (1886 [1914]) and 
claims it is a work, “of fundamental importance in the present connection” 
(Russell, 1921, 22n 1). For recent attempts to somehow reduce conscious-
ness or the essentially mental (including intentionality) to either phys-
ical or ultimately physiological structures cf. Patricia Churchland (1986), 
Fred Dretske (1988) and Daniel Dennet (1991). For the claim that mentalist 
categories or phenomena are methodologically unnecessary to any truly 
“scientific” psychology, cf. Watson (1914) and Skinner (1971). Finally, for 
a more recent argument that consciousness, the mental and intentionality 
are in effect separate matters, cf. Colin McGinn’s essay “Consciousness and 
Content” (1991).  
 5 .   Although he gives explanations of what distinguishes the mental, Brentano’s 
actual reasons for giving the mental the criteria he does will be shown to 
be determined by his own very distinct methodological and philosophical 
concerns.  
 6 .   Here, apparently, we are presented yet again with what can be called a 
highly ambiguous use of the term  phenomena. The “landscape” example 
has been the subject of much controversy. Some commentators argue that 
in order to be consistent with his use in other places in the PES, we must 
assume that Brentano means the characteristics of being extended and 
colored that pertain to a landscape and not the collective or active impres-
sion of seeing the landscape (cf. Kraus’s note to the above passage in the 
1924 edition of the PES). The actual seeing of anything, including a tran-
scendent collection of many objects such as a landscape, as is obvious from 
Brentano’s earlier definition of terms, would be a  mental or psychic phenom-
enon, (i.e. an activity) and not a physical phenomenon (i.e. a content). The 
objective properties grasped as contents or sense data, by contrast, i.e. the 
landscape’s extension, different colored aspects etc., would be the physical 
phenomena presented to us. Dermot Moran, for one, argues that the inclu-
sion of the “landscape” example refers to a “mental picture of the scenery”, 
(Moran, 1996, 20n 63). Against this reading, however, Ryan Hickerson, in 
line with his claim that Brentano is a Comtean positivist in the PES, writes 

280 Notes
of how: “[Brentano] treated phenomena as the objects of investigation of 
positive sciences, and physical phenomena as facts that appear in (i.e. are 
the contents of) and cause sensations” (Hickerson, 2007, 39). Hickerson goes 
on to maintain that the famous “landscape” example is not only meant 
to denote a physical landscape but also that, as such, it provides further 
evidence of Brentano’s thorough going “non-mentalist” phenomenalism. 
Bartok (2005) cites the landscape example as evidence of a misstep on 
Brentano’s part and an error. For reasons discussed in the previous chapter 
above, and because of the ambiguity Brentano himself bestows on the term 
“phenomena”, I am prone to side neither with Kraus and Bartok nor with 
Moran and Hickerson completely on this matter. In general, however, I agree 
with Hickerson that any radically immanent reading of Brentano’s use of 
physical phenomena or the contents of perception is a mistake. Below it will 
be claimed, based on a close reading and interpretation of relevant passages 
from the PES, that mental acts are directed to reality and not always or only 
to immanent contents, even if for Brentano epistemological justification is 
necessary for taking account of the “things in themselves” or the causes of 
our sensations.  
 7  .   On this point cf. Hermann Philipse, 1987. Philipse’s reading of Brentano’s 
doctrine of intentional inexistence is largely in accord with the position 
argued for here. Two important qualifications, however, must be made to 
characterize the difference between my reading and Philipse’s. The first 
regards the reconstruction of Brentano’s motivation and justification for 
positing the doctrine of “intentional inexistence”. Philipse attributes 
Brentano’s motives in formulating his doctrine of intentional inexistence 
to his attempt to account for mental acts, while simultaneously embracing 
“the new corpuscular philosophy of Descartes or the neo-atomists in the 
seventeenth century” (Philipse, 296). Philipse also describes the corpus-
cular philosophy as one positing a mechanistic explanation of nature and 
a separation between primary and secondary qualities (see also Philipse, 
1995 for more details on the corpuscular ontology). There is, however, no 
evidence that Brentano follows the atomists of any century in his onto-
logical doctrines and furthermore,  pace Philipse, Brentano obviously does 
not attribute the distinction between primary and secondary qualities to 
a “corpuscular philosophy” as he finds this view implicit in Aristotle (cf. 
Chapter 2 above). Secondly, Philipse writes of how, for Brentano, perceptual 
qualities “do not exist”, neither, “in physical reality nor in the stream of 
consciousness” (297). What Brentano actually says is that the mental object 
is not a real thing ( nicht eine Realität , PES-G, 115; and see below). Philipse 
again seems to ignore important ontological distinctions that Brentano 
holds and draws from his earlier Aristotelian studies that influence the 
development of his doctrines in the PES.  
 8  .   This taking of an object is also an ambiguous formulation for characterizing 
the mental. This is because, for Brentano, psychic acts can present contents 
and, furthermore, the primary object of the act is described as “not always 
known” (PES, 226). Brentano also later notes that when psychic acts are 
presenting objects without any non-appearing or unactualized potential, 
and in simple acts of presenting, we are still unable to truly perceive the 
transcendent cause of our presentations.  

Notes 281
 9 .   Pace Husserl who in the “Fifth Investigation” of his  Logical Investigations 
maintains that the “presentative law”, as it can be called, i.e. no psychic 
act without a presentation, is actually a definitive criterion for the mental 
and not merely necessary, but insufficient, as Brentano actually holds (cf. 
Husserl, 1900/1901, LI V § 44). As will be seen in Part III below, Husserl 
had both external and internal or philosophical reasons for interpreting 
Brentano’s position this way.  
 10 .   The German text reads as follows: “Jedes psychische Phänomen ist durch das 
charakterisirt, was die Scholastiker des Mittelalters die intentionale (auch 
wohl mentale) Inexistenz eines Gegenstandes genannt haben, und was wir, 
obwohl mit nicht ganz unzweideutigen Ausdrücken, die Beziehung auf 
einen Inhalt, die Richtung auf ein Object (worunter hier nicht eine Realität 
zu verstehen ist), oder die immanente Gegenständlichkeit nennen würden. 
Jedes enthält etwas als Object in sich, obwohl nicht jedes in gleicher Weise. 
In der Vorstellung ist etwas vorgestellt, in dem Urtheile ist etwas anerkannt 
oder verworfen, in der Liebe geliebt, in dem Hasse gehasst, in dem Begehren 
begehrt u.s.w.)” (PES-G, 115).  
 11  .   Chisholm 1967, 201–04.  
 12  .   See Herbert Spiegelberg’s paper on “ ‘Intention’ and ‘intentionality’ in the 
Scholastics, Brentano and Husserl ” in  The Context of the Phenomenological 
Movement , Phenomenologica series 80, Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague, (1981), 
3–26. For the above distinction see p. 4. Brentano, as Spiegelberg points 
out, does not use the term  intentio or “intentionality” in his writings, 
“Presumably someone who knew the Scholastics as well as Brentano had a 
good reason for avoiding the expression intentio, which was all too remin-
iscent of the various theories of knowledge connected with this term, and, 
in particular, of the Thomistic species doctrine” (Spiegelberg 1981, 9)..  
 13  .   On this point, cf. again, Spiegelberg 1981, 9.  
 14 .  Cf. Roderick M. Chisholm,  Perceiving: A Philosophical Study (1957), especially 
chapter 11 “Intentional Inexistence”, 168–85. There Chisholm writes that: 
“We may say that in our language, the expressions ‘looks for’, ‘expects’, 
‘believes’ occur in sentences which are intentional or are used intention-
ally, whereas ‘sits in’, ‘eats’, and ‘shoots’ do not. We can formulate a working 
criterion by means of which we can distinguish sentences that are inten-
tional, or are used intentionally, in a certain language from sentences that 
are not” (Chisholm, 1957, 169). Chisholm in effect blurs the distinction 
between “intentionality” in what will be shown to be Brentano’s sense, 
and “intensionality” or directedness to a mental content or proposition. 
Brentano’s position will be seen to be both broader, insofar as he is inter-
ested in pre-linguistic phenomena, and narrower insofar as the ontological 
framework for the intentional reference is left implicit in the PES.  
 15  .   Cf. McAlister, 1974; Philipse, 1987; and more recently, Moran, 1996; Bartok, 
2005; and Crane 2006.  
 16 .   Crane (2006), De Boer (1978), McDonnell (2006) and Moran (1996); see 
especially page 4, “Brentano is most accurately understood in the rather 
restricted context of a historically late, nuanced Scholastico-Cartesian 
view of the mind”. Ausonio Marrass, in TPB, 128–39, argues something 
like the above. And see also Runggaldier (1989), Sorabji (1991) and Herbert 
Spiegelberg,  op. cit .(1981).  

282 Notes
 17  .   It can be added here that it would be somewhat ironic, given the condem-
nation of his work and teaching as Jesuitical and Scholastic by many of 
his contemporaries, if Brentano’s neo-Aristotelian philosophy of mind is 
rejected solely due to its supposed lack of faithfulness to some Thomistic 
or other traditional standard of Scholastic realism (cf. McDonnell, 2006). 
For an account of the acrimony Brentano encountered from fellow philoso-
phers due to his neo-Aristotelian approach cf. Chapter One above and also 
E. Husserl “Reminiscences of Franz Brentano” (in TPB, 47).  
 18  .   Given that the class of psychic and physical phenomena both fall within 
the realm of experience, this brings up the controversial point of whether, 
according to Tim Crane, Brentano has any interest in understanding how 
we can think about non-existent objects (cf. Crane 2006). Emphasizing the 
epistemological and internalist aspects of Brentano’s theory, Crane main-
tains that the PES displays absolutely no ability to discuss non-existent 
objects. Crane does subsequently state that Brentano later backtracked and 
worked out a theory for taking into account the mode of being of intentional 
objects, but nonetheless his reading of Brentano’s PES can be contested. 
Crane’s reading is contradicted, I think, both by the content of Brentano’s 
earlier writings on ontology and metaphysics (see Chapter 2 above) and 
other statements made by Brentano. See, for example, Brentano’s letter to 
Anton Marty dating from 17 March 1905 where he writes, “it has never been 
my view that the immanent object is identical with ‘object of thought’. 
What we think about is the object or thing and not the ‘object of thought’” 
(cf. Brentano 1966, 77–79). Thus, Crane is correct to state that the focus in 
the PES is on the mental but wrong to say that the ontological context of 
intentionality is of absolutely no concern to Brentano. Many passages in the 
PES itself (cf. for example, Book Two, chapter 7. § 13 of the PES, 228–30) also 
evince an interest in classifying the ontological status of the mental and its 
contents and objects in more than a merely structural manner.  
 19  .   In fact the whole thrust of Brentano’s arguments for the directedness of 
the mental implies that it is directed to what is not mental, i.e. sensation 
contents that “enter into” and “appear in” the mental act (cf. PES, 95; 98). 
The representationally “inexistent” objects, in turn, are said to point to 
non-appearing causes of sensations. At most it can be said that the nature 
and exploration of what is mind transcendent is “bracketed” in the PES. 
As Barry Smith points out, “one will find no coherent interpretation of 
Brentano’s principle of intentionality so long as one remains within the 
framework of our usual, commonsensical notions of both the mind and 
its objects” (Smith, 1994, 40). The “bracketing” of the transcendent can be 
attributed to Brentano’s classification of sciences and the approach taken 
in the PES for assessing ontological or scientific truths about the external 
world. Brentano’s position on this matter is different from a naive realist 
position. Brentano stresses, for example, how the attainment of epistemo-
logical justification of scientific laws, and existence claims as well, must be 
grounded on the immediate access to evidence that only the sphere of imme-
diate experience, as treated in a philosophical psychology, can provide. By 
contrast, the nature and behavior of mind-transcendent physical objects 
(note,  not physical phenomena) must be treated by the natural sciences 
other than psychology. In Part III below it is argued that Brentano’s theory 

Notes 283
of intentional relations can be expanded to say something important about 
the epistemological/ontological dilemma arising when attempts to coher-
ently conceptualize the mode of being or existence of objects of false beliefs 
is made, cf. Chapter 7 below.  
 20  .   Most commentators take this reference to modes of being to refer to the 
 modus essendi doctrine that developed originally out of a medieval debate 
between Platonic realists and Aristotelian moderate realists. The nature of 
the  modus essendi debate, however, rested on both philosophical and theo-
logical matters, and an explication of it would take us too far afield from 
the psychological matters under consideration here. Interested readers 
can consult F. van Steenberghen’s 1980 work  Thomas Aquinas & Radical 
Aristotelianism and John Peterson’s  Introduction to Scholastic Realism (1999) 
for details.  
 21  .   British Empiricism, Comte, Descartes, Leibniz, Herbart, etc. will all be seen 
to play significant roles in Brentano’s development of doctrines in the PES.  
 22  .   The historical sources for this notion are given in a famous footnote to the 
“intentionality” passage. As Brentano understands the term “intentional 
(in) existence”, and so far as he formulates a conception of intentional refer-
ence, the PES footnote informs us, it stems from Aristotle’s notion of mental 
in-existence in the  De Anima . Brentano interprets it thus: “the sensed object, 
as such, is in the sensing subject; ... the sense contains the sensed object 
without its matter; ... the object which is thought is in the thinking intel-
lect” (PES, 88n\PES-G, 115n).Philo, we are told, also had a doctrine of mental 
existence and in-existence but, according to Brentano, confused them in his 
“contradictory doctrine of the logos and ideas” (PES, 88n). The Neoplatonists, 
including St. Augustine with his doctrine of the  Verbim mentis and his theory 
of inner light were equally contradictory and Anselm and Thomas Aquinas 
are also mentioned but apparently the theological concerns of both kept 
them from reaching clarity on the matter (cf. PES, 88n). Therefore, we 
were justified in stating above the doctrine of intentional inexistence has 
definite origins in the philosophy of Aristotle (or at least Brentano’s reading 
of Aristotle) and also borrows terms from the Scholastics. Brentano himself 
would later admit that the above formulations were “imperfect” and modi-
fied his view of relations accordingly. See especially Appendix I to the 
English translation of the  Psychology , “Mental Reference as Distinguished 
from Relation in the Strict Sense” (PES, 271ff). Here we are interested in the 
1874 formulation and with all the ambiguity contained therein.  
 23  .   This characterization of Brentano’s ambitions is borrowed from Dieter 
Münch, see his article “ Brentano and Comte ” (Münch, 1989). It is also empha-
sized by Ryan Hickerson in his 2007 book  The History of Intentionality , cf. 
especially pp. 26–31.  
 24  .   Cf. Hickerson, who writes of Brentano’s phenomenalist metaphysics and 
strict empiricist methodology that he, in positivist fashion, eschews meta-
physics as best he can. In “following Comte in treating phenomena as facts 
investigated by sciences”, “[Brentano] thereby eschew[s] claims about their 
causal (i.e. ‘metaphysical’) origins” (Hickerson, 2007, 34; 43; 132n 34).  
 25  .   Specifically Descartes, as regards taxonomy (see Chapter 6 below) and 
Leibniz with his notion of the mind as an “active unified substance”. 
Leibniz’s concept of the monad as simple and spiritual i.e. intensively 

284 Notes
defined and qualitative in essence could also have played a part in influ-
encing Brentano’s notion of the mental. For a summary of Leibniz’s contri-
butions to modern psychology (see Robinson, 1995, 216–17).  
 26  .  There is direct evidence in the form of a letter to a fellow Dominican, 
Heinrich S. Denifle, where Brentano explains the intent of his lectures 
on the history of philosophy from Würzburg. In this letter we see that, 
while still a Dominican priest himself, Brentano criticizes the reliance of 
Dominican intellectuals on the  Summae of Thomas Aquinas. Brentano’s 
main criticism was that he believed the Dominicans were responding to 
the Thomistic texts without first engaging in critical and foundational 
philosophical questioning (cf. Brentano’s letter to Heinrich S. Denifle 5 
May 1869, cited in Tomassi, 2007, 105). Furthermore, additional evidence 
of the break between Brentano’s philosophical framework from that of the 
Scholastics can be found in the PES itself. In Book Two, chapter 7, Brentano 
writes of how Thomistic conceptions of existence and essence and other 
“high flying [Scholastic] speculations ... will no longer carry anyone aloft 
with them” (PES, 230). Finally, it is argued by Gyula Klima, a scholar of 
medieval philosophy, that a detailed comparison of Brentano’s doctrines 
with those of the Scholastics reveals major differences in how the Scholastic 
concept of intentionality was articulated versus Brentano’s version of the 
theory. For example, Klima shows how the Scholastics extended “intention-
ality” to many non-cognitive and even non-mental activities and processes. 
Focusing on Thomas Aquinas, Klima states, “[For] Aquinas, intentionality or 
aboutness is the property of any form of information carried by anything. If 
we look at his remarks about  esse intentionale in this way, all will make good 
sense. After all, it is not only my perceptions and my thoughts that carry 
information about my environment, but also the medium carrying this 
information to my senses” (Klima, 2009, 2). By contrast Brentano’s doctrine 
is articulated solely as a criterion for demarcating and distinguishing the 
higher level mental activity of human cognitive life. Also, as Spiegelberg 
points out, Brentano never used the independent term “intention”, but 
spoke rather of “intentional” relations  in consciousness. Nonetheless, there 
are also mentions of “intentionality” ( Intentionalität ) by Brentano in manu-
scripts from unfinished parts of the PES and lectures (cf. Rollinger, 2011, 6, 
who cites its appearance in two manuscripts in Brentano’s  Nachlass , signa-
ture EL 81/13508 and Ps 50/52149).  
 27  .  Cf. Moran 1996, 27 & Jacquette, 1996, 138, & 2004, 107, etc. But the origins 
of this immanent object reading of Brentano’s doctrine of intentionality 
actually goes back to certain of Brentano’s immediate students such as 
Twardowski, Meinong and Husserl, cf. Part III below.  
 28  .   As was argued above, neither explanation of Brentano’s position bears scru-
tiny and therefore, we must refrain from either of these readings. Part of the 
problem for their persistence in the secondary literature may be that in his 
later writings on psychology, including his University of Vienna lectures 
from the 1880s (attended by Husserl) Brentano did make the immanent 
content a more pronounced feature of the intentional relation. In these later 
lectures, however, the genetic versus descriptive division within psychology 
is made both explicitly made and pronounced. Reading this distinction 
back into the PES is nonetheless still not recommended. And so while it is 

Notes 285
true that in the PES Brentano wants to make psychology the study of mental 
phenomena and their contents, in this earlier work – up to the time of the 
PES – Brentano is still under the influence of Aristotle and even maintains a 
correspondence theory of truth. For details on how this theory relates to his 
earlier realist ontology of relations, cf. Part One of Brentano’s  The True and 
the Evident (1966).  
 29  .   See Brentano’s letter to Anton Marty, 17 March 1905 (published in TE, 
77–79). There, Brentano writes “It has never been my view that the  imma-
nent object is identical with “object of thought”. What we think about is  the 
object or  thing and not the “object of thought” ”. Brentano has been accused 
of twisting his words here and misreading his own earlier doctrines, but I 
will argue below that there is textual evidence that he was not misreading 
or forgetting his own earlier position.  
 30  .   Even if Brentano would later articulate a radically externalist theory of 
intentional reference in the very last, so-called  reist, phase of his thought, 
there is no evidence, however, that this position underlies the intentional 
relation in the PES. In the PES, Brentano still seems more closely committed 
to the ontological doctrines of his earlier Aristotelian writings, i.e. a frame-
work that allows for both manifold senses of being and the existence of  entia 
rationis or abstract entities. For the later Brentano, after 1904 by contrast, all 
real relations between a thinker and external objects are abandoned and 
all truth found to reside squarely in the evident judgment. For more on 
Brentano’s “reism”, cf. Woleński, 1996 (in SB, 357–76) and CCB, 197–219. For 
differences between the position of the PES regarding relations and his later 
thought cf. Chapter 7 of Part III.  
 31  .   Nonetheless, many thinkers read Brentano’s “intentional inexistence” 
claim as meaning that when we are directed to objects intentionally, we are 
in fact directed to an intentional object that does not exist in the external 
world. Therefore, on this reading, the thinker is normally directed to a tran-
scendent object, such as a tree, and in certain cases thought is merely related 
to the non-existing tree currently manifest in (as a proper part of) mental 
activity. In-existence, on this view, becomes the mode of being of the inten-
tional object in the mind. This makes an intentional object the equivalent 
of a phantasm or an idea, literally an object manifested by the thinker’s 
occurent mental activity. However, although Brentano writes in the PES 
that, “every mental phenomenon is characterized by the intentional inex-
istence of an object”, it is true that by “object” he does not necessarily mean 
a mind-independent object; as the immediate qualification of their being 
also a, “reference to a content” makes clear (PES, 88). This should not be 
taken to imply that Brentano is articulating some kind of failed causal rela-
tion to objects transcendent of experience as the model against which the 
successful intentional relation to a transcendent object must be measured.  
 32  .   Against John Stuart Mill, therefore, an unconscious consciousness is not 
in the same category as an impossible state of affairs such as a “non-red 
redness” (PES, 102). Brentano distinguishes between an active and passive 
sense of unconsciousness. In the first, a person is simply not conscious of 
a thing that he is also directly aware of, while in the second, a thing of 
which we are not conscious is posited to exist in consciousness hidden from 
any awareness. In the first or active sense, an unconscious consciousness 

286 Notes
is a contradiction but not, we are told, in the second passive sense (cf. PES, 
102n). For a detailed history of the notion of the unconscious from 1680–
1880 cf. Whyte, (1962).  
 33  .   Eduard von Hartmann (1842–1906) is best known for his work  The 
Philosophy of the Unconscious (1868). There Hartmann articulated a philo-
sophical theory that featured the notion of “the unconscious” as an 
ultimate and metaphysical principle. Hartmann described this principle as 
“partly transcendental” and “partly empirical”. In his study  The Unconscious 
Before Freud , Lancelot Law Whyte writes of how “Von Hartmann’s work and 
his influence throughout Europe has sometimes been underestimated” 
(Whyte, 1962, 154), which, if one is taking the course of twentieth-century 
philosophy into account, seems like an accurate claim.  
 34 .   The blind spot phenomena can, in fact, be easily experienced by all normal 
sighted people in scenarios constructed to emphasize the obscuration of the 
visual field in respect to appropriately placed objects.  
 35  .   cf. http://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/spot Last accessed: May 
14, 2012  
 36  .   Leibniz discusses apperception in Section 4 of the  Principles of Nature and 
of Grace (1714), where he writes that apperception is “ consciousness , or the 
reflective knowledge of this internal state [of the soul] ... something not 
given to all souls, nor at all times to a given soul.” Elucidating the above 
definition, Kulstad comments, “A common understanding is that for Leibniz 
apperception is distinctive of spirits, and is not present in even the highest 
of animals beneath humans. While there is evidence that Leibniz at least 
sometimes adopts this position, there is also evidence that he sometimes 
endorses the view that (at least some) beasts also apperceive. Since we may 
assume that at a minimum apperception involves consciousness (though not 
necessarily certain higher forms of consciousness, e.g., self-consciousness, 
or reflective consciousness, in one sense or another), this leads to some 
uncertainty as to whether Leibniz assigns consciousness to beasts, that is, 
whether he does or does not agree with the famous Cartesian principle that 
beasts are not conscious, but only material automata” (cf. Kulstad & Carlin, 
2007).  
 37  .   See Thomas’s  Summa Contra Gentiles , Book II, chapter 49, paragraph 8, where 
he cites Aristotle’s  Physics VIII, 5, 256a2–33 to support this point.  
 38  .   It should be noted here that the disagreement is not about the relevance or 
active role that the unconscious plays in determining intellectual life. Both 
Thomas and Brentano want to say that our conscious thought is deter-
mined by higher level processes and should not, therefore, be reduced to 
blind impulse or unconscious urges and desires. In this sense, Brentano’s 
position is very close to the Thomist or neo-Thomist position. Therefore, 
he would agree completely with, e.g. the claims made by Gustav Weigel 
and Arthur G. Madden when, building on a broadly neo-Thomist position 
in their work on epistemology they claim: “Consciousness is the basis of 
all knowledge. That there can be no unconscious knowledge is readily 
admitted. The Freudian unconscious ideas are not knowledge but deter-
mined urges to action which can be expressed by ideas. The Freudian 
‘unconscious’ does not ‘know’ what it wants. It is a structural dynamism” 
(cf. Weigel and Madden, 1961, 16).  

Notes 287
 39 .  When dealing with Kant and his philosophy of mind, we must always be 
careful in what we attribute to him and how we read his views. This is 
because Kant himself admitted that the direct study of the mind or psych-
ology was not the explicit aim in the  Critique of Pure Reason (cf. A xvii). 
Furthermore, Kant does not focus on the mind exclusively or in detail in 
any other of his many works. Nonetheless, as Andrew Brook points out, 
“In the two editions of CPR, there are seven main discussions of the mind. 
The first is in the Transcendental Aesthetic, the second is in what is usually 
called the Metaphysical Deduction ... Then there are two discussions of it in 
the first edition [Transcendental Deduction], in parts 1 to 3 of Section 2 (A 
98–A 110) and in the whole of Section 3 (A 115–A 127) and two more in the 
second edition TD, from B 129 to B 140 and from B 153 to B 159, the latter 
seemingly added as a kind of supplement. The seventh and last is found in 
the first edition version of Kant’s attack on the Paralogisms, in the course 
of which he says things of the utmost interest about consciousness of and 
reference to self” (cf. Brook, 2008).  
 5 Psychic Acts Further Explored: The Unity of Consciousness 
and Brentano’s Classification of Mental Acts 
 1 .   Later, as he comes to rely on and make greater use of the mereological 
distinctions “parts of wholes” or “accidents of substances”, Brentano 
becomes more interested in exclusively ontological concerns. See Krauss’s 
comment in the PES, 161n. Also see Brentano’s  Descriptive Psychology for an 
application of these later views to act psychology (now classified as descrip-
tive psychology) and see  The Theory of Categories for a general explication 
of his mature ontological position. A good introduction to Brentano’s later 
ontological doctrines is Roderick Chisholm’s article “ Brentano’s Conception of 
Substance and Accident ” in  Grazer Philosopische Studien, vol. 5 (1978): 45–65. 
In what follows we will focus only on the PES and the ontology present 
there. 
 2 .   Friedrich Überweg (1826–71), German philosopher. An anti-Kantian and 
follower of F. E. Beneke. In the PES Brentano cites his  System der Logik und 
Geschichte der logischen Lehren , originally published in 1857.  
 3 .  Brentano writes: “It is clear, therefore, that Überweg does not claim that 
inner perception is guaranteed by comparing the content of the presenta-
tion and the real nature of the object. Instead he believes that the percep-
tion of a mental act consists in its being combined with other acts. As a 
result of this combination the real act becomes a part of a cohesive whole 
which is formed out of the totality of real acts. It is this assimilation into the 
whole which constitutes the act’s being perceived and known. It is neces-
sarily perceived and known as it really is, since it is assimilated in its reality” 
(PES, 140\PES-G, 183–84).  
 4 .  Actually, according to Boring, “Weber himself never formulated a “law,” 
but merely reported, “ ... that the smallest perceptible difference between 
two weights can be stated as a ratio between the weights, a ratio that is 
independent of the magnitudes of the weights” (Boring, 1950, 113). As was 
noted above, it was Fechner who adopted Weber’s discovery but used a 

288 Notes
different equation to describe it, namely, S = k log R, i.e. sensations (S) can 
be measured against a constant (k) taking into account a logarithm tabu-
lating the transformation of the physical intensities of the stimuli causing 
sensations into mental effects. Alan Kim writes that, “Weber’s Law was 
crucial to the development of psychology because it apparently demon-
strated that where Herbart had failed in his aprioristic construction of 
mathematical regularities of mind, experimentation could succeed. The 
situation nevertheless remained murky as interpretations of Weber’s Law 
multiplied. Fechner, for example, elaborated Weber’s experiments but took 
his results as the basis for an arcane panpsychic monism” (Kim, 2008). 
Recently, new research is revealing how Fechner’s laws of psychophysics 
can be understood in a different manner. More precisely, the claim that 
Fechner’s method necessitates an exclusive reliance on Weber’s theories 
has been challenged. Until recently, the common account of Fechner’s 
methodology has been said to be an exaggerated and one-sided account 
of the situation. Subsequently,  pace Boring et al., it has been argued that 
Fechner based many of his derivations on principles originally employed 
by Bernoulli in 1738 (cf. Masin, Zudini, & Antonelli, 2009). In the PES, 
Brentano understands Fechner’s law of psychophysics as amounting to the 
thesis that: “The strength of the external impression which causes a sensa-
tion [is for Fechner] a physical measurement of the strength of a sensa-
tion ... for all senses, ... one of the two is a function of the other, at least 
within certain limits” (PES, 67). After making his own amendments to the 
above theory (see PES, 67–69), Brentano praises Weber and Fechner for their 
demonstrative method, claiming it to be “ ... of great significance” (PES, 
69); however, he also writes that, “ ... the possibility of measuring inten-
sities according to their method is restricted entirely to those phenomena 
which are produced by external stimulation of the sense organs. We still 
lack, therefore, a measure of intensity for all mental phenomena which 
have their foundation in physical processes within the organism or which 
are caused by other mental phenomena” (PES, 69).  
 5 .  Brentano would later abandon this position after the publication of 
the PES.  
 6 .   Brentano writes, “The chief argument which Wundt can advance in support 
of his conception is the dependence of the accompanying feeling of inten-
sity. If we eliminate the influence exerted by the connectedness of our 
presentations upon the feelings accompanying each sensation, experience 
shows us, according to Wundt, that every sensation of moderate intensity is 
accompanied by a feeling of pleasure, and every sensation of very great inten-
sity by a feeling of pain. He adds that in the case of a very weak sensation 
the pleasure is slight and at first increases as the sensation itself increases. 
Then it reaches a maximum and a turning point. Beyond this point, the 
feeling of pleasure decreases rapidly and, after passing through a neutral 
point, changes into displeasure. As a result of further, continuous, increase 
in the stimulation which corresponds to the sensation this displeasure may 
attain an infinite magnitude. If this theory is correct, we should be able to 
verify it especially in the case of the higher senses, since they can be inves-
tigated with the greatest possible degree of accuracy. It cannot be denied 

Notes 289
that a certain faint feeling of pleasure is connected with a faint sensation 
of light and that this feeling of pleasure increases considerably as the light 
shines with more vivid color, but that if the brightness exceeds a certain 
degree a feeling of displeasure arises. When we look directly at the sun 
this displeasure becomes an intolerable pain. At first sight, therefore, all 
evidence seems to confirm Wundt’s interpretation. On a more careful study 
of the facts, however, this impression vanishes immediately. Is that extreme 
pain, which Wundt believes we may describe as infinite, really associated 
with the sensation of light? Wundt himself has to deny this. He says, rather, 
that this sensation has a quality which differs in no way from the qual-
ities of other similarly painful sensations caused by means of other sensory 
nerves. But how can this be? Has a color been transformed gradually into an 
absolutely heterogenous quality through an increase in the intensity of the 
sensation? This transformation seems as inconceivable as a gradual meta-
morphosis of a color into a sound. The truth is that experience teaches us 
something entirely different.” (PES, 149–50).  
 7 .  Brentano cites Aristotle as the  locus classicus for the formulation of the 
problem as he takes it up. Citing  Metaphysics Z, 16. There Aristotle writes 
that “the term ‘unity’ is used like the term ‘being’, and the substance of 
that which is one is one, and things whose substance is numerically one are 
numerically one ... ” (1040a 16–18).  
 8 .  Elsewhere, Brentano writes of Hume’s theory of the self that: “A ‘bundle’ 
strictly speaking, requires a rope or wire or something else binding it 
together. In the case of human consciousness it is out of the question that 
there is something of this sort ... we have to reject Hume’s description as an 
essentially distorted picture of consciousness” (DP, 14).  
 9  .  A modern version of Brentano’s “demon possession” thought experiment 
is presented in Dainton and Bayne (2005) where they write of a “streamal 
diverter” that can transpose streams of consciousness from one brain to 
another, all the while preserving personal identity (557–58).  
 10  .  In the PES Brentano goes so far as to criticize the position that even a 
materialist understanding of the mind would render the unity of conscious-
ness invalid. Citing the physiologist and materialist C. Ludwig (author of 
 Ueber die Grenzen der Naturerkenntnis , 1872), Brentano writes of the falsity 
of the claim that quantitative and heterogeneous physical “parts” forming 
a complicated structural whole would render the hypothesis of the unity 
of consciousness false or superfluous (cf. PES, 169–76\PES-G, 221–32). 
While the criticism above makes it seem that the system of the PES is itself 
compatible with materialist or physicalist assumptions when examined 
against the context of his broader metaphysical framework – as outlined 
in the Würzburg lectures and, when unpublished manuscript notes for the 
uncompleted sections of the work are examined, it can be shown that these 
claims are not only unsupported by any additional evidence but, in fact, 
quite false.  
 11 .   This aspect of Brentano’s discussion touches on what has been called the 
“bridge problem” in philosophical theories of identity connecting the 
former to phenomenal states. Here Brentano also points out that, “the 
content of an act of memory is not the act of memory itself [ der Inhalt 

290 Notes
eines Erinnerungsactes ist nicht der Erinnerungsact ] ... [w]hat is the guar-
antee that the memory and its content are to be ascribed to the same 
substantive unity, if they are not identical?” (PES, 168–9\PES-G, 220). 
Acts of memory are here said to be distinguished from acts of perception 
by relating to different contents. However, since memories, like percep-
tions, unfold in time, what Brentano is really pointing to is the necessity 
of an immediate apprehension or “proteraesthesis” that can conjoin the 
stream of consciousness as a unity. The necessary theory was, according to 
Stumpf, in fact already being developed by Brentano in Würzburg lectures 
from 1873. There he held that “the temporal differences in our asser-
tions, as they are present in the tenses of verbs, have nothing to do with 
the judgment function ... but only affect the object of judgment” (TPB, 
38). And see the unpublished Logic lectures, especially ES80\13.006[2], 
where Brentano writes of how: “Erinnerung ist keine Prädikation des 
Begriffs Vergangenheit, Wahrnehmung keine Prädikation des Begriffs 
Existenz ... . Doch auch dies ist hoffentlich genügend. Verweis auf meine 
Psychologie”.  
 12  .   This aspect of Brentano’s system will be treated in Chapter 6 below, when 
we deal with judgment and the evidence of axiomatic principles, such as 
those of metaphysics.  
 13  .   In his third meditation Descartes writes: “Some [of my thoughts] are like 
images of things; to these alone does the word ‘idea’ properly apply, as when 
I think of a man chimera, or the sky, or an angel, or God. Again there are 
other thoughts that take different forms: for example, when I will, or fear, 
or affirm, or deny, there is always something that I grasp as the subject of 
my thought, yet I embrace in my thought something more than the likeness 
of that thing. Some of these thoughts are called volitions or affects, while 
others are called judgments” (Descartes, 1993, 71).  
 14  .   It is of interest here that Wundt, in his own introductory textbook, the 
 Physiological Psychology , gives a survey and outlines different mental classes 
not in the second volume or even the later sections of the first, but almost 
immediately in the introductory sections of his text. Cf. Wundt, 1904, 
14–38. In many ways Wundt’s writings, even if less intellectually stimu-
lating or not as philosophically rich as Brentano’s, are nonetheless better 
organized and clearer in many respects.  
 15  .   Cf. Book Two, ch. 6, ii (PES,197\PES-G, 258) where Brentano writes that 
“Aristotle preferred this point of view to all others for arranging the 
material”.  
 16 .   In his introduction to his translation of  De Anima Hugh Lawson-Tancred 
writes that “Brentano’s attempt to enlist Aristotle’s support for his own 
interesting theory of sense-perception and the mental amounts to an 
overstretching of the meaning of the text of the  De Anima ” (cf. Aristotle, 
1986, 106). While Lawson-Tancred may be correct, it can be noted that our 
goal here is to focus on an exposition of Brentano’s doctrines. However, 
it can also be noted that, even if Brentano is guilty of misrepresenting 
the Aristotelian notion of the psyche this does not at all take away from 
the originality and/or the relevance of his own doctrine of intentional 
inexistence.  

Notes 291
 6 Brentano’s Theory of Judgment and the Connection 
of Feelings and Acts of Will 
 1 .  This latter fact is quite possibly the reason why Brentano’s theory has been 
mostly ignored. Another reason many mainstream philosophers may have 
chosen to avoid engaging with Brentano’s theory might pertain to the 
non-propositional character of the theory (making logical inference subor-
dinate to essentially phenomenological insights derived from the conscious-
ness of and immediate acquaintance with contents and objects in mental 
acts), as well as its explicitly ontological and psychological aspects, which 
are not currently in vogue. In the introduction to his book  Frege’s Theory of 
Judgement , for example, David Bell writes of how the tendency, especially 
after the 1950s in analytic philosophy, was to replace the theory of judg-
ment with a “theory of meaning”, which Bell takes to be a central staple 
of linguistic philosophy. According to Bell, “the theory of judgement has 
thus been displaced from the centre of the philosophical stage in favour 
of concerns more overtly linguistic”; however, Bell also notes that, “many 
of the aims, doctrines, concepts, and problems central to the former 
remain essentially unchanged beneath their new linguistic guise” (cf. Bell, 
1979, 2–8).  
 2  .   Brentano’s theory of judgment is actually one of the main sources of influ-
ence for later phenomenological approaches to cognition and the mind. 
Husserl and Heidegger, for example, would both draw largely from Brentano’s 
writings in this area. Ironically, Brentano’s own doctrines were transformed 
by these later thinkers and often as radically as he himself transformed 
the Aristotelian doctrines he was working with. For this reason, amongst 
others, Johannes Brandl can write of how, “Brentano’s theory of judgement 
remains an interesting alternative to the current mainstream in logic and 
epistemology” (Brandl, 2010) and see also Tassone (2011).  
 3  .   It can be noted that, given the predominance of this kind of behaviorist and 
anti-mentalist or “causal” approach to explaining belief in modern phil-
osophy of mind and epistemology, Brentano’s dismissal of Bain’s position 
may seem both premature and unwarranted. In his defense, Brentano could 
argue that if the content of a belief can be determined by non-cognitive 
factors, such as an essentially non-mental and external causal chains, or the 
blind conditioning of equally non-cognitive habits, then not only would no 
classification of what he takes to be fundamentally “mental” acts be possible, 
but the intentionality criterion established as a viable characteristic of the 
mental and presentations and judgments would be completely lost. We will 
return to an examination of these important matters in Chapter 7 (in Part 
III) below.  
 4  .   Cf. PES, 206–07n\PES-G, 274n, where Brentano cites Mill’s critical notes 
to his father’s text  Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind , second 
edition, ch. IV, sec. 4, I, 162n.ff. 
 5  .   Aristotelian logic was considered both practically complete as well as 
authoritative until the early twentieth century. In effect it still forms the 
conceptual framework from which all subsequent logic stems, cf. Mitchell, 
1970, 20.  

292 Notes
 6 .  As Brentano rightly notes, Aristotle mentions but does not treat existen-
tial or singular propositions in any detail in  the Organon , where he other-
wise outlines the rules for the distribution of terms and lists the valid 
versus invalid forms of inference. Nonetheless, although Brentano thinks 
that “[s]uggestions of the correct view of existential propositions can be 
found as far back as Aristotle ... [H]e seems not to have attained complete 
clarity about them”, he is clear that Aristotle’s writings on logic should 
not be lumped together with what can be called the Aristotelian trad-
ition. Brentano writes of how, “here, as in many other places, Aristotle 
has anticipated a more correct point of view”. (Cf. also Thomas Aquinas’ 
reproduction of Aristotle’s doctrine in  Summa Theologica, P. I, Q. 85, A. 5.), 
(PES,211–12n).  
 7 .   In this way, Brentano presents his own formulation of the epistemic rela-
tion that Bertrand Russell later calls “knowledge by acquaintance”. In his 
 Problems of Philosophy , Russell writes, “it is scarcely conceivable that we can 
make a judgment or entertain a supposition without knowing what it is 
that we are judging or supposing about” (Russell, 1912, 58). Likewise for 
Brentano, the foundational thesis of judgments as well as desires and acts 
of will as based on presentations, assumes that other, higher level, mental 
acts require the more basic acquaintance with experience given in an act of 
presentation to become active.  
 8 .  And cf. Aristotle’s  Prior Analytics 24b 25–30 and  Categories 1a.  
 9 .   The linguistic form of the copula is highly ambiguous and troublesome for 
logicians. Essentially there are many senses of predication – three of which, 
identity (“Socrates is a philosopher”), equation (“The son of Sophroniscus is 
Socrates”) and specification (“The thinker accused of corrupting the youth 
is Socrates”) are all signified by the same copular term: “is”. Therefore, 
Brentano is correct to point out the problems that accompany studies of logic 
that rely too greatly on linguistic form. A great deal of propositional logic 
in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth century attempted to eliminate 
or clarify this linguistic ambiguity through the introduction of terms and 
functions meant to highlight and clarify specifically logical form. Brentano, 
for the most part, rejected what he called the application of mathematics 
to logic (cf. PES, Appendix X, “On Attempts at the Mathematicization of 
Logic”, 301ff).  
 10  .  In his Würzburg logic lectures from the 1870s (EL80), however, Brentano 
writes of both presentational and judgment contents (EL80\13002–03) and 
see Section 8.2.  
 11  .  Beliefs, writes Brentano citing John Stuart Mill approvingly, cannot be 
entirely founded on the laws of the association of ideas. This is because 
belief is not simply a matter of habit and accident but instead a sphere 
wherein we make systematic use of judgments in the form of reasoning. 
Rational beliefs, therefore, are said to be regulated by evidence and a rela-
tionship to facts that have been evaluated by thoughtful attention to truth. 
Someone whose beliefs were all determined by accidental association would 
be, in the perfect sense of the word, a complete fool (cf. PES, 224–25\PES-G, 
293–94).  
 12  .  At this point Brentano tells us how “Subsequent discussions will throw 
further light upon what we have just said about the special laws of 

Notes 293
judgements and emotions” (PES, 225\PES-G, 295). These topics were meant 
to be discussed in Books Four and Five of the PES, which were, of course, 
never published. Surviving notes from the  Nachlass indicate that these 
Books of the text would have included chapters that dealt with, amongst 
other things, the quality and intensity of judgments, their quantity and 
relation, epistemology including blind versus evident and apodictic judg-
ments, the nature and evidence of axioms, deduction and induction, causes 
of error and related matters. These would have formed the content of the 
fourth Book. In the fifth Book, aspects of emotional acts that were planned 
to be discussed included: the quality and intensity of emotions, origination 
of the will, the quantitative aspects of emotions, motivated and unmoti-
vated emotions, the origin of love, discussions of what is originally loved 
as well as what can be loved for its own sake, a chapter dealing with the 
nature of morality and ethics and other chapters including one on freedom 
and another on the role of habit in the moral sphere (cf. Ps50/52139–43, 
the complete outlines with chapter numbering are reproduced in Rollinger, 
2011, 18–25).  
 13  .   “Object” here, once again, should be taken in the broad sense introduced 
in the PES – where Brentano writes that all psychic or mental phenomena 
are directed to objects. The Brentanian “object”, at this stage, is both 
synonymous with the content of an act and also “not to be understood as 
meaning ‘a thing’ ” (PES, 88\PES-G, 115), i.e. a mind independent entity.  
 14  .   Brentano, denies, however, that any “synthetic” judgments can be “a priori” 
and so the terms, “analytic” and “a priori” are really synonymous on his 
view. 
 15  .   As Aristotle writes, “The starting point of demonstration is not demonstra-
tion”, see his Metaphysics, Book Four, chapter 6, 1011a 12–14.  
 16 .   Timothy McGrew, a modern proponent of inductive reasoning, formalizes 
the above relationship even more concisely as:
 
 P((Fx(Pop) = (p ± e)) / (Fx(Smp) = p) & (S(Smp) = n)) 
 
For pertinent values of p, e, and n. From a Bayesian standpoint, we find this 
by expanding in the usual fashion:
 
 P((Fx(Pop)  =  (p ±  e)) / (S(Smp)  =  n)) x P((Fx(Smp)  =  p) / (Fx(Pop)  =  (p ±  e)) & 
(S(Smp) = n))  
 
 P((Fx(Smp) = p) / (S(Smp)=n))  (cf. McGrew, 2001).  
 17 .  In the case of the Bayesian inference formalized above, as McGrew eluci-
dates, “early critics of inverse inference were quick to point out, the left 
term of the numerator and (tacitly) the denominator both invoke a prior 
probability that the proportion of X’s in the population lies within e of p. 
How such priors are to be acquired is the fundamental problem of Bayesian 
inference; its apparent intractability is doubtless the chief stone of stum-
bling for non-Bayesians” (McGrew, 2001). In Brentano’s case, this criticism 
is raised by Hugo Bergmann (cf. TPB, 213ff.).  
 18 .   See the Würburg lectures on logic, where Brentano writes, “Die 
 Wahrscheinlichkeit eines Faktums wird dadurch bestimmt, dass man 
alle in Betracht kommenden sich gegenseitig () außchliessenden denk-
baren Tatsachen auf eine  bestimmte Zahl von  gleich denkbaren , d.h. 
von solchen Fällen reduziert, über deren Existenz uns die Umstände 

294 Notes
 gleichmässig unentschieden lassen und die  Zahl der für die Tatsache, 
deren Wahrscheinlichkeit gesucht wird, günstigen Fälle bestimmt. Das 
 Verhältniss dieser Zahl zu der Zahl aller denkbaren Fälle, ist das Maß der 
Wahrscheinlichkeit; sie ist also ein  Bruch , deßen Zähler aus der Zahl, der 
für die Tatsache günstigen Fälle, und deßen Nenner aus der Zahl aller 
möglichen Fälle besteht” (EL80\13041.1).  
 19 .  And this alternate formulate of the reliability of the causal law fit in well 
with Brentano’s own rejection of Kant’s transcendental strategy. Brentano 
had little patience for what he called Kant’s “synthetic a priori” constructions 
or the transcendental approach to solving Hume’s problem. In Part III we will 
examine the differences and similarities between Brentano’s approach and 
Kant’s, and argue for what can be called the complementary characteristics 
of the two thinkers doctrines.  
 20  .  In his  System of Logic , John Stuart Mill writes of how, “Whatever phenomena 
varies in any manner whenever another phenomenon varies in some 
particular manner, is either a cause or an effect of that phenomenon, or is 
connected with it through some fact of causation” (Book Three, chapter. 8; 
vi). Brentano would critically amend such a view, maintaining, as Jevons 
does, that “There is nothing whatever in the nature of things to prevent the 
existence of two variations which should apparently follow the same law, 
and yet have no connection with each other ... . The whole question of the 
relation of quantities thus resolves itself into one of probability” (Jevons, 
1874, 106; 107).  
 21  .  Brentano also cites Thomas Aquinas and points to the  Summa Theologica 
pt. I, Q80, a.1, ad.2. There Thomas writes, “What is apprehended and what 
is desired are the same in reality but differ in aspect; for a thing is appre-
hended as something sensible and intelligible, whereas it is desired as suit-
able or good” (Thomas, 1948, 351).  
 22 .  Elsewhere in the lectures, while describing teleology in nature, Brentano 
writes: “The most elementary of mental phenomena are the ideas of 
sense. But even these presuppose an order which appears to have been 
chosen! The eye not only conveys ideas of colors, but these in a certain 
order which can be the criterion of an ordered parallel in the external 
world. Hence the delicate branching of nerves in the retina. Each separate 
nerve fiber gives a distinct spatial presentation, or at least – as the 
so-called empiricists would have it – a distinct indication of one location 
in relation to its neighbors. But it is to the brain that all these particu-
larities are conducted, and where they are recorded, and only in this way 
is our spatial orientation made possible” (OEG, 158). For an account of 
Brentano’s views on Religion and Natural theology, as well as Darwinian 
evolution, cf. CCB, 237–54.  
 23 .  As Steven Bayne points out, “What [Anscombe] attempts is to describe an 
unfolding series of circumstances coinciding with Brentano’s purported 
continuum but which can go either of two ways: one where there is no 
actual trying, and one where there is. The difference that trying makes 
is so small that adding it to the series following [a contemplated action] 
merely adds to the series making up the continuum but which insofar as 
it (trying) is an act of will becomes “assimilated to emotion”.” (cf. Bayne, 
2003)  

Notes 295
 7 From Psychology to Phenomenology: Brentano 
and Contemporary Philosophy of Mind 
 1 .   Among hard reductionists can be listed, Churchland, 1986 and Dennet, 
1991; among advocates of supervenience, the most influential is Kim, 1993, 
1996. “Mysterian” thinkers include McGinn, 1991 and Stoljar, 2006.  
 2 .   In recent functionalism the claim that “function does not dictate form” is a 
common saying. What this seems to amount to is that we can gain a great 
deal of knowledge of how the mind works (and therefore of what the mind 
is) without knowing very much or anything at all about the ontological 
properties that make the mind the mind. Taking this claim seriously leads 
to both materialist and metaphysical functionalist positions. For almost all 
functionalists, however, it seems to be taken for granted that minds exist 
dependent on (and therefore requiring) some kind of physical embodiment 
(cf. Kim, 1996, 74).  
 3 .  For detailed overviews of contemporary philosophy of mind and the above 
positions see: Priest, 1991; Heil, 1998; and Montero, 2009.  
 4 .   Not surprisingly, the materialist paradigm became the most widespread. 
This seemed to be inevitable given the fall of the introspectionist paradigm 
and the rise of structuralism, functionalism and “subjectless” models for 
explaining behavior and the mind in academic psychology and philosophy 
in the early-twentieth century (cf. Hothersall, 1984; Kush, 2005 and see the 
“Introduction” above for a brief account of the rise and fall of content psych-
ology). Since the late-seventeenth century many philosophical theories 
about the natural world have slowly but eventually followed or have been 
influenced strongly by the sciences. This again is not surprising given that 
physics, biology, chemistry, etc., were all known (until the mid-nineteenth 
century) as branches of “natural philosophy”. In philosophy of mind this 
encroachment of the sciences into philosophy was a late phenomenon. Very 
likely this was due to the fact that psychology did not branch out from phil-
osophy until the late-nineteenth century.  
 5 .   See, for example, David Chalmer’s use of Kripke’s semantic theories in his 
1996 work  The Conscious Mind ; and Donald Davidson’s version of property 
dualism in his 1970 article “Mental Events”.  
 6 .   According to Shoemaker, a central tenet of “Cartesianism” in turn was 
supposed to be a commitment to a form of epistemological transparency 
that at first sight, looks very similar to the immediate insights Brentano is 
said to have arrived at, using his doctrine of inner perception (cf. Shoemaker, 
1990, 187).  
 7  .  A great deal of the indifference towards Brentano’s system in modern 
philosophy might perhaps stem from the sustained attempts in later 
twentieth-century philosophy of mind and philosophy of language, to 
eliminate “psychology” and “psychologism” from philosophical method-
ology. Tying the former into the strong bias against any non-materialist 
ontology would make it doubly difficult for mainstream philosophy of 
mind to take Brentano’s position seriously. Brentano himself, of course, 
was a psychologistic thinker, but as we shall see below, there are many 
types of “psychologism”, and as Brentano stated it was never his goal to 
reduce theoretical claims to factual descriptions about how humans think. 

296 Notes
The latter was, in his words, an “absurd subjectivism” (PES, Appendix XI, 306). 
In much of contemporary philosophy, however, any form of psychologism in 
epistemology is tacitly taken to undermine the theory being argued for.  
 8  .   The influence about these matters by prominent and influential thinkers, 
like Gottlob Frege, Bertrand Russell and, in the field of philosophy of 
language, Ludwig Wittgenstein, played no small role in changing the status 
quo. Post-positivistic philosophers of science, and so-called “post-modern” 
thinkers, on the other hand, would no doubt also object to the notion of 
foundationalism and epistemological hierarchy (respectively) expressed in 
Brentano’s project.  
 9  .   Not only was the manuscript that appeared in print and became the 1874 
PES, although not the full text as Brentano wanted it published (the outline 
for the entire work was, of course, announced in the “Foreword” to the 
1874 edition) but, as it stands, the full second Book did not even appear. 
That many of the concluding chapters of Book Two were written, however, 
is confirmed by the  Nachlass manuscript folios currently kept in Salzburg, 
Austria. In this regard, Manuscript Ps 50/52151–52 confirms that there were 
to be three more chapters to complete the second Book. That Brentano did 
not want to publish the text is evident from a letter sent to Lotze where 
Brentano thanks him for helping with his attainment of his Viennese post. 
Brentano’s letter is dated January 18, 1874, and therein he also complains 
about how he wishes he could postpone publication of the first volume of his 
 Psychology text “for years” in order to better prepare it. Brentano also writes 
of how friends and students encouraged him to publish, which led to his 
sending the manuscript out to the printer. Another, more pressing reason 
why the PES was rushed to the printing press, however, may have been to 
help Brentano secure his faculty position in Vienna (and see Rollinger, 2011, 
19; 32–33).  
 10  .   See for example, Hartly Field, who claims that Brentano’s intentional 
account of the subjective act to a proposition (!) makes it impossible to 
maintain an adequate materialist account of the mind (Field, 1978, 9). Field 
may have been influenced in this reading by Roderick Chisholm’s influen-
tial linguistic transformation of Brentano’s intentionality thesis (cf. Chapter 
4 above).  
 11  .   Nonetheless, Moran qualifies, “Brentano’s terms cannot be coherently 
mapped onto the distinction between the mental and the physical as 
deployed by current philosophy of mind in its discussion of physicalism 
and materialism, unless that discussion is already committed to a type of 
phenomenalism. Brentano cannot be recruited on one side or the other in 
the broad debate concerning materialism and reductionism” (Moran, 1996, 
3). Brentano’s phenomenalism was treated in Section 3.6, and given what 
was said there, it remains to be seen if modern versions of physicalism can 
be made compatible with Brentano’s dualism.  
 12  .   For Horwich, we are told, physiology is the main, if not the only, meth-
odological vehicle of research for psychology. Both Horwich and Auguste 
Comte are therefore said to overestimate the services that physiology 
can render to psychology by Brentano. Brentano gives us an analogy and 
writes of how, just as physics cannot depend completely and only upon 
mathematics, so psychology cannot rely solely on physiology or biology 

Notes 297
(PES, 50). Further support of physiological models and data for under-
standing psychology can be found in Brentano’s support for Maudsley’s 
call for the physiological basis of mental life: “Maudsley is not incorrect in 
saying that mental activity depends on the organic life of the brain” (PES, 
61). But again, Brentano does not accept a complete reduction as feasible. It 
should be noted that here he is in agreement with Wundt whose work and 
writings he was well aware of (cf. Wundt, 1909, 6).  
 13 .  The reasons why Brentano holds the above are also important. Some 
(Thomasson, 2000) have suggested that Brentano’s account of conscious-
ness does not attempt to provide a reductionist explanation of consciousness 
because “[Brentano] ... was working long before the drive for naturalisation” 
(206); that is before attempts to reduce consciousness to the mental become 
fashionable or a dominant part of psychology/philosophy of mind. Arguably 
however,, the drive towards naturalization in the social sciences goes back at 
least to the Enlightenment philosophers. Furthermore, in the PES Brentano 
presents many cases of important thinkers [Horwich, Maudsley, etc.] who 
held a reductionist view of consciousness and viewed it as a byproduct of 
physiological processes. Brentano’s reasons, as stated above, are internal to 
his system and not dictated by external factors.  
 14 .  Not all higher-order views locate the “consciousness causing” factor or act 
within thought, some adopt perception as the sphere where the lower order 
states are made consciousness by higher order perceptions. For an account 
of the mind promoting a materialist higher order perception theory, see 
Armstrong (1968). For one type of higher-order thought theory, see Rosenthal 
(1990). And again, see Thomasson (2000), who gives a defence of Brentano’s 
representationalist and intentionalist theory of the mental against contem-
porary so-called physical reductionist or what she calls “two-level” theories 
of consciousness claiming that it can provide a better, if somewhat insuffi-
cient, account of a one-level theory of consciousness (and see below).  
 15  .   This two page manuscript, titled “ Zur Lehre der Abstraktion ” has been traced 
back to papers intended as a continuation of the original PES manuscript 
by Robin Rollinger (the arguments on the distinction between human and 
animal mental life are quoted in full in Rollinger, 2011, 22).  
 16  .  “Meditation VI”, in  The Philosophical Writings of Descartes vol. 2, Cambridge 
UP (1984), 54. The proof Descartes’ elaborates therefore seems to be a vari-
ation on what later is expressed by Leibniz as the  principium identitatis indis-
cernibilium or “the principle of the identity of indiscernibles”. Namely, if 
entity x is identical to entity y in every respect, i.e. sharing all important 
or essential characteristics, then x = y. The mind, however, (characterized 
by Descartes as thinking, non-extended, non-physical, etc.) is not identical 
to the body (characterized as physical, extended, non-thinking) and there-
fore the two entities are different in nature. Descartes argument is a modal 
argument in the sense that if I can clearly and distinctly imagine a possi-
bility as holding where the mind is precisely identical to the body, then the 
modal force of the logical grounds for the argument will make my concep-
tual possibility a reality. If no compelling counter arguments can be raised, 
then this further increases the chances that my claim is indeed not merely 
a subjective wish-fulfillment or conceptual confusion. I grasp that the mind 
is not the body “clearly” and “distinctly”, according to Descartes.  

298 Notes
 17  .   In his  Treatise of Human Nature (1798), for example, Hume (in assessing the 
same fact that I can think) arrives at the opposite conclusion from Descartes. 
“When I turn my reflection on myself,” Hume writes, “I never perceive 
anything but the perceptions. [It is] the composition of these, therefore, 
which forms the self” (Hume, 1978, 634). Hume’s position, that the mind is 
nothing but a collection of perceptions was later referred to as the “bundle 
theory” of self (cf. Chapter 5 above). Hume’s bundle theory is a position 
that subsequent critics of dualism and different empiricists have often 
maintained to be more in alignment with modern science, and therefore a 
more adequate basis for positing facts about consciousness and the mind. 
See below for Brentano’s own use of Hume’s method arrived at through his 
reading of Lange.  
 18  .   For an account of dualism as a philosophical position, cf. Robinson (2007). 
For a recent defence of dualism cf. Hart (1988) and Lycan (2009). Lycan’s 
essay, assessing reasons why naturalist arguments against dualism are not as 
blatantly obvious as many physicalists believe, is especially relevant to the 
above context. For a defense of what is more or less Hume’s view of the self, 
cf. Pike (1967), Russell (1921), and Derek Parfit’s  Reasons and Persons , espe-
cially Part 3 (1984), Churchland (1986), and Dennett (1991). The Humean 
position is also held outside of western philosophy, for example in philo-
sophical Buddhism and can be said to be more prevalent than the Cartesian 
view. There are also other arguments for the distinction between mind and 
body some of which will be examined below.  
 19  .   Such as a variety of functionalist versions or those based upon some kind 
of supervenience relation between the mind and the body: Here we can list 
Davidson, 1970; and Strawson (2003) who holds a personalist version of 
dualism, (cf. Section 7.1).  
 20  .   That is the ultimate or most fundamental science of physics causally 
connected (directly or indirectly) to other sciences in a closed way. This is 
a common view of the relation of the sciences today, namely that the inter-
connection of our knowledge, and of all sciences, presupposing a “levels” 
view of reality with higher (less fundamental) levels somehow dependent 
on more basic lower levels in a causally pregnant sense, i.e. assuming 
 ceteris paribus laws holding for all the levels and nomological nature of the 
behavior of particulars throughout. This position, and the supervenience 
epistemology (in Brentano’s language: mereological essentialism with the 
parts conditioned or determined by the wholes) is shared by many modern 
philosophers of mind. Thinkers who disagree that supervenience relations 
hold essentially or deterministically for emergent or higher properties may 
point to things like the multiple realizability of the mental and emergence 
of non-determined properties. At first sight Brentano’s view seems to be 
compatible with thinkers holding the above, or even with what David 
Chalmer’s calls “naturalistic dualism” (cf. Chalmers, 1996, 168–71) with the 
qualification that because Brentano believes in things as real (i.e. reformu-
lated Aristotelian actualized essences), his view cannot be made compatible 
with any kind of neutral monist or dual aspect position that holds physical 
natural laws as fundamental or panpsychically potential in reality; unless, 
once again, we can arrive at a completed physics that can show the exact 
nature of the physical and its correlation to the mental (and cf. PES, 74).  

Notes 299
 21  .   There is certainly a pronounced tension present here that the naturalist 
could exploit, however; namely, if the sciences are methodologically 
connected and the hierarchy of sciences reflect the object realm that they 
explain; then at some level philosophy and metaphysics must be reducible 
to science. Brentano himself was not very clear about this scientistic premise 
in his writings. Most of the time he emphasizes the theoretical primacy of 
metaphysics, although in a lecture delivered in Vienna on 22 April 1874, 
titled  Über die Gründe der Entmutigung auf philosophischem Gebiete , Brentano 
defends the positivist conception of the hierarchy of sciences with the most 
complex science forming the basis – not merely the outgrowth – of meta-
physics (cf. ZP, 83–100).  
 22  .   See the PES where Brentano writes of how we come up against fundamental 
limits of scientific understanding when the physical meets the non-physical 
(as J.S. Mill also maintained). For this reason, writes Brentano, psychological 
laws cannot be derived from or reduced to the laws of physics or chemistry 
(PES, 47ff).  
 23  .   The materialist position, it should be said here, also rests on a metaphys-
ical point of view. Namely, the materialist worldview rests on the implicit 
metaphysical assumption that all of reality (as well as all of our experiences, 
beliefs, thoughts, etc.) is reducible to the fundamental laws of physics. 
In many ways this position, it will be argued below, is not immediately 
evident, and at the same time, possesses just as many (if not more) problems 
for philosophy of mind than dualism does.  
 24  .   See Chapter 3 above. It is within and through mental phenomena there-
fore, that we are presented (through our phenomenal contents) with the 
hypothetical existence of mind transcendent entities. The knowledge of the 
transcendent world is one about which we become aware through being 
informed of the effects of physical objects upon the senses. In terms of 
evidential status – on Brentano’s view – physics cannot overrule act psych-
ology, which, in turn, cannot overrule metaphysics.  
 25  .   However, it has also been denied as presenting a real problem for Brentano 
(cf. Krieger, 2012). In his paper “Brentano’s Most striking Thesis” Kriegel 
claims that, “[u]nlike most work on mental representation over the past 
century, Brentano’s thinking on the subject is attuned to the fact that 
mental representation involves crucially not only a representation-of rela-
tion, but also a representation-to relation.” (Kriegel, 2012, 16). In other 
words, Brentano’s understanding of consciousness makes the intrinsic 
nature of it representational in the sense that if it did not have this innate 
quality of allowing a representational sense to arise out of itself, there would 
be no second-order representations of objects, of a sentient conscious self, of 
symbolic meanings, etc.  
 26  .   Jeder psychische Act ist bewusst; ein Bewusstsein von ihm ist in ihm 
selbst gegeben. Jeder auch noch so einfache psychische Act hat darum ein 
doppeltes Object, ein primäres und ein secundäres. Der einfachste Act, in 
welchem wir hören; z. B. Hat als primäres Object den Ton, als Secundäres 
Object aber sich selbst, das psychische Phänomen, in welchem der Ton 
gehört wird (PES-G, 202).  
 27  .   The problem of intentional reference can be summarized as follows: a 
thinker who holds that the mind can contain thoughts which refer to objects 

300 Notes
that need not exist in the physically objective world (as all thinkers who 
uphold a theory of intentionality must to some extent maintain) can fall 
into problems of external reference. See their introduction to  The Cambridge 
Companion to Husserl (Smith & Smith, 1995).  
 28  .   Dale Jacquette expresses the problem as follows: “The dilemma for Brentano 
is that either there is or is not a bridge from thought to the transcendent 
objects of intentional attitudes. If there is no bridge, then experience is 
necessarily cut off from the world, as in the most radical idealism. The theory 
implies the counter-intuitive consequence that the objects of distinct inten-
tional states are themselves distinct and hence never shared by any other 
intentional state of the same thinking subject or publicly among different 
thinking subjects. If there is a bridge, then the link to external reality is 
more economically made directly from thought to potentially shareable 
transcendent objects, without positing immanently intentional in-existent 
objects as intermediaries” Jacquette, 2004, 104. Formulating the problem 
this way, however, may put forth a false ontological dilemma, i.e. that 
objects of experience or the contents corresponding to physical phenomena 
(in Brentano’s theory) are either completely mind-dependent and there-
fore radically immanent, or that they are completely mind-independent 
or radically transcendent. The first horn of the dilemma can be called 
the problem of the Cartesian theatre; the second, that of the Aristotelian 
substance as objective cause of experience. Brentano, it might be argued, is 
attempting precisely to synthesize insights from both views in his theory of 
intentionality.  
 29 .   Regarding Dan Zahavi’s alternate reading of Brentano on this point, it 
should be taken into account that he relies heavily on Husserl’s criticisms of 
Brentano in the  Logical Investigations . Here two points can be made. The first 
is that Zahavi’s criticism of Brentano’s theory suffers by relying on Husserl’s 
account of the doctrines in the PES. Husserl rarely attacked Brentano directly 
in his writings and often his criticism was aimed at his own fellow students 
who also studied with Brentano and held similar (but not always identical) 
views to their teacher. Here can be mentioned thinkers such as, Carl Stumpf 
(under whom Husserl also studied), Anton Marty, Alexius Meinong and 
Kazimierz Twardowski. Secondly, Husserl’s reports about Brentano’s views 
are often approached with his own frequently very different philosophical 
agenda in mind. This is not to deny the fruitfulness and depth of Husserl’s 
thought; rather, only to caution against accepting Husserl’s reports about 
Brentano’s doctrines as official or accurate, especially Brentano’s earlier 
thought. Husserl’s own early thought borrowed much from Brentano, but 
he soon took his phenomenology in a very different direction. We shall 
have more to say about Husserl below. Finally, it can also be said that Zahavi 
seems to assume that, given different one-level views of consciousness, only 
the radically or non-ambivalently non-representationalist account is to be 
preferred. However, it is safe to say, the above claim is not immediately 
self-evident (cf. Zahavi, 2004).  
 30  .  Colin McGinn has claimed that Brentano failed to stress the fact that inten-
tionality is also conscious mental activity (McGinn, 1991, 33). However, 
this is certainly an erroneous reading of Brentano on McGinn’s part. 
In Book Two, chapter 2 of the PES, p. 102, Brentano clearly states how, 

Notes 301
“I prefer to use [consciousness] as synonymous with “mental phenomena” 
or “mental act.” ... the term “consciousness”, since it refers to an object which 
consciousness is conscious of, seems to be appropriate to characterize mental 
phenomenona precisely in terms of its distinguishing characteristic, i.e. the 
property of the intentional inexistence of an object”). Terence Horgan and 
John Tienson have argued that if phenomenal consciousness (or the access of 
our experience defined by our awareness of it) is intentional, then this affects 
our experiences all the way down. Intentionality is necessarily phenomenal; 
therefore our psychological lives and lower level mental activities and beliefs 
are shaped by this property. As we shall see, Brentano takes a very similar 
position on these matters (and cf. Horgan & Tienson, 2002).  
 31 .   These sources can include information and experience obtained from 
personal experience or derived from our social surroundings, or from the 
variety of information obtained through various media etc.  
 32  .  In lectures delivered at the University of Vienna between 1876 and 1894, 
Brentano writes: “Without evident judgments there would be no science, 
but only heaps of rules sanctioned by habit. The fact that we may ask if a 
given judgment is evident does not prevent us from judging with discern-
ment or from building sciences upon the absolutely trustworthy foundation 
of evident judgments” (FCE, 21). Here we see a characteristic of Brentano’s 
thought that remained with him until his last days: a hybrid of Aristotelian 
foundationalism as a model for exact science and a Leibnizian or rationalist 
desire for precision, clarity and certainty. Erroneous judgments, it is true, 
may be convincing to the person who holds them, and sometimes even 
taken to be true and evident. Nonetheless, as we saw above, for Brentano 
evident judgments of fact and reason are grounded on the immediate truth 
of inner perception. It will be recalled that inner perception is said to be 
infallible and not admitting of doubt (PES, 35). Below we will examine 
more critically what the basis of this infallibility consists in and how any 
so-called empirical source of evidence can grant the epistemic status that 
inner perception is said to give.  
 33 .  If I say that I know “that p” it is inconsistent for me to also say I’m not sure 
that I know “that p” (note this is different from my saying “possibly p” or “p 
or not p”). It is also nonsensical for another to say to me, “how do you know 
that you know that p”?  
 34  .  Once again, the best guide to understanding Brentano’s motives can be seen 
to stem from essentially Aristotelian sources. Brentano’s grounding of the 
experimental and objective natural sciences on induction, closely related to 
immediately grasped first principles, has much in common with what was 
known as  demonstratio quia or demonstration from the fact in Renaissance 
Aristotelianism. The above process was also known as “resolution” in the 
writings of Jacopo Zabbarella. For example, for Zabbarella, resolution was 
opposed to what he called the “demonstrative” form of proof. However, 
both were in essence deductive approaches. As Heikki Mikkeli points out, 
“Demonstrative method (or composition) proceeds from cause to effect and 
involves demonstration” of the reasoned fact” or “most powerful” demon-
stration, best exemplified in the mathematical sciences. Resolutive method 
(or resolution) proceeds from effect to cause and, despite its name, also 
involves demonstration, but of an inferior kind, that is called demonstration 

302 Notes
“of the fact” or “from a sign”. Related to this alter type of demonstration is 
the process of induction ( inductio ), which is helpful for discovering princi-
ples that are known naturally but are not immediately evident. Zabarella 
believes that, by the force of induction, human intellect is capable of distin-
guishing the universal, which is hidden in particulars. Induction, or resolu-
tive method makes up the first phase in the  regressus method, which was, in 
[Zabarella’s] opinion, “the only proper method for natural philosophy” (cf. 
Mikkeli, 2005). Brentano it will be recalled, writes of how we must proceed 
from the immediate or given facts and phenomena, and in this way we 
take what are the transcendent cause of these phenomena (the objects in 
themselves inferred to exist from “signs” they give) as physical phenomena 
or intentional correlates. Mikkeli writes of how “Zabarella’s thought had a 
large impact among Protestant Aristotelians in Germany and in the Low 
Countries during the late-sixteenth century and first part of the seven-
teenth century. Zabarella’s clear and systematic interpretation of Aristotle’s 
logic and natural philosophy was used as a basis for numerous Aristotelian 
textbooks printed in Germany” (Mikkeli, 2005). Although it can only be 
conjectured how far the seventeenth-century Aristotelian tradition influ-
enced the later German Aristotle revival, it is notable to recall that Brentano 
studied with the Protestant Aristotelian Trendelenburg at the beginning of 
his career (see Section 1.1).  
 35  .  “Ich 
sehe 
ab 
von 
solchen 
Definitionen, 
die 
vermöge 
irriger 
Grundanschauungen ihr Ziel gänzlich verfehlen. Aber auch die, welche an 
keinem derartigen Übel krank sind, weichen beim ersten Anhören nicht 
unwesentlich von einander ab. Manche haben die Logik als die Kunst des 
 Denkens definiert, andere sagten, sie sei die Kunst des  Schließens , der  Folgerung 
im weitesten Sinne. Ich möchte sie lieber, zwischen beiden Bezeichnungen 
die Mitte haltend, die Kunst des Urteilens nennen. Denn die Logik in der 
althergebrachten und gemeinüblichen Bedeutung des Worts soll uns das 
Verfahren lehren, das uns  zur Erkenntnis der Wahrheit führt, d.i. zum  richtigen 
Urteil , denn die Wahrheit liegt im Urteil. Das gute Urteil ist Erkenntnis.” 
Compare this position with Wundt who maintained that judgments are 
part of logic and of no concern to psychology whatsoever.  
 36  .  At the time of the PES, Brentano maintained that there were degrees or corre-
sponding degrees of conviction pertaining to the intensity of the judgment. 
Later he would view this as a confused view of the matter (cf. TE, 59).  
 37  .  Brentano would view a completely externalist epistemology as a difficult 
model to establish knowledge upon. For example, the a posteriori nature 
of the foundations of logical laws is a difficult claim to accept, given all 
the available evidence. When we apprehend a rule of inference, like modus 
ponens, it is not easy to accept that the universality of the rule is derived a 
posteriori from any contingent experience. The same seems to hold for the 
rules of mathematics as well as the apprehension of the fundamental laws 
of logic and mathematics.  
 38  .  In this respect, Brentano is in agreement with the Scottish common sense 
philosopher Thomas Reid, who said of his fellow countryman Hume that 
if his analysis of the origins of causation were true then “even the night 
time could be called the ‘cause’ of the day” (cf. OEG, 96) In other words, we 

Notes 303
need concepts and analytic rules to ground causation beyond description of 
sense impressions, even if the latter are the origins of the former.  
 39  .   Dale Jacquette refers to this strategy as potentially amounting to “the 
inductive epistemic modal fallacy of deriving greater epistemic value from 
less” (Jacquette, 2002, 196).  
 40 .   In his logic lectures from the time the PES was published, Brentano writes 
of how memory is not a predication or duplication of a past term, and in an 
analogous sense perception is not a predication of the concept of existence 
derived from that which is perceived (cf. EL80\13.006.2).  
 41  .   So-called intuitionistic logic develops Brouwer’s mathematical insights, 
for example, and rejects the principle of bivalence thus promoting a 
“three valued” logic. So-called free logics also reject universal reference 
for terms. Brentano, of course, would reject these systems as unsound; 
however, the important point is that they are semantically possible in that 
they are consistent and ( pace Brentano) they show that the principle of 
non-contradiction cannot be the universal single principle from which we 
derive  all logical truth.  
 42  .   For Brentano, analytical propositions or truths are said to be empiric-
ally justified insofar as the concepts they use are analyzed and justified 
on the basis of a proper descriptive account of inner experience. These 
analyzed concepts, however, are held to be different from what can be 
called the analyzing propositions (cf. Körner, 1987, 12). This term comes 
from Stephan Körner in his paper “On Brentano’s Objections to Kant’s 
Theory of Knowledge”. Körner’s analysis of Brentano’s epistemology and 
the comparison he makes in his paper between Brentano’s views and Kant’s 
are useful and insightful. Nonetheless, we should be critical of Körner’s 
very unBrentanian characterization of the principle of causality as stem-
ming from the “logical impossibility of absolute chance” (Körner, 1987, 13). 
Logical impossibility or possibility is dependent, for Brentano, on absolute 
or metaphysical possibility or impossibility. Körner seems to downplay the 
existential\ontological foundation of Brentano’s epistemology and its foun-
dation in his theory of judgment in order to facilitate an analysis of know-
ledge as dependent on concepts. In this way he moves Brentano’s position 
closer to the Kantian or neo-Kantian views. In Chapter 8 below we will 
more closely investigate the transcendental conception of philosophy and 
how it differs from Brentano’s approach.  
 8 The Intentional Dynamic and Phenomenology: 
The Relevance of Brentano’s Epistemology 
and Philosophy of Mind 
 1  .   Cf. Aristotle’s  De Interpretatione and Plato’s  Cratylus , for classical sources.  
 2  .   A similar view to the standard representationalist position in contemporary 
philosophy of mind is the view of the so-called computational theorists. 
In recent cognitive psychology and computational theory of mind, a func-
tionalist approach dominates, although the reduction of representation 
to higher-order states (and intrinsically non-representational entities or 

304 Notes
activities) is very similar to how standard representationalists understand 
these matters.  
 3 .  Here we can list E. Husserl (1900), Roderick Chisholm (1957), John Searle 
(1983), etc.  
 4 .  De re mental states, (e.g. “Socrates believes  of [ about ] the man to his left that 
it is Plato”) are usually classified as externalist and for this reason  de re . The 
act of believing or judging of x, in Brentano’s terms, requires x’s existence, 
and x will often be some object or thing in the external environment. Lau 
and Deutsch write, “Externalism about  de dicto intentional mental states, 
those ascribed in English with “that-clauses,” (e.g. “Smith believes  that the 
water in his glass is thirst-quenching.”) is the controversial variety” (cf. Lau 
and Deutsch, 2008). Brentano’s system has much to say about these contro-
versial kinds of mental references.  
 5 .   I borrow this term from Benj Hellie, who writes, “I ... call the doctrine that 
an experience is,  phenomenally , an immediate awareness of entities external 
to the subject  Phenomenal Naiveté ” (Hellie, 2006, 1).  
 6  .  Hellie cites Michael Martin, 2004 and Tim Crane, 2006 as holding this 
view.  
 7  .  “Wir sprechen von der Undeutlichkeit einer Vorstellung in einem doppelten, 
einem eigentlichen und uneigentlichen Sinne. Wenn wir sagen: Gegenstände, 
die wir in der Ferne sahen, erschienen uns undeutlich, so meinen wir damit: 
Die Gesichtsvorstellungen, die sie in uns erweckten, gestatteten kein Urteil 
darüber, wie die Gegenstände in der Nähe aussehen würden, und ließen uns 
eben darum hinsichtlich anderer Eigentümlichkeiten zu keiner sicheren 
Vermutung kommen. Welchen  Inhalt die Vorstellungen hatten, mag uns 
dabei vollkommen klar sein. So sind sie undeutlich nur in uneigentli-
chem Sinne. Im eigentlichen Sinne undeutlich nennen wir dagegen solche 
Vorstellungen, bei welchen wir uns den  Inhalt selbst nicht mit Sicherheit 
Rechenschaft zu geben fähig sind.”  
 8  .  See Schlick’s  Allgemeine Erkenntnislehre (1918, revised 1925). Schlick calls 
Brentano’s reduction of categorical universal affirmative judgments to 
negative existential propositions “an artificial construction which turns 
the natural state of affairs upside down” (Schlick, 1985, 42). Whether 
Brentano’s method of reforming logical categories can indeed be rejected as 
“an artificial construction” is debatable, nonetheless Schlick’s criticism of 
Brentano’s abandonment of the correspondence theory of truth is relevant. 
Schlick writes: “The logical side of Brentano’s theory – the claim that basic-
ally every judgment is one termed – is an error that can lead to many philo-
sophical mistakes, in particular to the attempt to detach “things” from the 
relations existing among them ... ” (Schlick, 1985, 43). Here, Schlick is on 
firmer ground as Brentano’s intentional relation (as was also noted above) 
is not completely or theoretically compelling and his later terminalist 
impulses seem to make a consistent relationship between epistemology and 
any kind of formal and general ontology of meanings and relations prob-
lematic at best. This fact, along with a similar assessment, was also noted 
by Husserl in his earlier writings, such as  Logische Untersuchungen , especially 
“Investigation Five” where Husserl critiques Brentano’s theory of judgment 
(Husserl, [1900\1913; 1921] 2000). Schlick, it can be noted, was anticipated 

Notes 305
in his criticism of Brentano’s logical innovations by J.P. Land in a critical 
review appearing in the journal  Mind in 1876 (cf. Land, 1876).  
 9  .  Although some claim that these logical relations and theories cannot be 
addressed at all on Brentano’s non-propositional approach, cf. George 
Bealer, for example, who writes that Brentano’s theory “collides with logic 
itself” (Bealer, 1982, 223–24). This claim has, however, been contested by 
Lynn Pasquarella (1987). Here it can be noted that the above criticisms 
of Brentano’s theory should not be automatically taken to imply that, 
what can be called Brentano’s nominalism about reference to  abstracta is 
completely unworkable. By “abstracta” I mean such entities ranging from 
mathematical sets to propositions (viewed as truth bearers) and to domains 
of quantified formal objects. It is possible that Brentano’s system can deal 
with these matters perhaps just as exhaustively as can e.g. Frege’s predicate 
calculus. However, there are consequences for adopting Brentano’s solu-
tion as it stands and these become evident in the sphere of philosophical 
logic and metaphysics. For a sample of some of these problems in formal 
logic and metaphysics, interested readers can consult Simons (1996, in TSB, 
305–21,2004, in CCB, 45–65) and Vallicella (2001).  
 10  .  This claim may nonetheless be viewed as simply wrong by some Brentano 
scholars. After all, they will say, Brentano very clearly links Kant’s name 
to the declining phase of philosophy in his theory of intellectual develop-
ment outlined in  Die vier Phasen der Philosophie (PP, 1–32). Barry Smith, for 
example, has taken great pains to distance Brentano from German phil-
osophy by appointing him the formative influence to the Austrian approach 
of “scientific philosophy” (Smith, 1994, 1–6). Regarding the role of Kant’s 
relationship as philosophical influence on Austrian and German traditions 
however, Malachi Haim Hacohen sheds light on Kant’s role in responding 
to the 1936 claim of Otto Neurath that “Austria saved itself the interlude 
with Kant”. Hacohen comments: “Saved itself the interlude? Generation 
after generation, Austrian philosophers argued against Kant, sought to 
assure themselves that they were not Kantians, and competed in explaining 
why. The spectacle of a culture constantly endeavoring to exorcise a dead 
philosopher provides the best testimony to his influence. It was in confron-
tation with Kant that Austrian intellectuals formulated their philosophies. 
They may have reached anti-Kantian conclusions, but they made Kant the 
most widely read philosopher in Austria” (Hacohen, 2000, 58).  
 11 .  See especially Körner (1987), Albertazzi (1996) [in SB, 423–64], and Fréchette 
(2012).  
 12 .  With the important qualification, as Béatrice Longuenesse points out in 
her paper “Kant’s “I think” versus Descartes’ “I am a thing that thinks”, 
that Kant misconstrues the form of the Cartesian argument for the cogito. 
Longuenesse writes, “Contrary to Kant’s charge ... , Descartes does   not  derive 
the truth of the proposition “I exist” by a syllogistic inference from the major 
premise “Everything that thinks, exists” and the minor premise “I think.” 
On the contrary, Descartes repeatedly insists that the proposition “I exist” is 
known with certainty to be true by virtue of our knowing that   the particular 
proposition , “I think” is indubitably true, and   not  from a prior knowledge of 
the universal proposition, “Everything that thinks, exists.” ” (Longuenesse, 

306 Notes
2008, 12). In this respect Brentano is much closer to Descartes in rejecting 
the categorical form of judgment as necessary to account for the deductive 
proof of the cogito.  
 13 .  On this important debate, cf. Köhnke (1991) and Bird (2006). On Brentano’s 
misreading of Kant, cf. Körner (1987). For Brentano’s assessment of Kant as 
a disaster for epistemology, many references can be found. The following 
from Würzburg lectures, later given again in Vienna is typical: “Kant was 
not a great reformer. He did not introduce a valid and genuinely fruitful 
method to philosophy, but rather one which led him and others to the 
most unjustified fabrications. He was a very imperfect observer in psych-
ology. With his imaginary categorical imperative he could not even gain 
entrance to ethical inquiry. Misunderstanding the purpose of logic, he 
restricted it to so-called formal logic, and thus left it in such a rudimen-
tary form that it was useless in its most essential function. Even in the 
 Critique of Pure Reason he erected an edifice which, so far from being 
well-founded, actually rests on a presupposition which is itself an illu-
sion. This famous work is also not lacking in contradictions and vague-
ness in matters of detail. Actually Kant was not outstandingly clear; Hume 
decidedly surpassed him in this” (OEG, 67).  
 14  .  Brentano writes of how, Kant’s synthetic a priori cognitions are supposed 
to have validity only for objects of possible experience, “ ... therefore it is 
not supposed to be possible, on the basis of the law of universal causation 
for example, to infer any transcendent fact” (OEG, 88). If transcendent 
here means beyond any possible experience – of which the empirical is 
included, then Brentano’s reading is correct, however, as is clear from his 
analysis of Kant Brentano takes it to mean beyond any subjective or repre-
sentational and intuitive content. This is clearly false. Likewise, the same 
ambiguity and adherence to Trendelenburg’s reading informs Brentano’s 
interpretation where he writes, “if it’s true, as Kant believes, that analytic 
laws alone will not suffice for the construction of a science, then 
rejecting these laws must make science impossible. Thus a phenomenal 
science would be just as impossible as a science of things in themselves” 
(OEG, 91).  
 15  .  Aristotle’s example is the act of perception (a process or activity: ongoing 
and complete in itself at every moment with each moment contributing to 
the act’s reality) and this is compared to the building of a house. The latter 
is an event that takes place in time, it has a beginning, a middle and an end 
and it can be viewed as a definite connection of moments and activities.  
 16  .  And see Brentano’s comments in AWV, 43ff. Roderick Chisholm writes 
that: “It would be in the spirit of Brentano’s intention to say rather this: a 
substance is a thing that is not itself an accident but is capable of having 
accidents” (SNC, 9). In his mature ontology, accidents can constitute 
substances. Of other important changes to the system of 1874 (outlined in 
appendixes to later editions of the PES and other posthumous publications) 
can be listed the following: where Brentano writes of degrees of conviction 
and intensities of judgments, said to be analogous to feelings in the PES, 
later this is denied (ORW, 37n); Cognitive acts are also later distanced from 
containing innate elements of feeling (DP, 89); and there is no distinction 

Notes 307
between a real versus an existing thing. Brentano’s later doctrine also 
marks a break with his earlier act psychology of the PES by introducing an 
explicit distinction between “genetic” and “descriptive” psychology (this 
was systematically arrived at during Brentano’s Vienna years). Descriptive 
psychology is described as an a priori science. At one point, descriptive 
psychology is even called “phenomenology” by Brentano. Genetic psych-
ology, on the other hand, is empirical and a posteriori, and it is probably 
best equated with the physiological and experimental psychology that 
was establishing itself while Brentano was teaching. Finally, the later 
Brentano also distinguished more carefully between actually determined 
but differing modes of presentations, such as direct ( in recto ), indirect 
( in obliquo ) modes of awareness (of objects) and of the manner in which 
objects were presented. Presentations are later also described as “authentic” 
or “inauthentic”, “intuitive” or “abstract”, “distinct” or “confused”. 
Sensory presentations (determined by outer perception) were connected 
and made possible by an “original association”, or  proteraesthesis . Brentano 
writes “The great similarity and the close genetic tie with the experiences 
concerned was the reason that it [ proteraesthesis ] was for a long time gener-
ally confounded with sensations. The components belonging to proter-
aesthesis are even today often counted as components of sensations” (DP, 
91). Different theories of internal time consciousness were also proposed. 
Finally there was a distinction introduced between sensory and noetic 
consciousness, Brentano writes that, “the presentations that have  sensory 
objects have also been called intuitions; those that have [a] noetic object 
have been called conceptual thinking, thinking of concepts. But people 
have not always been completely consistent in this, for they sometimes 
have also considered inner perception of noetic activity something whose 
object is an intuition” (SNC, 45). Brentano subsequently tried to qualify 
the distinction between these two disparate modes of conscious awareness 
(cf. SNC, 45–64).  
 17 .   For if, following Frege, we say that “P” stands for the horse known as Pegasus 
(a propositional symbol representing the subject in a sentence), and “f” 
stands for the property of being able to fly, parsed: “capable of flying”, which 
is a variable predicated of the subject P, we can then express the proposition 
Pf. “Pf”, in line with Frege’s extension of Boolean propositional logic, and 
in modern conceptual notation, communicates that “Pegasus is capable of 
flight”. Nonetheless, it is still manifestly not evident how, on the above 
translation, implicit acts or affirmations of an object are not the basis of the 
formal mode of quantification employed. The Fregian notational symbols 
that represent and stand for the ascribing of properties to objects, in other 
words, seem to act analogously to the (linguistic) bearers of meaning and 
attribution of linguistic/real properties to subjects in natural language. The 
syntactic relations between well-formed sentences [i.e. propositions] are 
therefore essentially sentential variables within an underlying grammatical 
structure. The logical variables above, furthermore, have a basic structure 
analogous to linguistic statements. The above position, however, in util-
izing variables in place of sentences, has been rightly lauded for having the 
attributes of i) maximal formalizability and ii) rigor working in its favor. 

308 Notes
The propositional calculus also allows for truth predicates to be fundamen-
tally ascribed to the affirmed and well-formed “statement”, as opposed to 
isolated objects. The statement in notation can therefore be said to express 
the properties of the subject/object in grammatical form. And this is some-
thing important to logical analysis, but which is difficult to easily accom-
plish on Brentano’s model. Nonetheless, it also lacks Brentano’s concern 
with the ontological constitution of the things themselves and therefore 
with the philosophical questions at heart of the logical framework, such 
as the meaning and mode of existence of the objects quantified in strictly 
formal domains.  
 Conclusion 
 1 .  Crane continues, “The concept of intentional inexistence as introduced in 
the 1874  Psychology presupposes a metaphysical and epistemological frame-
work in which the idea of an intentional relation certainly made sense, but 
few would accept this framework today and it was rejected by Brentano 
himself (in the guise of an innovation) in the 1911 edition” (Crane, 2007, 
33). Arguably the later developments of Brentano’s system, his reist twist 
on the ontological framework of the PES, provide some interesting insights, 
although we argued above that the essential deflationary tendency (already 
present in the PES), is taken to an extreme level with the complete rejection 
of presentation contents. Brentano’s later nominalist account of intention-
ality therefore, is not as rich or potentially useful in philosophy of mind as 
the account provided in the 1874 system.  

309
 Abbagnano, Nicola, “Positivism” in Paul Edwards (ed.)  The Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy , New York, Macmillan Publishing Co, Vol. 5, (1972): 414–19. 
 Agassi, Joseph, “The Lark and the Tortoise” review of Peter Urbach,  Francis 
Bason’s Philosophy of Science: An Account and a Reappraisal ,  Philosophy of the 
Social Sciences , No. 19, (June, 1989): 89–94. 
 Aiken, D. Wyatt, “Essence and Existence, Transcendentalism and Phenomenalism: 
Aristotle’s Answers to the Questions of Ontology”, in  The Review of Metaphysics , 
Vol. 45, No. 1 (Sept, 1991): 29–55. 
 Albertazzi, Liliana,  Introduzione a Brentano , Rome-Bari: Editori Laterza, 1999. 
 ——,  Immanent Realism: An Introduction to Brentano , Synthese Library, studies 
in Epistemology, Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science Vol. 333, 
Springer: Dordrecht, 2006. 
 Albertazzi, L.; Libardi, M.; & Poli, R., (Editors).  The School of Franz Brentano in the 
Nijhoff International Philosophy Series Vol. 52, Dordrecht/Boston/London: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996. 
 Anscombe, G.E.M, “The Will and Emotion”, in  Grazer Philosophische Studien , 
Volume 5, (1978): 139–148. 
 Antonelli, Mauro, “Franz Brentano ‘The Grandfather of Phenomenology’ and 
the Spirit of the Times” in Tymieniecka (2002): 11–29. 
 ——, “Franz Brentano et l’“inexistence intentionnelle”” in  Philosophiques , 
vol. 36, No. 2, (2009): 467–487. 
 Aquinas, Thomas,  Introduction to St. Thomas Aquinas , Edited with an Introduction 
by Anton C. Pegis, Toronto: Random House, 1948. 
 Aristotle,  The Complete Works , 2 vols. Edited by Jonathan Barnes, New Jersey: 
Princeton University Press, 1984. 
 ——.  The Basic Works , Richard McKeon Editor, New York: Random House, 1941. 
 ——.  De Anima (On the Soul) , translated with an Introduction and Notes by Hugh 
Lawson-Tancred, London: Penguin, 1986. 
 Arnold, Magda B. (Editor),  The Nature of Emotion :  Selected Readings , 
Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England: Penguin, 1968. 
 Armstrong, David,  A Materialist Theory of the Mind . London: Routledge (1968). 
 Bäck, Allan,  Aristotle’s Theory of Predication, Leiden: Brill, 2000. 
 Bacon, Francis , Novum Organum (London: 1620). Translated by L. Jardine and 
M. Silverthorne as  The New Organon (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2000). 
 Bakan, David,  On Method: Towards a Reconstruction of Psychological Investigation , 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Inc., Publishers, 1967. 
 Barclay, J. R., “Franz Brentano and Sigmund Freud” in  Journal of Existentialism , 
5 (1964), 1–36. 
 Bartok, Philip J., “Brentano’s Intentionality Thesis: Beyond the Analytic and 
Phenomenological Readings” in  Journal of the History of Philosophy , Volume 43, 
Number 4, (October 2005): 437–460. 
 Bealer, George,  Quality and Concept , Oxford: Clarendon, 1982. 
 Bibliography  

310 Bibliography
 Bergmann, Gustav,  Realism: A Critique of Brentano and Meinong , Madison: 
University of Wisconsin Press, 1967. 
 Bergmann, Hugo S., “Unbekannte Manuskripte Franz Brentanos” pp. 34–49 
in Minkowski and Sternglas (eds)   Horizons of a Philosopher  :   Essays in Honor of 
David Baumgardt , Leiden: E J. Brill, 1963.  
 Bird, Graham, “The Neglected Alternative: Trendelenburg, Fischer, and Kant.” 
In  A Companion to Kant, Bird, (ed). Blackwell Publishing, 2006. 
 Blackmore, Susan, “There is no Stream of Consciousness” in Alva Noë (editor) 
 Is the Visual World a Grand Illusion? (Journal of Consciousness Studies 
Controversies in Science & the Humanities), Imprint Academic Publisher, 
(2002): 17–28. 
 Brandl, Johannes, “Brentano’s Theory of Judgement”,  The Stanford Encyclopedia 
of Philosophy (Summer 2010 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (editor), online at: http: 
//plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2010/entries/brentano-judgement/. 
 Brentano, Franz,  Von der mannigfachen Bedeutung des Seienden nach Aristoteles , 
Frieburg i. Br.: Herder, 1862. 
 ——,  Die Psychologie des Aristoteles: Insbesondere seine Lehre vom nous Poiētikos , 
Mainz: Franz Kirchheim, 1867. 
 ——,  Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt , Vol. 1, Leipzig, Duncker & Humbolt, 
1874. 
 ——,  Über die Gründe der Entmutigung auf philosophischem Gebiete. Wien: 
Braumüller, 1874b. 
 ——,  Meine letzten Wünsche für Österreich, Stuttgart: Cotta, 1895. 
 ——,  Was für ein Philosoph manchmal Epoche macht , Vienna, Pest & Leipzig: 
Hartleben, 1876. 
 ——,  Neue Rätsel von Änigmatias. Wien: C. Gerold’s Sohn, 1879. 
 ——, “Über der Creationismus des Aristoteles”, in  Stzungsberichte der kaiserlichen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften. Philosophisch-historische Klasse. Band 100. Wien: 
C. Gerhold’s Sohn, (1882): 95–126. 
 ——,  Vom Ursprung sittlicher Erkenntnis. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1889. 
 ——,  Das Genie. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1892. 
 ——,  Das Schlechte als Gegenstand dichterischer Darstellung. Leipzig: Duncker & 
Humblot, 1892 
 ——,  Untersuchungen zur Sinnespsychologie. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1907. 
 ——,  Aristoteles’ Lehre vom Ursprung des menschlischen Geistes. Leipzig: Quelle & 
Meyer, 1911. 
 ——,  Aristoteles und seine Weltanschauung , Leipzig:Quelle & Meyer, 1911 b. 
 ——,  Von der Klassifikation der psychischen Phänomene. Leipzig: Duncker & 
Humblot, 1911 c. 
 ——,  Die Lehre Jesu und ihre bleibende Bedeutung , Leipzig: Meiner, 1922. 
 ——,  Versuch über die Erkenntnis. Leipzig: Meiner Verlag 1925. 
 ——,  Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkte vol. III. Vom sinnlichen und noetischen 
Bewusstsein; Äussere und innere Wahrnehmung, Begriffe. Edited by Oskar Kraus, 
Leipzig: Felix Meiner, 1928. 
 ——,  Vom sinnlichen und noetischen Bewusstseins. Leipzig: Meiner, 1928. 
 ——,  Vom Dasein Gottes. Leipzig: Felix Meiner, 1929. 
 ——,  Wahrheit und Evidenz. Erkenntnistheoretische Abhandlungen und Briefe. Leizig: 
Felix Meiner 1930. 
 ——,  Kategorienlehre. Leipzig: Felix Meiner, 1933. 

Bibliography 311
 ——,  Die Lehre vom Richtigen Urteil. Nach den Vorlesungen über Logik, mit Benützung 
anderer Manuskripte aus dem Gebiete der Erkenntnistheorie, aus dem Nachlass. 
Bern: A. Francke, 1956. 
 ——,  Grundlegung und Aufbau der Ethik. Bern: A. Francke, 1959. 
 ——,  Grundzüge der Ästhetik. Aus dem Nachlass. Bern: A. Francke, 1959 b. 
 ——,  Geschichte der Griechischen Philosophie. Bern-München: A. Francke, 1963. 
 ——,  Die Abkehr vom Nichtrealen , ed. by F. Mayer-Hillebrand, Hamburg: Meiner, 
1966. 
 ——,  The True and the Evident . Edited by Oskar Kraus. English edition edited by 
Roderick M. Chisholm; translated by Roderick M. Chisholm, Ilse Politzer, and 
Kurt R. Fischer, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul 1966 b. 
 ——,  Über die Zukunft der Philosophie. Mit Anmerkungen ed. Von Oskar Kraus, neu 
eingeleitet von Paul Weingartner, Hamburg: Meiner, 1968. 
 ——,  Die vier Phasen der Philosophie und ihr augenblicklicher Stand. Ed. by Franziska 
Mayer-Hillebrand, Hamburg: Meiner, 1968 b. 
 ——.  The Foundation and Construction of Ethics . Edited and translated by Elizabeth 
Hughes Schneewind, New York: Humanities Press 1973. 
 ——,  On The Several Senses of Being in Aristotle , English Translation edited and 
Translated by Rolf George, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1975. 
 ——,  Philosophische Untersuchungen zu Raum, Zeit, und Kontinuum. Hamburg: 
Meiner, 1976. 
 ——,  The Psychology of Aristotle, in Particular his Doctrine of the Active Intellect. 
 With an Appendix Concerning the Activity of Aristotle’s God , Edited and Translated 
by Rolf George, Berkeley: University of California Press, George, 1977. 
 ——.  Aristotle and His World View, Edited and translated by Rolf George and 
Roderick M. Chisholm, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978. 
 ——. Sensory and Noetic Consciousness. Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint 
vol. III. , Edited by Oskar Kraus. English edition edited by Linda L. McAlister; 
translated by Margarete Schättle and Linda L. McAlister, London: Routledge 
& Kegan Paul, 1981. 
 ——,  The Theory of Categories . Translated by Roderick M. Chisholm and Norbert 
Guterman, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981 b. 
 ——,  Deskriptive Psychologie, Edited by Roderick Chisholm and Wilhelm 
Baumgartner, Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1982. 
 ——,  On the Existence of God. Lectures given at the Universities of Würzburg and 
Vienna (1868–1891) , Edited and translated by Susan F. Krantz, Dordrecht: 
Martinus Nijhoff 1987. 
 ——,  Philosophical Investigations on Space, Time, and the Continuum . Translated by 
Barry Smith, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul 1988. 
 ——,  Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint , ed. by L. McAlister, London: 
Routledge (Translation of the 2nd ed. with an Introduction and notes by 
O. Kraus, Leipzig 1924), 1995. 
 ——.  Descriptive Psychology ., Edited and translated by Benito Müller London: 
Routledge 1995 b. 
 ——,  The Four Phases of Philosophy and its Current State, with an Appendix by 
Balázs M. Mezei and Barry Smith, Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1998. 
 ——.  The Origin of our Knowledge of Right and Wrong , Edited by Oskar Kraus; 
English edition edited by Roderick M. Chisholm. Translated by Roderick M. 
Chisholm & Elizabeth H. Schneewind, New York: Routledge, 2009. 

312 Bibliography
 ——. Franz Brentano:  Logik (Spring 2011 edition), Robin Rollinger (ed.), available 
online at http://gandalf.uib.no/Brentano/texts/el/logik/norm/ 
 Brentano, J. C. M, “The Manuscripts of Franz Brentano” in  Revue Internationale 
de Philosophie , Vol. 20, No. 78 (1966): 477–484. 
 Broad, C. D., “Phenomenalism”,  Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society , New Series, 
Vol. 15, (1914–1915): 227–251. 
 Boudewijnse, G.A., Murray, D.J. and Bandomir, C. A., “The Fate of Herbart’s 
Mathematical Psychology” in  History of Psychology , Vol. 4, No. 2 (2001): 107–132. 
 Boring, E. G.,  A History of Experimental Psychology , Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2 nd  edition, 1950. 
 Butterfield, Herbert,  The Origins of Modern Science 1300–1800 , Revised Edition, 
New York: The Free Press, 1965. 
 Burgess, Andrew J., “Brentano as Philosopher of Religion” in  International Journal 
for Philosophy of Religion Vol. 5 (2) (1974): 79–90. 
 Cannon, W. B., “The James-Lange Theory of Emotion: A Critical Examination 
and an Alternative Theory” in The American Journal of Psychology, Vol. 39 
(1927): 106–124 reprinted in Arnold (Editor), (1968): 43–52. 
 Carruthers, Peter, “Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness”,  The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2011 Edition) , Edward N. Zalta (ed.), online at : 
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2011/entries/consciousness-higher. 
 Cassirer, Ernst,  The Individual and the Cosmos in Renaissance Philosophy , Translated 
with an Introduction by Mario Domandi, New York & Evanston: Harper 
Torchbooks, 1963. 
 Castaňeda, Hector-Neri (Editor),  Intentionality, Minds, and Perception: Discussions 
on Contemporary Philosophy – A Symposium , Detroit: Wayne State University, 
1967. 
 Caston, Victor, “Aristotle’s Psychology” in Gill and Pellegrin (Editors),  The 
Blackwell Companion to Ancient Philosophy , West Sussex UK: Blackwell, (2006): 
316–346. 
 Chisholm, Roderick. “Intentionality” in P. Edwards (ed.)  Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy , New York, Macmillan, (1967), Vol. 4, 201–4. 
 Chrudzimski, Arkadiusz, Intentionalitätstheorie beim frühen Brentano, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2001. 
 —— “Brentano’s Late Ontology”, in Brentano Studien, 10 (2002/2003): 221–235. 
 Churchland, Patricia Smith,  Neurophilosophy: Toward a Unifed Science of the Mind/
Brain , Cambridge Mass: MIT Press, 1986. 
 Clagett, Marshall,  Greek Science in Antiquity , New York: Collier, 1963. 
 Cleve, James van, “C. I. Lewis’ Defense of Phenomenalism” in  Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research , Vol. 41, No. 3 (Mar., 1981): 325–332. 
 Cohen, Aviva, “The Origins of Freud’s Theory of the Unconscious: A Philosophical 
Link,  Psychoanalytische Perspectieven , No. 41/42, (2000): 109–122. 
 Comte, Auguste,  The Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte, Freely translated and 
condensed by Harriet Martineau , with an Introduction by Frederic Harrison, 
Vol. 1 Kitchener: Batoche Books, 2000. 
 Crane, Tim, “Brentano’s concept of intentional inexistence” in Mark Textor 
(Ed., 2006): 20–35. 
 ——, “Is There a Perceptual Relation?” In Tamar Szabó Gendler and John Hawthorne, 
editors,  Perceptual Experience , Oxford: Oxford University Press 2006. 
 Dainton, Barry, and Tim Bayne. “Consciousness as a Guide to Personal 
Persistence.”  Australasian Journal of Philosophy 83.4 (2005): 549 – 71. 

Bibliography 313
 Damasio, Antonio,  Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason and the Human Brain 
(Examining the Argument of Separation of Mind and Body, and the Artificial 
Dichotomy Between Rationality and Emotion) , G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1994. 
 Davidson, Donald, “Mental Events” in  Essays on Actions and Events , Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 2nd ed. (2001): 137–149. 
 De Boer, Theodore,  The Development of Husserl’s Thought , The Hague: Springer, 
1978. 
 De Garmo, Charles,  Herbart and the Herbartians , New York: Charles Schribner’s 
Sons, 1895. 
 Dennet, Daniel, C.,  Consciousness Explained , Boston: Little Brown, 1991. 
 ——, “Review of Damasio’s Descartes’ Error” in  Times Literary Supplement, August 
25, (1995): 3–4. 
 De Palma, Vittorio, “La Ripresa Brentaniana della Theoria Aristotelica delle 
Categorie e il suo influsso su Husserl” Talk delivered December 18, 2002 at the 
philosophy department of the University of Padova, available online at: www.
uniurb.it/Filosofia/isonomia/depalma.pdf 
 Dilthey, Wilhelm,  Introduction to the Human Sciences , Selected Works Volume 
One, translated and edited by Makkreal and Rodi, 1989. 
 Dretske, Fred,  Naturalizing the Mind , Cambridge: MIT Press (1995). 
 Everdell, William R,  The First Moderns: Profiles in the Origins of 20 th   Century 
Thought , Chicago Il: University of Chicago Press, 1997. 
 Falkenstein, Lorne,  Kant’s Intuitionism: A Commentary on the Transcendental 
Aesthetic , Toronto, University of Toronto Press, 1995. 
 Fancher, Raymond, M., “Franz Brentano’s  Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint 
and Freud’s Early Metapsychology” in  Journal of the History of the Behavioral 
Sciences Vol. 13 No. 3, (July, 1977): 207–227. 
 Field, Hartley, “ Mental Representation ” in  Erkenntnis Vol.13, (1978): 9–61. 
 Fréchette, Guillaume, “Kant, Brentano and Stumpf on Psychology and 
Anti-Psychologism,” preprint version, to appear in  Kant and Philosophy in a 
Cosmopolitical Sense , S. Bacin, A. Ferrarin, C. La Rocca and M. Ruffing (eds), 
Berlin-New York, De Gruyter, 2012. 
 Freud, Sigmund,  Five Lectures on Psycho-Analysis , Translated & Edited by James 
Strachey, New York, London, Norton & Co., 1977. 
 Fugali, Edoardo, “Toward the Rebirth of Aristotelian Psychology: Trendelenburg 
and Brentano” pp. 179–202 in Heinämaa & Reuter (Editors), 2009. 
 Gontard, Friedrich,  The Chair of Peter: A History of the Papacy , Translated from the 
German by A.J. & E.F. Peeler, New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1964. 
 Hacohen, Malachi Haim,  Karl Popper – The Formative Years, 1902–1945 , Cambridge 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
 Hart, W. D.,  The Engines of the Soul , Cambridge UK: Cambridge UP, 1988. 
 Harman, Gilbert, “The Intrinsic Quality of Experience” in J. Tomberlin, ed., 
 Philosophical Perspectives 4: Action Theory and Philosophy of Mind , Atascadero: 
Ridgeview Publishing Company (1990): 31–52 
 Heidegger, Martin,  Unterwegs zur Sprache , Neske: Pfullingen, 1959. 
 Heaton, J. M., “Brentano and Freud” in Smith, B (Ed.),  Structure and Gestalt: 
Philosophy and Literature in Austria-Hungary and Her Successor States (Linguistic 
and Literary Studies in Eastern Europe, Vol 7), John Benjamins Publishing 
Company, 1981, pp. 171–194. 
 Heidbreder, Edna,  Seven Psychologies , New York: Appleton Century Crofts, 
1961. 

314 Bibliography
 Heil, John,  Philosophy of Mind: A Contemporary Introduction , London & New York: 
Routledge, 1998. 
 Hellie, Benj, “Beyond Phenomenal Naïveté” in  Philosophers’ Imprint 6 (2) (2006): 
1–24. 
 ——, “Higher Order Intentionality and Higher Order Acquaintance” in 
 Philosophical Studies 134 (3) (2007): 289–324. 
 Heimsoeth, Heinz,  The Six Great Themes of Western Metaphysics and the End of 
the Middle Ages , Translated with a Critical Introduction by Ramon J. Betanzos, 
Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1994. 
 Hickerson, Ryan, “Getting the Quasi-Picture: Twardowskian Representationalism 
and Husserl’s Argument Against It”, in  Journal of the History of Philosophy , Vol. 
43, No. 4, (October, 2005): 461–480. 
 ——,  The History of Intentionality: Theories of Consciousness from Brentano to 
Husserl , London, UK, Continuum International Publishing Group, 2007. 
 Heinämaa & Reuter (Editors).  Psychology and Philosophy: Inquiries into the Soul 
from Late Scholasticism to Contemporary Thought , Studies in the History of 
Philosophy of Mind, Vol. 8, Dordrecht: Springer, 2009. 
 Herschel, J. F. W.  Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy , London, 
Longman, Brown, Green & Longmans, 1851. 
 Horgan, Terence & Tienson, John, “The Intentionality of Phenomenology and 
the Phenomenology of Intentionality” in Chalmers (ed.),  Philosophy of Mind: 
Classical and Contemporary Readings . Oxford University Press (2002), avail-
able online at: http://www.u.arizona.edu/~thorgan/papers/mind/IPandPI.
htm#_edn1. 
 Hothersall, David,  History of Psychology , New York: Random House, 1984, Second 
Edition, 1990. 
 Huemer, Wolfgang and Landerer, Christoph, “Mathematics, Experience and 
Laboratories: Herbart’s and Brentano’s role in the Rise of Scientific Psychology” 
in  History of the Human Sciences , No. 23, Vol. 3, (2010): 72–94. 
 Husserl, Edmund,  Logische Untersuchungen, Tübingen: Max Niemeyer, Verlag, 
1913, 1921. Critical edition:  Husserliana , Vols. 19 (ed. by Ursula Panzer) & 
20 (ed. by Ullrich Melle). Translated as  Logical Investigations , in 2 volumes 
by J.N. Findlay, latest edition with a new preface by Michael Dummet and 
Introduction by Dermot Moran, Routledge, 2000. 
 ——,  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. 
Erstes Buch. Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie. Edited by Karl 
Schumann (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976). 
 ——,  Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstesens (1893–1917), Edited by 
Rudolf Boehm (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1969). 
 Hume, David,  Enquiry concerning Human Understanding , in  Enquiries concerning 
Human Understanding and concerning the Principles of Morals , edited by L. A. 
Selby-Bigge, 3rd edition revised by P. H. Nidditch, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1975 
 ——,  A Treatise of Human Nature , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2nd edition, 
1978. 
 Ierna, Carlos, “Husserl’s Critique of Double Judgments” pp. 49–73 in F. Mattens 
(Editor).  Meaning and Language: Phenomenological Perspectives , Dordrecht: 
Springer, 2008. 

Bibliography 315
 Jacquette, Dale, “Alexius Meinong (1853–1920)” in Albertazzi, Libardi and Poli 
(eds),  The School of Franz Brentano in the Nijhoff International Philosophy 
Series Vol. 52, Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
(1996): 131–160. 
 ——, (Editor),  The Cambridge Companion to Brentano , Cambridge UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 2004. 
 James, William, “What is an Emotion?” in Mind, Vol. 9, (1884): 188–205, 
reprinted in Arnold (Editor), 1968: 17–36. 
 ——,  The Principles of Psychology , 2 Volumes, 1890, (Dover Books Reprint, 1950). 
 Jevons, Stanley, W,  The Principles of Science: A Treatise on Logic and Scientific 
Method , London: Macmillan & Co., 1874. 
 Keynes, John Maynard,  A Treatise on Probability , New York: Harper & Row, 1962. 
 Kim, Alan, “Wilhelm Maximilian Wundt”,  The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
(Fall 2008 Edition) , Edward N. Zalta (ed.), online at: http://plato.stanford.edu 
/archives/fall2008/entries/wilhelm-wundt/. 
 Kim, Jaegwon,  Supervenience and Mind , Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 
1993. 
 ——,  The Philosophy of Mind , Boulder, Co: Westview Press, 1996. 
 Klima, Gyula, “Three Myths of Intentionality versus Some Medieval 
Philosophers”, Talk presented at the  7th International Conference for the Arts 
and Humanities , Honolulu, January 9, 2009. 
 Köhnke, Klaus Christian,  The Rise of Neo-Kantianism: German Academic 
Philosophy between Idealism and Positivism . Translated from the German by 
R. J. Hollingdale, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991. 
 Körner, Stephan,  Kant , Penguin Books, 1955. 
 ——, “On Brentano’s Objections to Kant’s Theory of Knowledge” in  Topoi , 6, 
(1987): 11–17. 
 Kolakowski, Leszek,  The Alienation of Reason: A History of Positivist Thought , 
Translated by N. Guterman, New York: Anchor/ Double Day, 1968. 
 Krantz, Susan, “Brentano on `Unconscious Consciousness’” in  Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research , Vol. 50, No. 4 (Jun., 1990): 745–753. 
 Kraus, Oskar (Editor).  Franz Brentano: Zur Kenntnis seines Lebens und seiner Werke. 
Mit Beiträgen von Carl Stumpf und Emdund Husserl. München: Beck, 1919. 
 Kristeller, Paul Oskar,  Renaissance Thought: The Classic, Scholastic and Humanist 
Strains , New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1954. 
 Kuhn, Thomas,  The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1962. 
 Kulstad, Mark and Carlin, Laurence, “Leibniz’s Philosophy of Mind”,  The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2008 Edition) , Edward N. Zalta (ed.), online at: 
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/leibniz-mind/. 
 Külpe, Oswald,  Introduction to Philosophy: A Handbook for Students of Psychology, 
Logic, Ethics, Aesthetics and General Philosophy , translated from the 1895 
German edition by W.B. Pillbury and E.B. Titchener, London: George Allen & 
Unwin Ltd., 1927. 
 Kusch, Martin,  Psychologism: A Case Study in the Sociology of Knowledge , London: 
Routledge, 1995. 
 ——,  Psychological Knowledge: A Social History and Philosophy , London, Routledge, 
1999. 

316 Bibliography
 Lacey, A.R.,  A Dictionary of Philosophy , London Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1974. 
 Land, J. P. N, “Brentano’s Logical Innovations”, in  Mind , Vol. 1, No. 2 (Apr., 
1876): 289–292. 
 Leibniz, G.W.  Philosophical Essays , Edited and translated by R. Ariew and D. 
Garber, Indianapolis & Cambridge: Hacket Publishing Company, Co., 1989. 
 Long, Christopher P. “Aristotle’s Phenomenology of Form: The Shape of Beings 
that Become” in  Epoché , Vol. 11, No. 2 (2007): 435–448. 
 Longuenesse, Beatrice, “Kant’s ‘I think’ versus Descartes’s ‘I am a thing that 
thinks’ ” in  Kant and the Early Modern , Dan Garber and Beatrice Longuenesse 
(eds), Princeton: Princeton University Press, (2008): 9–31. 
 Luft, S. and Makreel R., Editors,  Neo-Kantianism in Contemporary Philosophy , 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2009. 
 Lycan, William, “Giving Dualism its Due” in the  Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
Vol. 87, No. 4 (2009): 551–563. 
 Mach, Ernst,  Analysis of Sensations (Originally Published 1866), La Salle, Ill.: 
Open Court, 1914. 
 Markie, Peter, “Rationalism vs. Empiricism”,  The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy (Fall 2008 Edition) , Edward N. Zalta (ed.), available online at: <http: 
//plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/rationalism-empiricism/. 
 Marty, Anton,  Deskriptive Psychologie , Herausgegeben von Maruo Antonelli 
und Johann Christian Marek, mit einer Einleitung von Mauro Antonelli, 
Würzburg: Köningshausen & Neumann, 2011. 
 Masin, S.C.; Zudini, V. & Antonelli, M., “Early Alternative Derivations of 
Fechner’s Law” in  Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, Vol. 45 No.1, 
(Winter 2009): 56–65. 
 Mayer-Hillebrand, F, “A reply to Dr. Srzednicki”, in  Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research , Vol. 23, No. 3 (1963). 
 McAllister, Linda (Editor),  The Philosophy of Brentano , Atlantic Highlands: 
Humanities Press, 1977. 
 McGrew, Timothy, “Direct Inference and the Problem of Induction”, in  The 
Monist 84 (2) (April, 2001), Reprinted in Henry E. Kyburg and Miriam Thalos 
(Editors),  Probability is the very Guide of Life: The Philosophical Uses of Chance , 
33–60. 
 Mikkeli, Heikki, “Giacomo Zabarella”,  The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
(Fall 2009 Edition) , Edward N. Zalta (ed.), available online at: http://plato. 
stanford.edu/archives/fall2009/entries/zabarella. 
 Mitchell, David,  An Introduction to Logic, London , Anchor Books, 1970. 
 Merlan, Phillip. “Brentano and Freud” in  Journal of the History of Ideas , Vol. 6, 
No. 3 (June, 1945): 375–377. 
 ——. “Brentano and Freud—A Sequel” in  Journal of the History of Ideas , Vol 10, 
No, 3 (June, 1949): 451. 
 Mezei, Balázs M. and Smith, Barry.,  The Four Phases of Philosophy With an 
Appendix: The Four Phases of Philosophy and Its Current State by Franz Brentano , 
Studien Zur Österreichischen Philosophie, Herausgegeben von Rudolf Haller, 
Band XXVII, Atlanta, GA: Amsterdam, 1998. 
 McDonnell, Cyril, “Brentano’s Modification of the Medieval-Scholastic 
Conception of ‘Intentional Inexistence’ in  Psychology from an Empirical 
Standpoint (1874)”, in  Maynooth Philosophical Papers 3, (2006): 55–75. 
 McGinn, Colin,  The Problem of Consciousness , Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 
1991. 

Bibliography 317
 ——,  The Mysterious Flame: Conscious Minds in a Material World , New York, NY: 
Basic Books, 1999. 
 ——,  Truth By Analysis: Games, Names, and Philosophy , Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2012. 
 Mill. John Stuart,  Auguste Comte and Positivism , London: N. Trübner & Co., 
1866. 
 ——,  A System of Logic: Ratiocinative and Inductive , Vol. 1, London: Harrison & 
Co., 
 ——,  The Collected Works of J.S. Mill, Vol. XVII, The Later Letters of J.S. Mill 
1849–1873 Part IV , Edited by Francis E. Mineka and Dwight N. Lindley, 
Toronto, University of Toronto Press, 1972. 
 Mises, Ludwig von,  The Historical Setting of the Austrian School of Economics 
Arlington House, 1969. 
 Modrak, Deborah K.,  Aristotle: The Power of Perception , Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1987. 
 ——,  Aristotle’s Theory of Language and Meaning , Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 
2001. 
 Montero, Barbara,  On the Philosophy of Mind , Cengage Learning Series, 
Philosophical Topics, Belmont CA: Wadsworth, 2009. 
 Moran, Dermot, “The Inaugural Address: Brentano’s Thesis” in  Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes, Vol. 70, (1996): 1–27 
 ——, “Husserl’s Critique of Brentano in the Logical Investigations” in  Manuscrito , 
Vol. 2, No. 23 (October, 2000): 163–206. 
 Morick, Harold (Editor),  Introduction to the Philosophy of Mind , Glenview, Illinois: 
Scott Foresman and Company, 1970. 
 Mourret, Fernand,  A History of the Catholic Church Volume 8: Period of the Early 
Nineteenth Century (1823–1878) , Translated by Rev. Newton Thompson, S.T.D., 
London: B. Herder Book Co., 1957. 
 Münch, Dieter, “ Brentano and Comte ” in the  Grazer Philosophische Studien Vol. 35, 
(1989): 32–54. 
 ——, “Franz Brentano”, entry in  The Encyclopedia of Phenomenology , Lester 
Embree, et al. Editors, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, (1997): 
71–75. 
 Münsterberg, Hugo,  Psychology and Industrial Efficiency , New York: Houghton 
Mifflin, 1913. 
 Murphy, Gardner,  Historical Introduction to Modern Psychology , New York: 
Harcourt, Brace & Co, 1949 
 Nagel, Thomas, “What is it like to be a Bat?” in Philosophical Review 4, (1974): 
435–50 
 ——,  The View from Nowhere , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986 
 O’Connell, Marvin R., “Ultramontanism and Dupanloup: The Compromise of 
1865” in 
 Church History , Vol. 53, No. 2 (June, 1984): 200–217. 
 Orlow, Dietrich,  A History of Modern Germany: 1871 to the Present , Upper Saddle 
River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 4th edition, 1999. 
 Oswald, Donald J., “J. S. Mill’s a priori Deductive Methodology: A Case Study 
In Post-Modern Philosophy of Science” in  Review of Social Economy , Vol. 48, 
No. 2 (Summer, 1990): 172–197. 
 Owens, Joseph,  Aristotle’s Gradations of Being in “Metaphysics” E-Z (Edited with a 
preface by L. Gerson) South Bend Ind.: St. Augustine’s Press, 2007. 

318 Bibliography
 Pasquarella, Lynn, “Intensional Logic and Brentano’s Non-propositional 
Theory of Judgement”, in  Grazer Philosophische Studien , Vol. 5, No. 29, (1987): 
59–62. 
 Peterson, John,  Introduction to Scholastic Realism, New Perspectives in 
Philosophical Scholarship, Vol.12/ New York: Peter Lang Publishing, 1999. 
 Philipse, Herman, “ The Concept of Intentionality: Husserl’s development from the 
Brentano Period to the Logical Investigations ” in  Philosophy Research Archives : 
Vol. 12, (March 1987): 293–328. 
 ——, “ Transcendental Idealism ” in the  Cambridge Companion to Husserl edited by 
D.W Smith and B. Smith, Cambridge University Press, (1995): 239–322. 
 Pike, Nelson, “Hume’s Bundle Theory of the Self: A Limited Defense” in  American 
Philosophical Quarterly Vol. 4, No. 2 (Apr., 1967): 159–165. 
 Poli, Roberto (Editor).  The Brentano Puzzle , Aldershot UK: Ashgate, 1998. 
 Pozzo, Riccardo (Editor).  The Impact of Aristotelianism on Modern Philosophy , 
Washington D.C.: CUA Press, 2004. 
 Priest, Stephen,  Theories of the Mind , London: Houghton Mifflin, 1991 
 Puglisi, Mario, “Franz Brentano: A Biographical Sketch” in  American Journal of 
Pyschology , Vol. 35, (1924): 414–419. 
 Quine, Willard van Orman, “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,”  Philosophical Review 
60, No. 1 (1951): 20–43. 
 Raval, R.K. “ An Essay On Phenomenology ” in  Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 33 (1972–3): 216–226. 
 Richardson, Robert, “ Brentano on Intentional Inexistence and the Distinction 
Between Mental and Physical Phenomena ” in  Archiv für Geschicte der Philosophie , 
Vol. 65, (1983): 250–282. 
 Rist, John M., “ Notes on Aristotle, de anima 3.5” in Anton, J. P. & Kustas, G. L. 
(Editors).  Essays in Ancient Greek Philosophy , Albany 1971, pp. 505–521. 
 Robertson, Priscilla,  The Revolutions of 1848: A Social History , New Jersey: 
Princeton University Press, 1952. 
 Robinson, D. N,  An Intellectual History of Psychology , Third Edition, London: 
Arnold (1995), 216–17. 
 Robinson, Howard, “Dualism”  The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (2007 
Edition) , Edward N. Zalta (ed.),Online at  http://plato.stanford.edu/entries
/dualism/#ProForDua . 
 Rollinger, Robin, “Husserl and Brentano on Imagination“,  Archiv für Geschichte 
der Philosophie  75 (1993): 195–210. 
 ——,  Husserl’s Position in the School of Brentano . Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1999. 
 ——, “Brentano and Husserl”, in Jacquette (ed.) (2004). 
 ——, “Austrian Theories of Judgment: Bolzano, Brentano, Meinong, and Husserl”, 
in Wolfgang Huemer and Arkadiusz Chrudzimski (eds) (2004). 
 ——, “Brentano’s Psychology And Logic And The Basis Of Twardowski’s Theory 
Of Presentations” in  The Baltic International Yearbook of Cognition, Logic and 
Communication (online), Vol. 4 August (2009): 1–23. 
 ——, “Brentano’s Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint: Its Background and 
Conception” in  Revue Romaine de Philosophie 55 (2011): 5–39. 
 Runggaldier, Edmund, “On the Scholastic and Aristotelian Roots of 
Intentionality in Brentano”  Topoi 8, (1989): 97–103. 
 Russell, Bertrand, “Descriptions” [1919] reprinted in A.W. Moore, ed.,  Meaning 
and Reference , Oxford, Oxford University Press, (1993): 46–55. 

Bibliography 319
 Russo, A, “Franz Brentano e Heinrich Denifle: alla scuola di Aristotele”, in: “ La 
filosofia come santita` della ragione” Scritti in onore di Xavier Tilliette . Trieste: 
Edizioni Universita` di Trieste, 2004. 
 Schaefer, Richard, “Intentionality and Infallibility: Franz Brentano’s Diagnoses 
of German Catholicism” in  Journal of the History of Ideas , Volume 68, No. 3, 
(July 2007), pp. 477–499. 
 ——. “Program for a New Catholic  Wissenschaft : Devotional Activism and 
Catholic Modernity in the Nineteenth Century” in  Modern intellectual History , 
Volume 4, No. 3, (2007b): 433–462. 
 Schlick, Moritz,  Allgemeine Erkenntnislehre (1918, revised 1925), Translated by A. E. 
Blumberg as  General Theory of Knowledge , Le Salle, Illinois: Open Court, 1985. 
 Shoemaker, Sydney, “First Person Access” in  Philosophical Perspectives 4 (1990): 
187–214. 
 Skinner, B. F.  Beyond Freedom and Dignity , New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1971. 
 Smith, Barry,  Austrian Philosophy: The Legacy of Franz Brentano, Chicago—La Salle 
IL: Open Court, 1994. 
 Smith, Robin, “Aristotle’s Logic”,  The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2011 
Edition) , Edward N. Zalta (ed.),Online at: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives 
/fall2011/entries/aristotle-logic/ 
 Sorabji, Richard, “From Aristotle to Brentano: the development of the concept of 
intentionality”, in  Aristotle and the Later Tradition , Oxford Studies in Ancient 
Philosophy supp. Vol, (1991). 
 ——, “Body and Soul in Aristotle” in Michael Durrant (editor)  Aristotle’s De 
Anima in focus , London: Routledge, (1993): 162–193. 
 Stace, W. T.,  The Philosophy of Hegel: A Systematic Exposition , Dover Publications 
Inc. 1955. 
 Stadler, Friedrich,  Studien zum Wiener Kries , Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 
1997. English translation:  The Vienna Circle Studies in the Origins, Development 
and Influence of Logical Empiricism , Vienna: Springer, 2001. 
 Steiner, Rudolf,  The Riddles of Philosophy , Spring Valley, New York, The 
Anthroposophic Press, 1973. 
 Steenberghen, Fernand van.,  Thomas Aquinas & Radical Aristotelianism , 
Washington, D.C.: CUA Press, 1980. 
 Stoljar, Daniel,  Ignorance and Imagination :  The Epistemic Origin of the Problem of 
Consciousness, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006. 
 Strawson, P. F., “Self, Mind and Body”. in S. Guttenplan, J. Hornsby, & C. 
Janaway,  Reading Philosophy: Selected Texts with a Method for Beginners ,Oxford: 
Blackwell (2003): 28–35. 
 Srzednicki, J. T. J., “Remarks concerning the interpretation of the philosophy of 
Franz Brentano”, in  Philosophy and Phenomenological Research , XXII, No. 3, 1962. 
 Tassone, Biagio G., “Franz Brentano’s Phenomenological Transformation 
of Aristotle’s theory of Judgment” in the  Journal of the British Society for 
Phenomenology, Vol. 42, No. 3, October 2011, pp. 305–328. 
 Tauber, Alfred I. “Freud’s Philosophical Path: From a Science of the Mind to 
a Philosophy of Human Being”,  Scandinavian Psychoanaytic Review No. 32, 
(2009): 32–43. 
 Teo, Thomas, “Dialectics of Critical Psychologies in Germany” in Wolfgang 
Maiers, B Bayer, B D Esgalhado, R Jorna & E Schraube (eds),  Challenges to 
Theoretical Psychology, Toronto: Captus University Publications, 1999. 

320 Bibliography
 ——,  The Critique of Psychology: From Kant to Postcolonial Theory , New York: 
Springer, 2005. 
 Terrel, D. B., “Brentano’s Argument for Reismus” in  Revue Internationale de 
Philosophie 78 Vol. 20, (1966): 446–458. 
 Textor, Mark (Editor),  The Austrian Contribution to Analytic Philosophy , London: 
Routledge, 2006. 
 Thomasson, Amie, “After Brentano: A One-Level Theory of Consciousness” in 
 European Journal of Philosophy Vol. 8, 2 (2000): 190–209. 
 Titchener, E. B., “Brentano and Wundt: Empirical and Experimental Psychology” 
in the  American Journal of Psychology , Volume 32 (1921): 108–120, reprinted in 
McAlister (Ed.), 1976: 80–90. 
 ——, “Functional Psychology and the Psychology of the Act I & II” in the 
 American Journal of Psychology , Volume 32 (1921b): 519–542; and Volume 33 
(1922): 43–83. 
 Tomasi, Pietro, The unpublished “History of Philosophy” (1866–1867), by Franz 
Brentano”  Axiomathes Vol. 17 (2007): 99–108. 
 Trendelenburg, Adolf,  Über eine Lücke in Kants Beweis von der ausschließeuden 
Subjectivitant des Raums und der Zeit , Leipzig: S. Hirzel (1867). 
 ——,  Die logische Frage in Hegel’s System. Zwei Streitschriften, Leipzig: F.A. Brockhaus 
1843 (first published in  Neue jenaische allgemeine Literaturzeitung, April 1842, 
no. 97ff., and February 1843, no. 45ff). Translated into English as “The Logical 
Question in Hegel’s System” in  The Journal of Speculative Philosophy, trans. by 
T. Davidson, ed. by W. Harris, vol. V, pp. 849ff., vol. VI, pp. 82ff., vol. VI, 
pp. 163–175 and vol. VI, p. 350–361; nos. 20 (1871), 21, 22, and 24 (1872). 
 ——,  Aristoteles de anima libri tres: Ad interpretum graecorum auctoritatem et codicum 
fidem recognivit, commentariis illustravit (Jena: Walz, 1833; Berlin: Weber, 1877); 
reprint: Graz: Akademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt, 1957 and 1964. 
 ——,  Logische Untersuchungen vol. I-II, Berlin: Bethge, 1840 ( LU ), second and 
third, enlarged editions 1862 and 1870. 
 Twardowski, Kasimierz,  On the Content and Object of Presentations , Martinus 
Nijhoff: The Hague, 1977. 
 Tymieniecka, Anna-Teresa,  Phenomenology World-Wide, Foundations-Expanding 
Dynamics-Life-Engagements: A Guide for Research and Study (Analecta Husserliana; 
Vol. 80), Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2002. 
 Vallicella, William F., “Brentano on Existence” in  History of Philosophy Quarterly , 
vol. 18, No. 3, July (2001): 311–318. 
 Van der Shaar, Maria, “Brentano on Logic, Truth and Evidence” in  Brentano 
Studien  10 (2003): 119–150. 
 Van Gulick, Robert, “Consciousness”,  The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
(Summer 2011 Edition) , Edward N. Zalta (ed.), online at: http://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/sum2011/entries/consciousness/. 
 Von Mises, Ludwig, “The Historical Setting of the Austrian School of Economics” 
New Rochelle, New York: Arlington House, 1969. 
 Wallace, William A.,  Galileo’s Logic of Discovery and Proof: The Background, 
Content, and Use of His Appropriated Treatises On Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1992. 
 Ward, Steven C.,  Modernizing the Mind: Psychological Knowledge and the Remaking 
of Society , Westport, CT: Praeger/Greenwood, 2002 

Bibliography 321
 Watson, John Broadus,  Bahavior: An Introduction to Comparative Psychology , New 
York: Henry Holt, 1914. 
 Watson, Robert,  The Great Psychologists: From Aristotle to Freud , Philadelphia: J. B. 
Lippincott Company, 1963. 
 Weber, N., “Franz Jacob Clemens” in  The Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert 
Appleton Company (1908, reprinted 1913). Online at New Advent: http: 
//www.newadvent.org/cathen/04012a.htm. 
 Weigel, Gustav and Madden, Arthur G.,  Knowledge Its Values and Limits , 
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc. 1961. 
 Wertz, Frederick J, “The Phenomenology of Sigmund Freud” in  Journal of 
Phenomenological Psychology , Vol. 24, No. 2, (1993): 101–129 
 Wertheimer, Michael,  A Brief History of Psychology , Third Edition, Fort Worth: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987. 
 Wheelwright, Philip,  The Presocratics , New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 
1966. 
 Whyte, Lancelot Law,  The Unconscious Before Freud , New York: Anchor Books, 
Double Day & Co. Inc., 1962. 
 Wilson, Colin,  New Pathways in Psychology: Maslow and the Post-Freudian 
Revolution , New York: Tapplinger Publishing Co. Inc., 1972. 
 Windelband, Wilhelm,  A History of Philosophy , 2 Volumes, New York: Harper 
Torchbooks, 1958. 
 Wundt, Wilhelm,  Principles of physiological psychology , translated by E.B. 
Titchener, 2 Volumes, 1909. 
 Zahavi, Dan “Back to Brentano?” in  Journal of Consciousness Studies , 11 No. 10–11 
(2004): 66–87. 
 Zubiri, Xavier. “Prólogo” a Brentano,  El porvenir de la filosofía . Traducción y 
prólogo de Xavier Zubiri, Ed. Revista de Occidente, Madrid 1936, pp. vii–viii. 
 Zudini, Verena, “The Euclidean Model of Measurement in Fechner’s 
Psychophysics ” in  Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, Vol. 47, No. 1 
(Winter 2011): 70–87.  

323
abnormal (clinical) psychology, 
271n12
abstract terms/entities, 8, 32, 58, 62, 
106, 131, 144, 165, 173, 178, 
198, 207, 216, 233, 
236, 242, 285n30, 
305n9, 307n16
act psychology, see descriptive 
psychology
actuality (of substances/entities), 47, 
49, 54, 59, 60, 65, 97, 105, 113, 
202, 207, 265n30
aesthetics, 269n4
after-image (psychology of 
perception), 100, 126–7
Agassi, Joseph, 271n14
Aiken, D. Wyatt, 93
Ajdukiewicz, Kazimierz, 265n24
Alexander of Aphrosias, 265n26
Albertazzi, Liliana, 18, 20, 24–5, 
37n, 251n2, 254n22, 255nn1, 4, 
256nn6, 7, 257nn11, 15, 258n19, 
261n1, 268n1, 305n11
analytic judgments (analytic 
necessity), 175, 182, 217–18, 
226, 237, 239, 293n13, 303n42, 
306n14
analytic philosophy, 2, 9, 254n20, 
260n30, 291n1
Anscombe, Elizabeth, 185–7, 294n23
Anselm, St., 138, 283n22
Antonelli, Mauro, 28, 259n27, 288n4
aporia, 227, 266n38
a posteriori, 173, 212, 214, 217–18, 
302n37, 307n16
appearance, 91, 92, 98, 101–3, 105, 
133–4, 203, 213, 239, 274n23
a priori, 46, 73, 93, 110, 154, 173, 175, 
177–9, 188, 199, 204, 214, 217–19, 
253n11, 272n15, 276n35, 293n14, 
307n16
aynthetic a priori (Kant), 240, 
294n19, 306n14
Aquinas, St. Thomas, 19, 28, 66, 73, 
126, 129–30, 167, 261n1, 262n5, 
264n18, 283n22, 284n26, 292n6, 
294n21
Aristotle, 19, 21, 27, 29, 31–2, 35, 
36, 38–74, 79–81, 83, 91–4, 107, 
113, 114, 118–22, 131, 139, 
143, 153–4, 156, 158–60, 164, 
174, 175, 177, 185, 213, 235, 
240, 251n3, 255nn5, 6, 256n9, 
259n25, 260n27, 261nn1–4, 
262n5, 263nn8, 10, 264–5nn17, 
18, 22, 265nn26, 27, 28, 31–3, 
266nn33, 35, 38–41, 267nn44–50, 
52, 268n53, 269n3, 270n9, 
274n23–4, 275n35, 280n7, 
283n22, 285n28, 286n37, 289n7, 
290nn15, 16, 292n6, 8, 293n15, 
302n34, 303n1, 306n15
writings of: De Anima, 41, 49ff, 68, 
72, 84, 91, 153, 263n11, 265n32, 
268n53, 270n9, 283n22, 290n16, 
De Interpretatione, 67–70, 72, 
267nn46, 48, 303n1; Metaphysics, 
19, 29, 43ff, 65, 70, 92–3, 122, 
264nn17–20, 266n40, 267nn44, 
46, 269n3, 270n9, 274n23, 289n7, 
293n15; Prior Analytics, 52, 67–9, 
267n49, 292n8; Posterior Analytics, 
52, 59, 67, 69–71, 266n38
Armstrong, David, 297n14
Arnold, Magda B., 182–3
associationist psychology, 73, 
88, 109
atomism (atomic theory), 148
Augustine, St., 283n22
axioms, 87, 90, 176, 218, 239, 271n13, 
293n12
Baader, Franz von, 23
Bäck, Allan, 267n48
Bacon, Francis, 86–7, 271nn13, 14, 
272n15
Index

324 Index
Bain, Alexander, 83, 87, 104, 106, 141, 
160–2, 169, 195, 212, 272n15, 
275n35, 278n3, 291n3
Bakan, David, 249
Bakan, Mildred, x
Barclay, James R., 252n4
Bartok, Phillip J., 118, 254n21, 280n6, 
281n15
Bayes, Thomas, 272n15, 
293nn16, 17
Bayne, Steven, 294n23
Bayne, Tim, 243–4, 289n9
Bealer, George, 305n9
behaviorism, 5, 191, 193–5
Bell, David, 291n1
Beneke, Friedrich Eduard, 287n2
Benussi, Vittorio, 254n4
Bergmann, Gustav, 253n13, 254n19
Bergmann, Hugo, 182, 272n15, 
293n17
Berkeley, (Bishop) George, 71, 102, 
104–5, 275n35
Bernoulli, Jacob, 180, 288n5
Bird, Graham, 238, 306n13
Blackmore, Susan, 152
Blind Spot Vision (Punctum Caecum), 
125–6, 286n34
Boole, George, 307n17
Bolzano, Bernard, 22, 256n10
Boring, Edwin G., 4, 21, 90, 252nn6, 
7, 256n6, 270nn7, 8, 273n20, 
287n4, 288n4
Brandl, Johannes, 258n18, 291n2
Brentano, Franz (see also individual 
entries)
break with the Catholic Church, 
21–3, 247n14
Catholicism of, 19–20, 21–4, 35, 
41–4, 255n6, 257n14, 284n26
early life, education and family 
background, 17–27
personality of, 21
Reaction to Papal Infallibility 
(doctrine of), 256n11
as a teacher, 23
teaching activity at Würzburg, 20, 
21–3, 26–35, 37
travels of, 24
writings on Aristotle, 38–74
Broad, Charlie Dunbar, 103
Brook, Andrew, 287n39
Broudewijnse, Geert-Jan, A., 273n20
Buddhism, 298n18
Cannon, Walter B., 187
Carlin, Laurence, 126, 286n36
Carnap, Rudolf, 193
Carruthers, Peter, 197
Cassirer, Ernst, 261n4
Caston, Victor, 268n53
categorical propositions 
(convertibility into existential 
form), 32, 43, 45, 48, 70, 122, 
164–5, 167–9, 235–6, 246, 
264n21, 304n8, 306n12
causality, 32, 46, 132, 148, 179, 181–2, 
203, 212–13, 217, 218, 220, 303n42
Chalmers, David, 253n14, 278n1, 
295n5, 298n20
Chisholm, Roderick, 9, 116, 207, 
253n16, 260n28, 281nn11, 14, 
287n1, 296n10, 304n3, 306n16
Chrudzimski, Arkadiusz, 13, 251n2, 
254nn19, 20, 258n18
Churchland, Patricia, 279n4, 295n1, 
298n18
classification of mental phenomena 
(Brentano’s), 36, 88, 145, 151–7, 
159–64, 187–8, 224, 230, 290n14
Clemens, Franz Jacob, 19, 21, 256n7, 
261n1
Cleve, James Van, 102–3
Cognitive or Theoretical Acts, 49, 51, 
56, 79, 92, 136, 156–8, 160, 173, 
183–4, 186, 188, 193, 208–10, 
212, 222, 224–5, 239, 246, 
253nn12, 14, 266n38, 284n26, 
306n16
Cohen, Aviva, 252n4, 276n35
Comte, Auguste, 35, 37, 79–81, 
87, 95–9, 101–2, 106–7, 120, 
213, 261n3, 271n10, 273n18, 
274nn26–8, 275nn29–30, 32, 35, 
279n6, 283nn21, 23–4, 296n12
consciousness, 4, 6, 8, 11, 13, 33, 
42, 65–6, 83–4, 108–9, 111, 113, 
120–1, 123–4, 128–32, 134–5, 
137–8, 140–2, 152, 154–5, 160, 

Index 325
consciousness – continued
 
167, 169–71, 181, 187, 191, 193, 
196–8, 203–7, 209–11, 215–17, 
219, 221–3, 226–9, 231–2, 238, 
240–1, 243–5, 247–9, 253nn11, 
13, 269n1, 270n8, 271n11, 
278nn1, 3, 279n4, 280n7, 
284n26, 285n32, 286nn36, 38, 
287n39, 289nn8, 9, 290n11, 
291n1, 297nn13, 14, 298n17, 
299n25, 300n29, 301n30, 307n16
intentionality of, 9, 11–13, 14, 65, 
114–17, 120–1, 123–4, 134, 140, 
192, 196, 201, 203, 205–6, 207–8, 
210, 221–3, 225–8, 231–2, 242, 
244–5, 247–8, 254n20, 279n4, 
281n12, 282nn18, 19, 283nn22, 
23, 284nn26, 27, 291n3, 296n10, 
300nn27, 28, 30, 308n1
unity of, 9, 12–13, 114, 133, 136, 
142–51, 196, 203, 215, 237–9, 
241, 243, 249, 289n8
cosmology, 28, 37, 73
Crane, Tim, 101–2, 117, 118, 248, 
253n17, 272n16, 276n36, 281nn15, 
16, 282n18, 304n6, 308n1
Dainton, Barry, 243–4, 289n9
Damasio, Antonio, 187, 195
Darwin, Charles, 24, 186, 257n17, 
294n22
Davidson, Donald, 295n5, 298n19
De Boer, Theodor, 117, 121, 281n16
De Garmo, Charles, 100
Denifle, Heinrich S., 284n26
Dennet, Daniel C., 195, 253, 279, 
295n1, 298n18
Descartes, René (& Cartesianism), 
71–3, 79, 87, 113, 126, 151–2, 
153–7, 178–9, 195, 199–201, 237, 
261n3, 264n21, 268n53, 277n42, 
280n7, 283nn21, 25, 290n13, 
297n16, 298n17, 305n12
descriptive (act) psychology, 6–7, 
11, 17, 61, 80, 90, 110, 115, 118, 
131, 174, 188, 204, 209, 213, 217, 
219–20, 236, 242, 247–50, 251n2, 
253n11, 260n31, 269n4, 273n18, 
284n28, 287n1, 303n42, 307n16
Dilthey, Wilhelm, 7, 215–17, 220, 
252n10
Dretske, Fred, 222, 279n4
Drobisch, Moritz, 24
Döllinger, Ignatius, 19, 20
Elizabeth of Bohemia (princess), 200
emotions (feelings), 140–1, 154, 
156–8, 170–1, 182–6, 208, 
215, 273n21, 278n3, 
288n6, 306n16
empiricism, 7, 11–12, 62, 237, 261n3, 
263n8
Brentano’s, 67ff, 77–8, 93, 104, 120, 
132, 200, 221, 274n27, 275n31, 
283n21
British, 35, 71, 120, 195
radical empiricism (Hume as 
proponent of), 179, 225
epistemology, 8, 10, 12, 14, 20, 30–2, 
34, 40, 42, 159, 178, 195, 227, 
275n34, 286n38, 296n7
of Aristotle, 44, 49, 72, 268n53
Brentano’s, 79, 94, 134, 172–4, 
177, 179–81, 208–13, 233, 238, 
248, 252n10, 253n13, 267n51, 
291nn2, 3, 293n12, 302n27, 
303n42, 304n8, 306n13
J. S. Mill’s, 98–9
Erhenfels, Chrsitian von, 251n4
essence, 46, 71, 93, 96, 266n37, 
284n26
of the mental (according to 
Brentano), 89, 113, 196, 198, 
284n25, 298n20
ethics, 12, 34–5, 42, 170, 174, 
253n15, 260nn28, 29, 
269n4, 293n12
Eudemus, 66
evidence (evident Judgments), 30–1, 
61, 87, 93, 112, 122, 129, 132, 137, 
139, 150, 167, 173–4, 176, 177–8, 
179, 182, 184, 188, 193, 198, 
201, 203–4, 206, 210–11, 214, 
215–18, 220, 227, 232, 234, 
238–9, 241, 243, 248, 278n1, 
282n19, 292n11, 293n12, 
301n32, 302n37
existentialism, 253n10

326 Index
experimental (laboratory) 
psychology, 3–4, 5, 8–9, 24, 33–4, 
42, 56, 78, 83–5, 89–91, 110, 
128, 249, 252n7, 263n7, 269n4, 
273n20, 307n16
Fancher, Raymond, 252n4
Fechner, Gustav Theodor, 5, 24, 
84, 88, 91, 103, 127–8, 273n19, 
287n4, 288n4
Field, Hartley, 196, 296n10
Fischer, Kuno, 238, 263n12
forms (formal principles/sciences), 
2, 8, 32, 54, 59, 62, 71, 136, 146, 
180–1, 202, 210, 211, 226, 236, 
248, 251n4, 265n24, 
293n16, 304n8, 305n9, 
306n13, 307n17
Fréchette, Guillaume, 239, 305n11
Frege, Gottlob, 235, 245–6, 291n1, 
305n9, 307n17
Freud, Sigmund, 2, 125–6, 252nn4, 9, 
273n18, 276n35, 286nn33, 38
Fugali, Edoardo, 264n13
Galileo, Galilei, 213
genetic psychology, 6, 214, 249, 
269n4, 284n28, 307n16
George, Rolf, 261nn1, 2
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 17–18, 
255n4
Gontard, Freidrich, 256n11
Grossmann, Reinhardt, 242
Guthrie, Edwin Ray, 193
Hacohen, Malachi, 305n10
Haller, Rudolf, 253n16
Hamilton, Sir William, 141
Harman, Gilbert, 222
Hart, Wilber Dyre, 298n18
Hartmann, Edward von, 125, 
286n33
Heaton, John M., 252n4
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 
40–2, 104, 262n5, 263n12, 
275n35
Heidbreder, Edna, 21
Heidegger, Martin, 2, 251n3, 
253nn10, 17, 255n5, 291n2
Heil, John, 194, 295n3
Heimsoeth, Heinz, 261n4
Hellie, Benj, 226–8, 304nn5, 6
Helmholtz, Herman von, 25, 100, 
107, 126, 127, 262n7,
Herbart, Johann Friedrich, 24–5, 
90–1, 100, 104, 106, 107, 262n7, 
270n7, 273nn19, 20, 275n35, 
276n35, 283n21, 288n4
hermeneutics (philosophical), 
216, 250
Herschel, John F. W., 98, 99
Hickerson, Ryan, 95, 102, 121, 
274n26, 275nn29, 30, 276n37, 
279n6, 283nn23, 24
Hiene, Henrich, 262n6
higher-order theories (of thought/
consciousness), 197–8, 204–6, 
208, 221–2, 227–9, 243–4, 247, 
297n14, 303n2
Höffe, Otfried, 263n8
Höffler, Alois, 251n4
Hoffmann, Franz, 23–4
Horgan, Terence, 301n30
Horwicz, Adolf, 141, 273n18
Hothersall, David, 5, 187, 252n6, 
269n4, 270n7, 295n4
Huemer, Wolfgang, 270n7, 276n35
Hull, Clark Leonard, 193
Hume, David, 71, 73, 147–8, 179–81, 
200–1, 216–20, 225, 231, 238, 
241, 275nn31, 32, 289n8, 
294n19, 298nn17, 18, 
302n38, 306n13
Husserl, Edmund, 2, 23, 37n, 134, 
144, 151, 217, 231, 232, 235–6, 
239–40, 251nn3, 4, 253n17, 
254n1, 255n2, 256n10, 277n40, 
281nn9, 12, 282n17, 284nn27, 
28, 291n2, 300nn27, 29, 
304nn3, 8
idealism (German), 23, 39–42, 102, 
104, 238, 255n6, 257n12, 262n5, 
263n8, 300n28
ideological conflicts (Methodenstreit 
in 19th c. German philosophy 
departments), 23, 39, 41, 262n5, 
263n9

Index 327
Ierna, Carlos, 37n
induction (inductive laws), 31–2, 
80, 86–90, 173–9, 180–3, 212, 
216, 272nn14, 15, 275nn32, 33, 
293n12, 301n34
inner perception, 31–2, 58, 61–2, 
81–5, 96–7, 105, 113, 128–30, 
132–4, 137–41, 148–9, 150, 152, 
167, 173–4, 179, 181–2, 187, 
195, 211, 213–18, 223, 232, 234, 
237–9, 241–3, 248, 277n42, 
287n3, 295n6, 301n32, 307n16
distinguished from inner-
observation, 83
intentional inexistence (see also 
consciousness, intentionality 
of), 108–9, 113–15, 117–20, 122, 
148, 153, 231, 245, 264n19, 
280n7, 281n14, 283n22, 285n31, 
290n16, 301n30, 308n1
as demarcation criterion for study 
of the mental, 114
as a scholastic notion, 117–20
imagination, 43, 63–4, 66, 109, 
111, 133
Jacquette, Dale, 121, 260n30, 275n30, 
284n27, 300n28, 303n39
Jaeger, Werner, 265n26
James, William, 21, 33, 78, 104, 142, 
187, 271n11, 279n4
James-Lange theory of emotions, 187
Jevons, Stanley, 181, 195, 294n20
Jopling, David, x
judgment (intellectual), 12–13, 31–2, 
36, 42, 48–9, 67–8, 70, 78–9, 93, 
97, 99, 103, 117–18, 125, 133, 
136–41, 155–6, 158–88, 198, 
207–8, 210–14, 217–19, 221, 224–5, 
229–38, 241, 245–6, 265n25, 
267n49, 268n1, 269n3, 285n30, 
290nn11–13, 291nn1–3, 292nn7, 
10, 293nn11, 14, 301n32, 302nn35, 
36, 303n42, 304n8, 306n16
Kant, Immanuel, 24, 28, 39–41, 43, 
90, 91, 93–4, 97, 100–101, 102, 
104–7, 113, 126, 132–5, 153–7, 
160, 167, 181, 185, 215–16, 219, 
231, 237–40, 257n15, 262nn5, 
7, 263nn8, 12, 270n6, 271n11, 
273nn19, 20, 275nn32, 33, 35, 
277n41, 287n39, 294n19, 303n42, 
305nn10, 12, 306nn13, 14
Keynes, John Maynard, 181
Kim, Alan, 4, 139, 288
Kim, Jaegwon, 295nn1, 2
Klima, Gyula, 284n26
Koehn, Glen, 261nn1, 2
Koffka, K. 254n4
Köhler, Wolfgang, 254n4
Köhnke, Klaus C. 39, 42, 263nn7, 8, 
264n15, 306n13
Körner, Stephan, 220, 303n42
Krantz, Susan, 130
Kraus, Oscar, 37n, 254n1, 255n3, 
257n14, 258n19, 269n1, 275n35, 
279n6, 280n6, 287n1
Kriegel, Uriah, 196, 299n25
Kripke, Saul, 295n5
Kristeller, Paul Oscar, 261n4
Kuhn, Johannes, 20
Kuhn, Thomas, 272nn14, 15
Külpe, Oswald, 270n7
Kulstad, Mark, 126, 286n36
Kush, Martin, 5, 195, 263n9, 
295n4
Lacey, A. R., 102
Land, J. P. N., 305n8
Landerer, Christoph, 270n7, 276n35
Lange, Carl, 187, 271n11
Lange, Friedrich Albert, 147, 200, 
270n6, 298n17
language (natural), 4, 18, 31, 47, 
67–8, 70, 86, 88, 139, 168, 171–2, 
183, 193, 222, 230, 232, 244–6, 
273n17, 281n14, 307n17
Lawson-Tancred, Hugh, 290n16
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 65, 79, 
99, 100, 126, 132, 149, 261n3, 
264n21, 275n34, 283nn21, 25, 
286n36, 297n16, 301n32
Lesniewski, Stanislaw, 251n4, 
265n24
Lewis, C. I., 103
Lieben, Adolf von, 25
Lieben, Ida von, 25

328 Index
Locke, John, 71–2, 83, 99–100, 120, 
231, 243, 268n53
logic
Aristotle’s, 52ff, 67, 165, 264n17, 
267n50, 291n5, 292n6, 302n24
Bain’s, 272n15
Brentano’s use and reforms of 
classical logic, 7, 12, 27–8, 31–2, 
36–7, 46–7, 49, 70, 72, 79, 92, 
98, 110, 139, 158ff, 165ff, 172, 
179–82, 210ff, 225, 230, 237, 246, 
251n4, 258n20, 259nn25, 27, 
269n4, 277n43, 290n11, 291nn1, 
2, 292n9, 302n37, 303n40, 
304n8, 305n9, 306n13
‘logicism’, 8, 167, 195, 245–6
John Stuart Mill’s, 98–9, 163, 
272n17, 275n33, 294n20
modern formal or symbolic logic, 
2–3, 6, 8, 166, 220, 222, 245–6, 
254n20, 303n41, 307n17
syllogistic logic, 71, 165ff
Trendelenburg’s work on, 42
Wundt’s views on Logic, 302n25
logical positivism (logical 
empiricism), 41, 226
Lonergan, Bernard, 176
Longuenesse, Beatrice, 305n12
Lotze, Rudolf Hermann, 141, 185, 
257n15, 262n7, 296n9
Ludwig, C., 289n10
Luft, Sebastian, 263n7
Lycan, William, 298n18
Mach, Ernst, 73, 103, 277n39, 279n4
Madden, Arthur G., 286n38
Makkreel, Rudolf A., 263n7
Marrass, Ausonio, 117, 281n16
Martin, Michael, 304n6
Marty, Anton, 28, 232, 251n4, 
282n18, 285n29, 300n29
Masin, S. C., 288
Maudsley, Henry, 88, 126, 273n18, 
297nn12, 13
Mayer-Hillebrand, F., 258n19
McAllister, Linda L., 254n1
McDonnell, Cyril, 117, 281n16, 282n17
McGinn, Colin, 279n4, 295n1, 
300n30
McGrew, Timothy, 180, 293nn16, 17
meaning (semantics), 7–8, 9, 32, 159, 
168, 207, 222–3, 225–6, 230, 
232–3, 235–6, 241–2, 244–6, 248, 
291n1, 304n8, 307n17
in conversion of categorical 
judgments, 167
Hume on, 148
Meinong, Alexius, 5, 188, 231, 236, 
251n4, 284n27, 300n29
Medelssohn, Moses, 185
memory, 50, 59, 69, 85, 125, 134, 150, 
152, 172, 176, 215–17, 271n10, 
289n11, 303n40
Merkel, Joseph, 19–20
Merlan, Philip, 252n4
metaphysics (Brentano on first 
philosophy), 1, 8, 19, 21, 27–32, 
34–7, 38–9, 41–4, 67, 74, 81, 92, 
95, 106, 120, 150, 174, 179, 194, 
202, 204, 250, 255n5, 259nn22, 
27, 260n28, 261n1, 267n51, 
269n4, 272n15, 274n24, 277nn39, 
43, 278n43, 299nn21, 24, 305n9
anti-metaphysics (the positivist’s 
critique of M.), 95, 103, 159, 
283 n24
Aristotelian metaphysics, 45–9, 
52–3, 61, 65, 70, 92–3, 122, 202, 
264nn17, 18, 21, 267n44, 268n53, 
269n3, 270n9, 274n23, 289n7, 
293n15
general vs. special metaphysics, 150
metaphysical dualism (in 
philosophy of mind), 54, 123, 
191–2, 194, 200
Meyerson, Émile, 271n14
Mezei, Balázs, 274n27
Mikkeli, Heikki, 301n34
Mill, James, 141, 161, 169, 291n4
Mill, John Stuart, 24, 29–30, 32, 
35, 73, 79, 83, 87, 96, 97–9, 101, 
104, 106–7, 120, 141, 147–8, 160, 
163–4, 165, 186, 195, 212, 217, 
241, 259n23, 261n3, 271n10, 
272n15, 272n17, 275nn32, 33, 35, 
285n32, 291n4, 292n11, 294n20, 
299n22
Mitchell, David, 291n5

Index 329
Mivart, Christoph, 24
Modrak, Deborah, 267n48, 268n53
Möhler, J. A., 259n20
Montero, Barbara, 295n3
Moore, (G.E.) George Edward, 103, 
228, 260n30, 277n38
Moran, Dermot, 117, 121, 196, 261n1, 
279n6, 281nn15, 16, 284n27, 
296n11
Müller, Johannes Peter, 264n15
Münch, Dieter, 275n29, 283n23
Münsterberg, Hugo, 269n4
Murphy, Gardner, 252n6
mysterianism (regarding 
consciousness), 192
Nagel, Thomas, 151, 253n13
Newman, (Cardinal ) John Henry, 24
Nominalism, 28, 242, 254n19, 
305n9, 308n1
one-level theory (of thought/
consciousness) – Brentano as 
proponent of, 13, 123, 134–5, 
197–8, 204–5, 207, 223, 228, 241, 
243, 297n14, 300n29
Orlow, Dietrich, 255n2
Owens, Joseph, 268n53
Parfit, Derek, 298n18
Pasquarella, Lynn, 305n9
Pavlov, Ivan Petrovich (Pavlovian 
behaviorism), 193
perception (external or outer), 9–10, 
33, 43, 78–9, 82, 85, 88, 92, 99, 
103, 105, 110–11, 113, 118, 125, 
128–30, 137–8, 142, 146, 156–7, 
172, 174–7, 204–7, 211–12, 214, 
217, 219–20, 229–30, 237, 244, 
246–7, 268n53, 280n6, 290nn11, 
16, 297n14, 307n16
Helmholtz’s ‘stereoptic theory’ 
of, 100
Hume on, 298n17
as judgment, 167, Aristotle’s theory 
of, 57–9, 69, 72, 91, 270n9, 306n15
Leibniz’s theory of, 286n36
Plato on, 153
Peterson, John, 283n20
phenomenology, 2, 11, 92, 203, 240, 
250, 253n10, 300n29, 307n16
phenomenon (phenomenalism), 10, 
12–13, 58, 62, 72, 77, 81–3, 87–8, 
90–107, 110, 125–6, 142, 147, 151, 
153, 170, 172, 183, 186–7, 192, 
195, 197, 208, 210, 218, 227–8, 
240–1, 246–7, 249–50, 253, 
259n27, 269n4, 270n7, 272n16, 
273n17, 274nn26, 28, 275n33, 
276n36, 277n39, 279nn3, 4, 6, 
281n14, 282n19, 283n24, 288n4, 
294n20, 296n11, 302n34, 306n14
Philipse, Herman, 122, 277n43, 
280n7, 281n15
phrenology, 273n18
physical objects, 102–4, 106, 122, 
130, 201, 282n19, 299n24
physical phenomena, 13, 42, 89, 
106–21, 151, 192, 199, 234, 
252n10, 253n12, 276n37, 278n1, 
280n6, 282n18, 300n28
Pike, Nelson, 298n18
Pius IX (Pope), 256n11
Plato, 41, 51, 54, 59, 63, 69, 73, 81–2, 
93, 94, 147, 152–3, 199, 201, 
213, 242, 266nn37, 38, 267n48, 
283nn20, 22, 303n1
Plotinus, 257n12
Poli, Roberto, 254n22, 260n31
Pozzo, Riccardo, 261n4
presentations (acts of), 31, 36, 48, 56, 
58, 60, 92, 100–101, 111–13, 128, 
132, 136, 137–8, 140, 145, 147, 
150, 154–7, 158–88, 198, 208, 
211, 217, 221–2, 224–7, 229–37, 
242, 264n19, 266n35, 268n1, 
280n8, 288n6, 291n3, 292n7, 
299n25, 307n16
Priest, Stephen, 295n3
psychic or mental phenomena (see also 
consciousness), 12–13, 33, 52, 61, 
67, 78, 81–6, 88–9, 90–1, 104–5, 
107–21, 123–4, 126–9, 136–7, 141, 
144–5, 147, 149, 151–3, 155–6, 
171, 183, 185, 196–7, 202–3, 208, 
210–11, 215, 222, 229–31, 234, 
247, 252nn8, 10, 270n7, 272n15, 
273nn18, 19, 276n37, 277n42, 

330 Index
psychic or mental 
phenomena – continued
 
278n1, 282n18, 285n28, 288n4, 
293n13, 299n24, 301n30
psychoanalysis, 2, 220, 269n4, 273n18
psychologism (in epistemology), 8, 
49, 253n13, 263n9, 295n7
psychophysics, 5, 33, 43, 53, 56, 84, 
103, 125, 128, 288n4
Puglisi, Mario, 17, 22, 254n1, 255n3
Rancurello, Antos, 251nn1, 2, 278n1
real, reality (versus concrete or 
actual existence), 43, 46, 49, 
51, 53, 65, 68, 70, 73, 78, 92–3, 
98–9, 100, 105–6, 113, 115, 
119–22, 130, 134, 136–8, 142–3, 
146–9, 165, 175, 180, 188, 192, 
194, 197–9, 202, 207, 211, 220, 
228, 231, 233–4, 236–7, 242, 
244–5, 259n27, 264n17, 265n30, 
277nn37, 43, 280n6, 282nn18, 
19, 283n22, 285n28, 298n20, 
299n23, 307n16
reductionism (about the mind/body 
relation), 4, 33, 88, 191–2, 203, 
295n1, 297n13
Reid, Thomas, 302n38
retrospection (apperception), 85, 
128, 134
apperceptione (Leibniz), 126, 386n36
‘unity of apperception’ (in Kant), 
132, 134–5
Rist, John M., 50
Robinson, Daniel N., 298n18
Robinson, Priscilla, 255n2
Rollinger, Robin, x, 34, 37n, 197–8, 
229, 251n2, 254n22, 256n10, 
258nn18, 19, 259nn26, 27, 
268n1, 284n26, 292n12, 296n9, 
297n15
Rosenthal, David, 297n14
Rueprecht, Emilia, 26
Runggaldier, Edmund, 117, 281n16
Russell, Bertrand, 103, 228, 234, 
245–6, 260n30, 279n4, 292n7, 
296n8, 298n18
Russo, A., 274n24
Ryle, Gilbert, 193
Sartre, Jean Paul, 151, 253n17
Schaefer, Richard, 21, 256n6, 257n11, 
262n5
Scheler, Max, 151
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph 
von, 23, 257nn12, 17
Schlick, Moritz, 236, 304n8
scholastic (philosophy), 9, 19, 20, 24, 
74, 99, 115, 130, 255n6, 261n1, 
265n5, 281n12, 282n17, 283n20
influences on Brentano’s doctrine 
of intentionality, 117ff, 147, 231, 
274n24, 283n22, 284n26
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 264n21
Schuman, Karl, 260n30
science, 4–5, 6–7, 10–11, 20–1, 26, 
29–30, 32, 34–7, 39–40, 41–2, 53, 
67, 69–72, 74, 77–107, 110–12, 
114, 116, 119, 133, 150, 154, 174, 
176–7, 179, 181–2, 187, 193–5, 
200, 202–4, 209, 212–16, 219, 
237, 239–40, 249–50, 252n10, 
253nn13, 15, 257n17, 263n8, 
269nn3, 4, 270n6, 271n14, 
272nn15, 16, 273n18, 274nn26, 
28, 276n36, 277nn39, 43, 278n44, 
278n3, 282n19, 283n24, 295n4, 
296n8, 297n13, 298nn17, 20, 
299n21, 301nn32, 34, 306n14, 
307n16
Searle, John, 253n14, 304n3
Shoemaker, Sydney, 194, 295n6
Simons, Peter, 101–2, 251n1, 276n36
Skinner, (B.F.) Burrhus Frederick, 193, 
279n4
Smith, Barry, 9, 194, 206, 253n16, 
254n19, 274n27, 
282n19, 305n10
Smith, David Woodruff, 206–7, 
300n27
Smith, Robin, 267n50
Smith, William Robertson, 24
Snow, C. P., 253n13
Sorabji, Richard, 72, 117, 267n52, 
281n16
Spencer, Herbert, 24, 141, 161, 169
Spiegelberg, Herbert, 101, 117, 
281nn12, 13, 16, 284n26
Spinoza, Baruch, 113, 264n21

Index 331
Srzednicki, J. T. J., 258n19
Stace, Walter Terence., 262n5
Stadler, Friedrich, 255n6
Steiner, Rudolf, 252n4, 259n23
Stoljar, Daniel, 295n1
Strümpell, Ludwig, 25
Struve, Gustav, 255n2
Stumpf, Carl, 5, 21, 28–9, 34–5, 37n, 
181, 251n4, 254n1, 257nn13, 14, 
259nn22, 25, 260n29, 290n11, 
300n29
Suárez, Francisco, 19, 261n1
supervenience (strong and weak), 192, 
295n1, 298nn19, 20
Tarski, Alfred, 251n4
Teo, Thomas, 195, 252n6, 269
Terrel, D. B., 254n19, 278n1
Textor, Mark, 101, 276n36
theology (religion – Brentano on) 
(see also Christianity), 19–20, 23, 
27–8, 37, 41, 74, 255n6, 294n22
Comte’s views on, 96
Theophrastus, 66
Thomasson, Amie, 197, 204–5, 
297nn13, 14
Tienson, John, 301n30
Titchener, Edward B., 3–4, 85, 252n6, 
273n21
Tolman, Edward Chace, 193
Tomasi, Pietro, 258nn19, 20
transcendental philosophy 
(knowledge) (see also Kant, 
Immanuel; Husserl, Edmund), 
28–9, 37, 93–4, 106, 132–5, 138, 
217, 221, 237–40, 248, 263n8, 
277n40, 286n33, 287n39, 294n19, 
303n42
Trendelenburg, Adolf, 7, 19, 27, 41–3, 
47, 104, 106, 238, 261n1, 262n5, 
263nn10–12, 264nn13, 14, 
302n34, 306n14
Twardowski, Kasimierz, 232, 236, 
242, 251n4, 284n27, 300n29
Überweg, Friedrich, 138, 287n2
Ulrici, Hermann, 126
Vallicella, William, 305n9
Van der Shaar, Maria, 237
Van Steenberghen, Fernand, 283n20
Varzi, Achille C., 265n24
Vienna Circle, 2, 95
Von Ketteler, Baron (Bishop of 
Mainz), 257n11
Von Mespelbrunn, Julius Echter 
(Prince Bishop of Würzburg), 
257n17
Von Mises, Ludwig, 263n9
Wallace, William, 213
Watson, John B., 193, 279n4
Weber, Heinrich Friedrich, 25
Weber, Ernst Heinrich, 127–8, 139, 
287n4
Weigel, Gustav, 286n38
Wertheimer, Michael, 21
Wertz, Frederick, 252n4
Whewell, William, 87, 195, 212
Whyte, Lancelot Law, 
286nn32, 33
Windelband, Wilhelm, 24, 262n5
Witasek, Stephan, 252n4
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 193, 252n9, 
296n8
Wolff, Christian, 27
Wundt, Wilhelm, 3–5, 21, 33, 78, 
83–4, 85, 88, 90, 91, 141, 155, 
252nn6–8, 270nn4, 8, 273n21, 
288n6, 289n6, 290n14, 297n12, 
302n35
Zabarella, Jacopo, 301n34
Zahavi, Dan, 204–6, 253n17, 
300n29
Zeller, Eduard, 21, 256n9, 267n45, 
276n35
Zeno, 180
Zudini, Verena, 273n19, 288n4

