Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series
From Natural 
Numbers to 
Quaternions 
Jürg Kramer
Anna-Maria von Pippich

Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series
Advisory Board
M. A. J. Chaplain, University of St. Andrews
A. MacIntyre, Queen Mary University of London
S. Scott, King’s College London
N. Snashall, University of Leicester
E. Süli, University of Oxford
M. R. Tehranchi, University of Cambridge
J. F. Toland, University of Cambridge

More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/3423

Jürg Kramer
• Anna-Maria von Pippich
From Natural Numbers
to Quaternions
123

Jürg Kramer
Department of Mathematics
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
Germany
Anna-Maria von Pippich
Department of Mathematics
Technische Universität Darmstadt
Germany
Translation from the German language edition: Von den natürlichen Zahlen zu den
Quaternionen by Jürg Kramer and Anna-Maria von Pippich, © Springer Spektrum 2013. All
Rights Reserved.
ISSN 1615-2085
ISSN 2197-4144
(electronic)
Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series
ISBN 978-3-319-69427-6
ISBN 978-3-319-69429-0
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69429-0
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017958024
Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation (2010): 08–01, 11–01, 12–01, 20–01
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or
for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Preface to the English Edition
This book on the construction of number systems ﬁrst appeared in 2013 in a
German edition with the same title. It can be seen from the following preface
to that edition that the goal of this book is to present a basic and compre-
hensive construction of number systems, beginning with the natural num-
bers and ending with Hamilton’s quaternions, while providing relevant al-
gebraic knowledge along the way. As a supplement to the German edition,
an appendix has been added to each chapter in this English edition, which
in contrast to the rigorous style of the rest of the book, presents in the more
casual form of a survey some related aspects of the material of the chapter,
including some recent developments.
We would like to offer our most heartfelt thanks to the translator, David
Kramer, for his competent work, which has contributed signiﬁcantly to this
English version and in many places led to a more felicitous presentation of
the material.
We hope that this book will help students and teachers of mathematics
as well as all those with an interest in the subject to ﬁll in any gaps in their
mathematical education related to the construction of number systems and
that the appendices will inspire some readers to pursue further mathemati-
cal studies.
Berlin, September 2017
Jürg Kramer
Anna-Maria von Pippich

Preface to the German Edition
The main topic of this book is an elementary introduction to the construc-
tion of the number systems encountered by mathematics students in their
ﬁrst semesters of study. Beginning with the natural numbers, we succes-
sively construct, along with the requisite algebraic machinery, all the num-
ber ﬁelds containing the natural numbers, including the real numbers, com-
plex numbers, and Hamiltonian quaternions. Our experience has shown us
that time is frequently lacking in introductory mathematics courses for a
well-founded construction of number systems; this book represents a con-
tribution toward ﬁlling that gap.
The construction of number systems also represents an important compo-
nent in the professional education of mathematics teachers. For this reason,
this book offers a self-contained and compact construction of the number
systems that are of relevance to different grade levels from a mathematical
perspective with a view toward aspects of pedagogical content knowledge.
This book arose from a course in elementary abstract algebra and number
theory given a number of times at the Humboldt University of Berlin. Parts
of the ﬁrst-named author’s book Zahlen für Einsteiger: Elemente der Algebra
und Zahlentheorie (Vieweg Verlag, Wiesbaden, 2008) have been revised and
expanded for inclusion in this newly conceived book on the construction of
number systems. Numerous exercises with extensive solutions facilitate the
reader’s engagement with the subject.
The completion of this book would not have been possible without the
contributions of many individuals. Here we wish to thank ﬁrst of all Christa
Dobers and Matthias Fischmann for typing the ﬁrst parts of the manuscript.
In addition, we wish to thank all the students whose written course notes
contributed to the text. We also wish to thank our colleagues, in particu-
lar Andreas Filler and Wolfgang Schulz, for their numerous suggestions for
improving early versions of the manuscript. A special word of thanks goes
to Olaf Teschke for his work on creating the exercises, and we also thank
Barbara Jung and André Henning for their work on writing up solutions
to the exercises. Finally, we offer hearty thanks to Christoph Eyrich for his
expert support in designing the layout of the book and to Ulrike Schmickler-
Hirzebruch for her encouragement and support on behalf of the publisher,
Springer Spektrum.
Berlin, February 2013
Jürg Kramer
Anna-Maria von Pippich

Table of Contents
Preface to the English Edition
v
Preface to the German Edition
vii
Introduction
1
I
The Natural Numbers
9
1.
The Peano Axioms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.
Divisibility and Prime Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.
The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.
Greatest Common Divisor, Least Common Multiple . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.
Division with Remainder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
A.
Prime Numbers: Facts and Conjectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
II
The Integers
45
1.
Semigroups and Monoids. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
2.
Groups and Subgroups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
3.
Group Homomorphisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.
Cosets and Normal Subgroups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.
Quotient Groups and the Homomorphism Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6.
Construction of Groups from Regular Semigroups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
7.
The Integers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
B.
RSA Encryption: An Application of Number Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
III
The Rational Numbers
93
1.
The Integers and Divisibility Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
2.
Rings and Subrings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
3.
Ring Homomorphisms, Ideals, and Quotient Rings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
4.
Fields and Skew Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
5.
Construction of Fields from Integral Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
6.
The Rational Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
7.
Unique Factorization Domains, Principal Ideal Domains, and
Euclidean Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
C.
Rational Solutions of Equations: A First Glimpse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
IV
The Real Numbers
141
1.
Decimal Representation of Rational Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
2.
Construction of the Real Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
3.
The Decimal Expansion of a Real Number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155

x
Table of Contents
4.
Equivalent Characterizations of Completeness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
5.
The Real Numbers and the Real Number Line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
6.
The Axiomatic Point of View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
D.
The p-adic Numbers: Another Completion of Q . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
V
The Complex Numbers
183
1.
The Complex Numbers as a Real Vector Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
2.
Complex Numbers of Modulus 1 and the Special Orthogonal
Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187
3.
The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
4.
Algebraic and Transcendental Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
5.
The Transcendence of e . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197
E.
Zeros of Polynomials: The Search for Solution Formulas. . . . . . . . . . 204
VI
Hamilton’s Quaternions
219
1.
Hamilton’s Quaternions as a Real Vector Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219
2.
Quaternions of Modulus 1 and the Special Unitary Group . . . . . . . . 223
3.
Quaternions of Modulus 1 and the Special Orthogonal Group . . . . 227
F.
Extensions of Number Systems: What Comes after the
Quaternions? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
Solutions to Exercises
247
Selected Literature
279
Index
283

Introduction
The Development of the Integers and Algebra
One of mankind’s earliest intellectual occupations was counting. The devel-
opment of the concepts of numbers and the representation of numbers has
therefore assumed a place of importance in the history of every civilization.
The enormous effectiveness of our decimal system of numerical represen-
tation is the culmination of centuries—indeed millennia—of earlier efforts
that together represent a powerful cultural attainment.
The idea of counting objects, that is, of bringing a set of equivalent objects
into a one-to-one correspondence with a ﬁxed set of numbers, represents a
signiﬁcant intellectual process of abstraction.
In more advanced cultures, systems of symbolic notation for these num-
bers—some more effective than others—were developed. We mention par-
ticularly the cuneiform writing of the Babylonians, Egyptian hieroglyphics,
Roman numerals, and the system of numerals developed in India. It was
only in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries that the Indian positional
decimal system ﬁnally made its way via the Islamic world to Western Eu-
rope, which to this day uses “Arabic” numerals.
The development of number systems goes relatively closely hand in hand
with the development of methods of calculation. In this regard, the Babylo-
nian and Indian number systems, for example, were far superior to those of
the Egyptians and Romans. Nevertheless, until late in the ﬁfteenth century,
in both the ancient civilizations and Western Europe, numerical calculation
was the province of a small group of specialists known as arithmeticians. It
was not until the publication in the ﬁfteenth century of Adam Ries’s books
on calculation, which were based on the book Liber Abaci of Leonardo of
Pisa, known as Fibonacci, that the usual methods of calculation that we use
today became accessible to the “common people.” The diffusion of calcula-
tional techniques is linked to a systemization of arithmetic in the academic
world, which then led to the development of algebra. At ﬁrst, algebra was
viewed primarily as a practical tool, but it gradually took on a life of its own
and eventually developed into the independent discipline that we know to-
day. Algebra will therefore play a signiﬁcant role in every rigorous scientiﬁ-
cally based construction of number systems.

2
Introduction
A First Look at Number Systems
We all recall from our schooldays how we ﬁrst learned about the numbers
1, 2, 3,..., then the square roots of such numbers, for example
√
2, and some-
what later became acquainted with the number π, associated with the cir-
cumference of a circle, and perhaps Euler’s constant e. On our ﬁrst encounter
with these numbers, we had no idea that a powerful intellectual construct
had to be developed before a number system could be created that could
contain all these numbers and make possible a “sensible” way of calculating
with them, namely the system of real numbers. The creation of this number
system represents an outstanding achievement of the human intellect, and
a fundamental objective of this book is to acquaint students with the con-
struction of the real numbers so that they may become familiar with the ﬁne
structure of these objects.
It is astounding that the set of real numbers, which we denote by R,
can be developed essentially from the single number 1 (one). Let us sketch
brieﬂy how this is done, for a thoroughgoing working out of this process is
the main purpose of this book. We begin by identifying the number 1 with
an object, and we then bring along another object of the same kind, so that
we now have two objects and thereby have acquired the number 2. We may
formalize this process by writing 2 = 1 + 1. Continuing in this manner, we
obtain in sequence the numbers
3 = 2 + 1 = 1 + 1 + 1,
4 = 3 + 1 = 1 + 1 + 1 + 1,
···
that is, the set of natural numbers N except for the number 0 (zero), which
we shall obtain momentarily, and append to the set of natural numbers. One
might say that the number 1 generates additively every natural number.
That is, the number 1 is, from an additive point of view, the atom from which
every natural number is built.
We may picture the natural numbers 1, 2, 3,... as sitting equally spaced
like pearls on a necklace beginning at the left with 1 and continuing sequen-
tially off to the right. We might also represent these numbers geometrically,
to which end we choose a unit length and mark it off on a horizontal line L
by beginning at a point P and moving to the right. We denote by the symbol
1 the point on the line thereby constructed. Continuing, we obtain a second
point, which we denote by 2, and so on:
L

P

3

2

1
For no reason other than symmetry we might wish to carry out a similar
process by moving to the left. Of course, the new points that we thereby

3
obtain must be given new names. We denote the mirror image of 1 in the
point P by −1, and so forth, obtaining
L

P

3

2

1

−1

−2

−3
We denote the reﬂection point P by 0. What we have obtained here in a very
graphic way is the process of extending the system of natural numbers N to
the system of integers Z. This can be interpreted algebraically by saying that
the equation
x + n = m
(m, n ∈N)
always has a solution.
Up to now, we have taken exclusively the additive point of view. We
could, however, combine natural numbers and integers in a second way,
namely multiplicatively. Just as the addition of numbers can be interpreted
as laying off unit distances on a line, multiplication can be viewed as mea-
suring area with respect to the unit square (a square all of whose sides have
length equal to the unit distance 1).
If for n ∈N, we deﬁne
n · 0 := 0
and then inductively
n · (m + 1) := (n · m) + n,
we obtain the formal equivalent of this. Just as we recognized 1 as the atom
for the additive construction of the natural numbers and integers, we may
now ask the corresponding question in the multiplicative case. The answer
turns out to be much more complicated: we are led to the (inﬁnite set of)
prime numbers. That every integer can be uniquely (up to order and units)
represented as the product of prime numbers is not a priori clear. This fact
is the content of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
From an algebraic point of view, one can, in analogy to the additive case,
ask in the multiplicative case about the unrestricted solvability of the equa-
tion
n · x = m
(m, n ∈Z).
To be sure, there is no solution when n = 0 and m ̸= 0. But what about the
case n ̸= 0? In the general case, there is no solution x ∈Z unless n is a divisor
of m.
To overcome this restriction, one is led to the set Q of rational numbers.
Such numbers are familiar to us as “fractions” r = m
n (m, n ∈Z; n ̸= 0).
One should note, however, that the representation of r in the form m
n is not
unique: we can make the numerator and denominator larger or smaller us-
ing the relation

4
Introduction
r = m
n = m′
n′ ⇐⇒m · n′ = n · m′.
It is therefore essential in understanding the set Q that we imagine a rational
number as a class of pairs of integers. At this point, there are several ways in
which we might motivate a further enlargement of our number system. For
example, we could follow the ancient Greeks and use the fundamental the-
orem of arithmetic to demonstrate that the length of the diagonal of the unit
square, that is, the “number”
√
2, is not rational, which would then require
an enlargement of the number system Q. Another possibility is the follow-
ing: using the geometric representation of the integers as points on a line to
create an extension to the rational numbers using properties of similar tri-
angles, we obtain these new rational numbers as additional points that are
“densely packed” on the line. The question now arises whether these newly
obtained points constitute the entire number line, that is, whether the ratio-
nal numbers ﬁll up the number line without leaving any gaps. As is well
known, there are such gaps, and we are then motivated to attempt to ﬁll
them in. Once again, one is led to an extension of the set of rational numbers
Q and thereby to the construction of the real numbers R. This nontrivial pro-
cess of completion of the rational numbers has wide-ranging consequences,
since it lays the foundation for calculus and thereby makes it possible, for
example, to handle differential equations, which describe many processes in
the real world.
Detailed Outline of This Book
There are various aspects of the natural numbers that can provide us an ori-
entation. One relies primarily on the cardinal aspect (counting aspect) and the
ordinal aspect (ordering aspect) of the natural numbers. The cardinal aspect
rests on the equivalence classes of sets of equal size, while the ordinal aspect
is based on the assumption that the set of natural numbers has a beginning
point, that every natural number has exactly one successor number, and that
distinct natural numbers have distinct successors. In the framework of our
axiomatic approach, we turn to the ordinal aspect and establish the natu-
ral numbers at the beginning of the ﬁrst chapter with the help of Peano’s
axioms. Using the ﬁfth Peano axiom, namely the axiom of mathematical
induction, we deﬁne addition and multiplication of the natural numbers
and introduce the usual arithmetic operations. In the second part of the ﬁrst
chapter, we develop the concept of divisibility of natural numbers; the main
result of this part is the proof of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic. The
ﬁrst chapter ends with a section on division with remainder, in which the
decimal representation of numbers plays an important role.
The operations of addition and multiplication of natural numbers devel-
oped in the ﬁrst chapter are abstracted in the second chapter, leading to the

5
deﬁnitions of semigroups and monoids. These notions begin our construc-
tion of number systems through the necessary algebraic concepts that we
develop in the second and third chapters. In the second chapter, we concen-
trate above all on an elementary presentation of group theory, introducing
groups, subgroups, normal subgroups, group homomorphisms, cosets, and
quotient groups. These theoretical considerations lead to the fact that regu-
lar abelian semigroups can be extended essentially uniquely to groups. This
yields in particular the mathematically based extension of the additive semi-
group (N, +) of natural numbers to the additive group (Z, +) of integers.
The extension of the multiplication of natural numbers to the newly con-
structed domain of the integers leads to the algebraic concept of a ring. The
study of the fundamental aspects of ring theory is the subject of the third
chapter. In this connection, we study rings, subrings, ideals, ring homomor-
phisms, and quotient rings. We discover the special classes of rings known
as integral domains and ﬁelds, which again play an important role in the
construction of number systems. In ﬁelds, for example, division of two el-
ements can be carried out in every case, provided the denominator is not
zero. We shall see that every integral domain can be enlarged to a ﬁeld. Since
the ring (Z,+, ·) will turn out to be an integral domain, we will be able to
enlarge it to the ﬁeld (Q,+, ·) of rational numbers. The third chapter closes
with a discussion of special rings motivated by an algebraic systemization
of the concept of divisibility.
To begin the fourth chapter, we apply the decimal representation of inte-
gers to the set of rational numbers that we constructed in the third chapter.
We thereby obtain the decimal fraction development of rational numbers. It
turns out that such a representation of a rational number either terminates
or is periodic. This raises the question whether there exists an extension of
the rational numbers that contains all “numbers” that can be represented
by an arbitrary decimal expansion. As we shall see, this is the set of real
numbers, but we have far to go before we can carry out that construction:
with the help of the quotient ring of rational Cauchy sequences modulo the
ideal of rational null sequences, we ﬁrst construct a ﬁeld that contains Q.
We determine that this ﬁeld is complete, that is, that every Cauchy sequence
with elements in this ﬁeld has a limit in this ﬁeld. From this, we achieve the
insight that this abstractly constructed ﬁeld can be identiﬁed with the set of
numbers represented by inﬁnite decimals, which leads to the ﬁeld R of real
numbers. In the last part of the chapter, we consider alternative characteri-
zations of the completeness of R, such as the existence of the supremum of
every subset of R that is bounded from above. Another important point at
the end of this chapter is the identiﬁcation of R with the number line, which
becomes possible only after the axioms of classical Euclidean geometry are
extended by a further axiom that postulates that the number line has, so to
speak, no holes.
The ﬁfth chapter begins with the question of a further extension of the set
of real numbers: given that the integers and rational numbers were created

6
Introduction
with the goal of being able to solve every linear equation of the form
a · x + b = c
(a, b, c ∈N; a ̸= 0),
the question naturally arises concerning the solvability of equations of higher
degree, for example those of degree 2. With quadratic extensions it becomes
clear that the solution of quadratic equations implies the existence of square
roots. It turns out that real square roots exist for every positive real number.
In contrast, no negative real number has a real square root. By postulating
that the number −1 has the imaginary unit i as a square root, we are led to
the ﬁeld C of complex numbers. Having constructed C, we soon come to the
conclusion that extraction of square roots can be carried out without restric-
tion in the complex numbers. That in fact, every polynomial equation with
complex coefﬁcients has complex roots is the content of the fundamental
theorem of algebra, for which we give an elementary proof. In the second
part of the chapter we investigate the ﬁne structure of the real (and com-
plex) numbers. This leads us to the distinction between algebraic and tran-
scendental numbers. Although transcendental numbers seem to be a priori
more difﬁcult to deal with, their characterization shows that they are par-
ticularly well approximated by rational numbers. The chapter closes with a
proof of the transcendence of Euler’s number e = 2.71828....
Our goal in the ﬁnal sixth chapter is to search for ﬁelds that extend the
ﬁeld of complex numbers C to an even more encompassing ﬁeld. Since we
can view C as a two-dimensional real vector space, it makes sense to be-
gin by looking for a ﬁeld that arises from a three-dimensional real vector
space. It turns out, however, that no such ﬁeld exists. If we then look for a
ﬁeld that can be obtained from a four-dimensional real vector space, we dis-
cover that such a ﬁeld exists, provided that we abandon the requirement of
commutativity of multiplication. In this way, we are led to the construction
of the skew ﬁeld of Hamiltonian quaternions, which brings to a close our
investigation of number systems.
Chapter Appendices for the Interested Reader
As mentioned in the preface, each of the six chapters in the English edition
on the construction of number systems has been supplemented with an ap-
pendix. These appendices have been designed for the reader who wishes
to learn about some of the further developments to which the number sys-
tem presented in the corresponding chapter has given rise, both historically
and with respect to very recent results. In contrast to the systematic devel-
opment of the mathematical machinery necessary for constructing number
systems, we have adopted in the appendices a less rigorous style. This al-
lows the appendices to remain largely independent of the remainder of the
book, and in particular, they should provide the student some ﬁrst insights

7
into questions that are topics of current research. The choice of topics largely
represents the authors’ personal mathematical taste.
The appendix to the ﬁrst chapter deals with interesting developments on
the subject of prime numbers, including work on conjectures that remain un-
resolved to this day. The appendix to the second chapter provides an intro-
duction to working with congruences, which are particularly useful in cryp-
tographic applications. Building on that knowledge, we introduce the RSA
encryption procedure and discuss some of its strengths and weaknesses. In
the appendix to the third chapter we investigate the search for rational solu-
tions of polynomial equations in several variables (with integer coefﬁcients),
the most famous example being the Fermat equation Xd + Yd = Zd, which
for exponent d > 2 has only the trivial solution. In the fourth chapter, af-
ter we have obtained the real numbers by completing the rational numbers
with respect to the (archimedean) absolute value, we introduce in the ap-
pendix the so-called p-adic completion, which leads to the p-adic numbers
Qp, which in turn are helpful in ﬁnding rational solutions to polynomial
equations in the context of the local–global principle. Following the con-
struction of the complex numbers in the ﬁfth chapter, we turn naturally to
the question of the representation in terms of radicals of the zeros of a poly-
nomial in a single variable (with complex coefﬁcients), which turns out to
be impossible in general once the degree of the polynomial exceeds four.
This leads directly to Galois theory and the current topic of so-called Galois
representations. In the appendix to the last chapter, we conclude our book
by asking whether there can exist a number system that extends Hamilton’s
quaternions. It turns out that if we are willing to give up associativity of mul-
tiplication, there is precisely one additional extension, Cayley’s octonions,
which rounds out the subject of this book in a most satisfying way.
Prerequisites
A ﬁrst prerequisite for the study of this book is an acquaintance with naive
set theory. We assume that the interested reader is familiar with the notions
of set, membership, and containment, as well as the operations of set in-
tersection, union, and difference. Furthermore, we assume familiarity with
mappings between sets and the notions of injectivity, surjectivity, and bijec-
tivity of mappings. It is only in the ﬁfth and sixth chapters that we invoke
in certain places the theory of ﬁnite-dimensional vector spaces, and we also
make use of elements of the calculus of functions of a single real variable.
Final Remarks
Many interesting topics and mathematical pearls from the theories of ele-
mentary number theory and abstract algebra are not mentioned in this book.

8
Introduction
We have focused primarily on the construction of number systems and their
requisite algebraic apparatus. It is our hope that through the lens of algebra,
the reader will obtain new insights into the structure of the number systems
studied earlier in school, and in addition, will learn with the help of familiar
numbers to value the abstract and fruitful methods of algebra in the spirit
of the ﬁfth-century Greek philosopher Proclus, who wrote, “Wherever there
is number, there is beauty.”

I
The Natural Numbers
1.
The Peano Axioms
We begin our study of elementary number theory with a discussion of the
set of natural numbers. According to Leopold Kronecker, the set of natural
numbers {0,1,2,...} together with the familiar operations of addition and
multiplication may be considered as having been created by God. We shall
not go any further into metaphysics regarding the natural numbers. Instead,
we are going to take an axiomatic approach to constructing sets of numbers,
and we shall begin by deﬁning the natural numbers with the help of the
axioms proposed by Giuseppe Peano.
Deﬁnition 1.1 (Peano axioms). The set N of natural numbers is character-
ized by the following axioms:
(i)
The set N is nonempty. It contains a distinguished element 0 ∈N.
(ii)
For every n ∈N, there exists a uniquely deﬁned element n∗∈N with
n∗̸= n. The element n∗is called the (immediate) successor of n, and n is
called the (immediate) predecessor of n∗.
(iii) There is no element n ∈N whose successor n∗satisﬁes the relation n∗=
0. That is, the element 0 has no predecessor and is therefore considered
the ﬁrst element.
(iv) If two natural numbers n1,n2 satisfy the equality n∗
1 = n∗
2, then it fol-
lows that n1 = n2. That is, the successor mapping is an injection from
N to N.
(v)
Principle of mathematical induction: If T is a subset of N with the property
that 0 ∈T (basis of the induction), and if it follows from the assumption
t ∈T (induction hypothesis) that t∗∈T as well (induction step), then
we must have T = N.
Remark 1.2. Note that the successor of a natural number n is the immediate
successor n∗. By a successor of a natural number n we mean any element
of the set {n∗,n∗∗,n∗∗∗,...}; we will also call these numbers respectively the
ﬁrst successor, second successor, third successor, etc., of n. Similar nomen-
clature holds for predecessors.
Remark 1.3. Using Deﬁnition 1.1 repeatedly, we may introduce the follow-
ing familiar notation:
1 := 0∗,
2 := 1∗= 0∗∗,
3 := 2∗= 1∗∗= 0∗∗∗,
...,
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
J. Kramer and A.-M. von Pippich, From Natural Numbers to Quaternions, 
Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69429-0_1

10
I The Natural Numbers
where the multiple asterisks denote multiple applications of taking the suc-
cessor. The set N of natural numbers can now be written in the familiar form
N = {0,1,2,3,...}.
Axiom (v) of Deﬁnition 1.1 forms the basis of constructing what are called
proofs by induction: if one wishes to prove that every natural number pos-
sesses a certain property, then one may do so by ﬁrst proving that the num-
ber 0 possesses the given property (basis of the induction), then showing
that on the assumption that the natural number n (n ∈N arbitrary but ﬁxed)
has the property (induction hypothesis), it follows that the successor n∗has
the property. By Axiom (v), it follows that the property holds for all n ∈N.
We would like to note here that the principle of mathematical induction
can be formulated in the following modiﬁed form: if T is a subset of N con-
taining n0 (basis of induction) and if t ∈T (induction hypothesis) implies
t∗∈T (induction step), then we must have T ⊇{n0, n∗
0,...}. With induc-
tion proofs of this type, it is possible to prove properties that do not hold
necessarily for all the natural numbers, but only for n0 and its successors.
Remark 1.4. One could justiﬁably ask whether the set of natural numbers
as deﬁned actually exists, whether there exists a model of the Peano axioms.
This question can be answered in the afﬁrmative with the help of set theory.
Likewise, one can show that the natural numbers are uniquely determined,
that is, that all models of the Peano axioms are equivalent (more precisely,
isomorphic) to each other. We refer the reader to the vast literature on set
theory.
We now deﬁne the operations of addition and multiplication of natural
numbers.
Deﬁnition 1.5. Addition and multiplication of natural numbers m and n are
deﬁned inductively as follows:
Addition:
n + 0 := n,
n + m∗:= (n + m)∗,
(1)
Multiplication:
n · 0 := 0,
n · m∗:= (n · m) + n.
(2)
Remark 1.6. Deﬁnition 1.5 indeed constitutes a valid deﬁnition of addition
and multiplication on the set of natural numbers. If one wishes, for example,
to add the natural number n to the natural number m, the sum n + m is
determined by (1) as follows: we write m in the form m = 0∗···∗(with m
asterisks; that is, m is the mth successor of 0); from n + 0 = n by deﬁnition,
we may deduce

1. The Peano Axioms
11
n + 1 = n + 0∗= (n + 0)∗= n∗,
n + 2 = n + 0∗∗= (n + 0∗)∗= (n + 1)∗= n∗∗,
···
n + m = n + 0∗···∗= n∗···∗(m times);
that is, the sum n + m is the mth successor of n.
Similarly, the product n · m of n,m ∈N is deﬁned by (2). We note here that
we will frequently omit the dot symbolizing multiplication and write mn
instead of m · n.
We shall now use Peano’s axioms to prove that the usual laws of addition
and multiplication hold under our deﬁnition of those two operations.
Lemma 1.7. The following laws hold for arbitrary natural numbers n,m, p:
Associative law:
n + (m + p) = (n + m) + p,
n · (m · p) = (n · m) · p.
Commutative law:
n + m = m + n,
n · m = m · n.
Distributive law:
(n + m) · p = (n · p) + (m · p),
p · (n + m) = (p · n) + (p · m).
Proof. We shall present a proof for the commutative law of addition. The
other proofs are similar. We shall use a double induction argument, that is,
an induction on m, and embedded within that induction, an induction on n.
(i) We take m = 0 as the basis of the induction: We must show that
n + 0 = 0 + n
for all n ∈N. Since by (1), we have n + 0 = n, we must show that 0 + n = n;
we do this by induction on n. For n = 0, the assertion is true. Given the
induction hypothesis that 0 + n = n for an arbitrary n ∈N, we must show
that 0 + n∗= n∗. Using (1) and the induction hypothesis, we see easily that
0 + n∗= (0 + n)∗= n∗.
This completes the induction on n and also the basis of the induction for
m = 0.
(ii) We now make the induction hypothesis that for m ∈N, the equality

12
I The Natural Numbers
n + m = m + n
holds for all n ∈N. On this assumption, we now assert that we also must
have
n + m∗= m∗+ n
for all n ∈N. Before we prove this, we show ﬁrst that m∗+ n = (m + n)∗
for all n ∈N, again using induction on n. For n = 0, the assertion follows at
once from (1). With the induction hypothesis m∗+ n = (m + n)∗, it sufﬁces
to show that we also have m∗+ n∗= (m + n∗)∗. This can be seen at once
from using (1) twice and the induction hypothesis, namely
m∗+ n∗= (m∗+ n)∗=
 (m + n)∗∗= (m + n∗)∗.
This allows us to complete the induction on m. Namely, using (1), the induc-
tion hypothesis, and the equality that we just proved, we have
n + m∗= (n + m)∗= (m + n)∗= m∗+ n.
This completes the proof of the fact that addition of natural numbers is com-
mutative.
⊓⊔
Exercise 1.8. Prove the remaining laws of addition and multiplication from
Lemma 1.7.
Remark 1.9. In connection with the distributive law, we note that the opera-
tion of multiplication takes precedence over that of addition. Thus, recalling
that we may suppress the dot symbolizing multiplication, we can write the
distributive law in the following form:
(n + m)p = np + mp,
p(n + m) = pn + pm.
Exercise 1.10. Prove the following assertion: The product of two natural
numbers m and n is equal to 0 if and only if at least one of the two num-
bers is equal to 0.
Remark 1.11. In deﬁning addition and multiplication of natural numbers
we have assumed the validity of the principle that it is possible to deﬁne
functions on the natural numbers recursively. This means that in deﬁning a
function f on N, it sufﬁces to deﬁne the value f (0) and then to deﬁne f (m∗)
in terms of m and f (m). For a proof of this principle we refer the reader, for
example, to Section 2.10 of the book “Set theory: with an introduction to real
points sets”, by A. Dasgupta.
To simplify notation, we now introduce exponential notation.

1. The Peano Axioms
13
Deﬁnition 1.12. Let a and m be two natural numbers. We deﬁne the mth
power am of a inductively on m as follows:
a0 := 1,
am∗:= am · a.
Lemma 1.13. Let a,m,n be arbitrary natural numbers. Then we have the follow-
ing rules:
am · an = am+n,
(am)n = am·n.
Proof. We leave the proof as an exercise for the reader.
⊓⊔
Exercise 1.14. Prove the power law of Lemma 1.13.
Deﬁnition 1.15. Le m,n ∈N be given. We say that m is less than or equal to
n, and write
m ≤n,
if either m is a predecessor of n or m = n. If m = n does not hold, then we
say that m is (strictly) less than n and write
m < n.
We deﬁne analogously the notion of m being greater than or equal to n, and
write
m ≥n,
if either m is a successor of n or m = n. If the equality m = n does not hold,
then we say that m is (strictly) greater than n, and we write
m > n.
Remark 1.16. With the relation <, the set of natural numbers N becomes an
ordered set; that is, the following three conditions are satisﬁed:
(i)
For all elements m,n ∈N, we have m < n or n < m or m = n.
(ii)
The three relations m < n, n < m, m = n are mutually exclusive.
(iii) If m < n and n < p, then m < p.
Analogous conditions hold for the relation >.
Exercise 1.17. Prove properties (i), (ii), and (iii) of Remark 1.16.
Remark 1.18. Using the relation <, we can present the following variant of
proof by induction, also called strong induction: Suppose we wish to prove
that every natural number n ≥n0 satisﬁes a certain property. Then we ﬁrst

14
I The Natural Numbers
show that the natural number n0 possesses this property (basis of the induc-
tion), then select an arbitrary natural number n > n0 and assume that the
property in question holds for every natural number n′ such that n0 ≤n′ < n
(induction hypothesis), and show ﬁnally that on the induction hypothesis,
the natural number n also possesses this property (induction step).
Remark 1.19. For the relation <, we have the following rules relating to ad-
dition and multiplication:
(i)
For all p ∈N, if m < n, then also m + p < n + p.
(ii)
For all p ∈N, p ̸= 0, if m < n, then also m · p < n · p.
Analogous rules hold for the relation >.
Exercise 1.20. Prove properties (i) and (ii) of Remark 1.19.
Lemma 1.21 (Well-ordering principle). If M ⊆N is a nonempty subset of the
natural numbers, then M contains a smallest element m0. That is, for all m ∈M,
we have m ≥m0.
Proof. Let m be an arbitrary ﬁxed element of M. We provisionally set m0 :=
m. By the ordering of M (see Remark 1.16), m0 can be compared with any
element of M, and it can thus be decided whether m0 has a predecessor in
M. If not, then m0 is the desired least element, and we are done. If, however,
m0 has a predecessor m′ ∈M, that is, m′∗···∗= m0, then we reset m0 := m′.
We again ask whether m0 has a predecessor in M. If not, we are done. Oth-
erwise, we proceed as above and ﬁnd a predecessor of m0. The possibility
of choosing another predecessor must end after at most m steps, since we
eventually would reach the ﬁrst element, 0, of N, which has no predecessor.
If 0 /∈M, the proof will end in fewer steps.
⊓⊔
Remark 1.22. The well-ordering principle ensures the existence of a smallest
element in a nonempty set of natural numbers. This does not mean that it is
always easy to determine such a minimal element.
For example, it has been proven that there is a (very large) natural number
m1 such that all natural numbers m ≥m1 can be written as a sum of at most
seven third powers (cubes). By the well-ordering principle, there must be a
least natural number m0 with this property (the value of m0 is conjectured
to be 455). However, to this day, the true value of m0 is unknown.
Exercise 1.23. Can you ﬁnd any examples from everyday life in which a
smallest element of a ﬁnite set must exist, yet the actual value of that number
is impossible to determine in practice?
Deﬁnition 1.24. Suppose we have m,n ∈N with m ≥n. Then (m −n), or
m −n for short, denotes the natural number that satisﬁes the equation n +
x = m. We call m −n the difference of m and n.

2. Divisibility and Prime Numbers
15
Exercise 1.25. Prove that the difference m −n of two numbers m,n ∈N with
m ≥n is well deﬁned, that is, that there exists precisely one natural number
x that satisﬁes the equation n + x = m.
Remark 1.26. One motivation for including the set of natural numbers in a
larger set is the desire to have a solution to the equation
n + x = m
for given natural numbers m,n. Deﬁnition 1.24 assumes (and you proved it
in the exercise) that a solution exists in the set of natural numbers, namely
the number x = m −n, when m ≥n. Indeed, x is determined by the fact that
m is the x = (m −n)-fold successor of n. On the other hand, if m < n, then
there is no natural number that can be substituted for x that will solve the
equation. This deﬁcit will lead us to the construction of the integers, which
we shall be able to accomplish with some algebraic tools to be presented in
the next chapter.
2.
Divisibility and Prime Numbers
We begin with the deﬁnition of divisibility in the natural numbers.
Deﬁnition 2.1. A natural number b ̸= 0 divides a natural number a, denoted
by b | a, if there exists a natural number c such that a = b · c. We say also that
b is a divisor of a. We say that b ∈N is a common divisor of a1,a2 ∈N if there
exist c1,c2 ∈N such that aj = b · cj for j = 1,2.
Example 2.2. Let a = 12 and b = 6. Then with c = 2, the equation a = b · c
is satisﬁed; therefore, 6 | 12. On the other hand, if we take a = 12 and b = 7,
then 7 ∤12.
If we take a1 = 12, a2 = 6, and b = 3, then we can see that 3 is a common
divisor of 12 and 6.
Remark 2.3. Let a be a nonzero natural number, and b a divisor of a (that is,
a = b · c for some c ∈N, c ≥1) such that a ̸= b. Then we must have b < a.
Indeed, if we had b > a, we would be led by Remark 1.19 to the inequality
a = b · c ≥b · 1 = b > a,
which is impossible.
We may conclude at once from this discussion that if the equation m · n =
1 is satisﬁed by natural numbers, then we must have m = n = 1. Namely, we
have m | 1, and from the assumption m ̸= 1, we would have by the above
that m < 1, that is, m = 0, which is impossible, since that would lead to the
equality 0 = 1.

16
I The Natural Numbers
Lemma 2.4. We have the following basic facts about divisibility in the natural
numbers:
(i)
a | a
(a ∈N; a ̸= 0).
(ii)
a | 0
(a ∈N; a ̸= 0).
(iii)
1 | a
(a ∈N).
(iv)
c | b, b | a ⇒c | a
(a, b, c ∈N; b, c ̸= 0).
(v)
b | a ⇒b · c | a · c
(a, b, c ∈N; b, c ̸= 0).
(vi)
b · c | a · c ⇒b | a
(a, b, c ∈N; b, c ̸= 0).
(vii)
b1 | a1, b2 | a2 ⇒b1 · b2 | a1 · a2
(a1, a2, b1, b2 ∈N; b1, b2 ̸= 0).
(viii) b | a1, b | a2 ⇒b | (c1 · a1 + c2 · a2)
(a1, a2, c1, c2, b ∈N; b ̸= 0).
(ix)
b | a ⇒b | a · c
(a, b, c ∈N; b ̸= 0).
(x)
b | a, a | b ⇒a = b
(a, b ∈N; a, b ̸= 0).
Proof. Since divisibility properties are of great importance in elementary
number theory, we shall present the proofs in detail, even though they are
quite straightforward.
(i) By the deﬁnition (2) of multiplication of natural numbers, we have for
all a ∈N the equality a = a · 1. That is, we have a | a for a ̸= 0.
(ii) Likewise, from (2), we have for all a ∈N the relation 0 = a · 0. That is,
we have a | 0 for a ̸= 0.
(iii) Using the equality in (i) above and the commutativity of multiplica-
tion, we have a = 1 · a, from which we obtain 1 | a.
(iv) Since by assumption, we have c | b and b | a, there exist m,n ∈N such
that b = c · m and a = b · n. We thereby obtain
a = b · n = (c · m) · n = c · (m · n),
and therefore c | a.
(v) It follows from b | a that there exists m ∈N such that a = b · m. On mul-
tiplying this equality by c ∈N, c ̸= 0, we obtain the equality a · c = (b · m) · c.
Taking into account the commutativity and associativity of multiplication,
we have a · c = (b · c) · m. That is, b · c | a · c.
(vi) From b · c | a · c, it follows that there exists m ∈N such that a · c =
(b · c) · m. As the difference of the left-hand and right-hand sides of this
equality, we obtain, using the properties of addition and multiplication for
the natural numbers, in particular the distributive property, the equality
0 = a · c −(b · c) · m = (a −b · m) · c.
But since c ̸= 0 and the product of a −b · m and c is equal to 0, we must have
a −b · m = 0, whence a = b · m, from which follows b | a.
(vii) By assumption, there exist m1,m2 ∈N such that a1 = b1 · m1 and
a2 = b2 · m2. We thereby obtain, using the properties of addition and multi-
plication,
a1 · a2 = (b1 · m1) · (b2 · m2) = (b1 · b2) · (m1 · m2),

2. Divisibility and Prime Numbers
17
and consequently, b1 · b2 | a1 · a2.
(viii) If the number b divides two natural numbers a1,a2, then there exist
m1,m2 ∈N such that a1 = b · m1 and a2 = b · m2. Let c1,c2 ∈N be arbitrary.
For the natural number c1 · a1 + c2 · a2, we obtain by substitution, after a
brief calculation,
c1 · a1 + c2 · a2 = c1 · (b · m1) + c2 · (b · m2) = b · (c1 · m1 + c2 · m2),
from which we conclude that b | (c1 · a1 + c2 · a2).
(ix) Since b | a, there exists m ∈N such that a = b · m. If we multiply this
equality by some c ∈N, we obtain a · c = b · (m · c), from which b | a · c follows
at once.
(x) By the divisibility assumptions, both a and b are nonzero. Since b | a
and a | b, there exist n ∈N and m ∈N such that a = b · m and b = a · n.
Substituting the second equality into the ﬁrst yields
a = (a · n) · m
⇐⇒
a · (m · n −1) = 0.
Since a ̸= 0, it follows that m · n −1 = 0; that is, m · n = 1. Remark 2.3 tells us
at once that n = m = 1, from which we conclude that a = b.
This completes the proof of the lemma.
⊓⊔
Exercise 2.5. Let a1,...,ak be natural numbers such that a1 ··· ak + 1 is divis-
ible by 3.
(a) Show that none of the numbers a1,...,ak is divisible by 3.
(b) Prove that at least one of the numbers a1 + 1,...,ak + 1 is divisible by 3.
Remark 2.6. By Lemma 2.4, every a ∈N, a ̸= 0, has the divisors 1 and a. We
call these the trivial divisors of a . The divisors of a ∈N other than a itself are
called proper divisors of a.
One can say that from an additive viewpoint, the number 1 is the fun-
damental building block of the natural numbers, since every natural num-
ber can be expressed as a sum of ones. We now consider the multiplicative
point of view and ask what might be the fundamental multiplicative build-
ing blocks of the natural numbers. This leads us to the notion of prime num-
ber, which we now present.
Deﬁnition 2.7. A natural number p > 1 is called a prime number if p has no
nontrivial divisors, that is, if p has only the divisors 1 and p. We shall denote
the set of prime numbers by
P := {p ∈N | p is a prime number}.
Example 2.8. Let us ask whether the number 11 is prime. To this end, we
write down all the divisors b of 11. By our considerations above, we must
have

18
I The Natural Numbers
b ∈{1,...,11}.
A direct calculation tells us that the numbers 2,...,10 cannot be divisors of
11. Therefore, 11 has only the trivial divisors 1 and 11, from which it follows
that 11 ∈P.
The sequence of prime numbers begins
2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41, 43, 47, 53, ... .
Lemma 2.9. Every natural number a > 1 has at least one prime divisor p ∈P.
That is, there exists a prime number p such that p | a.
Proof. We consider the following set, whose elements depend on the value
of a:
T (a) := {b ∈N | b > 1 and b | a}.
Since a ∈T (a), the set T (a) is not empty. By the well-ordering principle
(Lemma 1.21), the fact that T (a) is a nonempty subset of N implies that it
has a least element, which we denote by p. By the way the set was deﬁned,
we must have p > 1.
We now show that p is a prime number. If such were not the case, that
is, if p were not prime, then p would have a proper divisor q greater than
1, that is, we would have q | p for some 1 < q < p. Since q | p and p | a, we
obtain from Lemma 2.4 (iv) that q | a. Since we also have q > 1, it follows
that q ∈T (a). This contradicts the minimal choice of p. Therefore, p is, as
claimed, a prime divisor of a.
⊓⊔
Theorem 2.10 (Theorem of Euclid). There are inﬁnitely many prime numbers.
Proof. Suppose such were not the case, that there were only ﬁnitely many
prime numbers p1,..., pn. We could then consider the natural number
a := p1 ··· pn + 1.
We have certainly a > 1, and by Lemma 2.9, a has at least one prime divisor;
call it p. By the assumption that there are only ﬁnitely many prime numbers,
we must have p ∈{p1,..., pn}. In particular, p | (p1 ··· pn). However, since
we also have the divisibility relation p | a, it follows by the laws of divisibility
that p | 1. That implies that p = 1, which, however, is impossible. This refutes
the hypothesis that there are only ﬁnitely many prime numbers, and so there
must be inﬁnitely many primes.
⊓⊔
Remark 2.11. The proof of Euclid’s theorem provides us a way of construct-
ing an inﬁnite sequence of prime numbers: We begin with the prime num-
ber p1 = 2. Setting a2 = p1 + 1 = 3, we obtain a second prime, p2 = 3. Setting
a3 = p1 · p2 + 1 = 7, we obtain the additional prime number p3 = 7. We now

2. Divisibility and Prime Numbers
19
set a4 = p1 · p2 · p3 + 1 = 43 and obtain the prime number p4 = 43. Proceed-
ing in this way, we obtain next a5 = p1 · p2 · p3 · p4 + 1 = 1807. For the ﬁrst
time in this process, we obtain a number that is not prime, since we have the
decomposition 1807 = 13 · 139. That is, we obtain the two additional prime
numbers 13 und 139.
Exercise 2.12. Show that using the procedure of Remark 2.11, one does not
obtain every prime number. To accomplish this, deﬁne the numbers a1 := 2
and an+1 := (an −1) · an + 1 (n ∈N, n ≥1) and consider the set of prime
numbers
Mn := {p ∈P | p | an}
(n ∈N, n ≥1).
Show that S
n∈N,n≥1 Mn ̸= P, by proving that 5 /∈Mn for all n ∈N, n ≥1.
Exercise 2.13. Use the idea of the proof of Euclid’s theorem and Exercise 2.5
to show that there are inﬁnitely many prime numbers in the subset of the
natural numbers
2 + 3 · N := {2, 2 + 3, 2 + 6, ..., 2 + 3 · n, ...}.
Example 2.14. We introduce here two special types of prime numbers.
(i) A prime number of the form p = 2n −1 (n ∈N) is called a Mersenne
prime (after Marin Mersenne). It is known that
2n −1 is a prime number
=⇒
n is a prime number.
(ii) A prime number of the form p = 2n + 1 (n ∈N, n ≥1) is called a
Fermat prime (after Pierre Fermat). It is known that
2n + 1 is a prime number
=⇒
n = 2m for some m ∈N.
Exercise 2.15. Prove the two assertions of Example 2.14.
The converse assertions to (i) and (ii) are in general false. For the converse
to (ii), for example, we see that
m = 0 : 220 + 1 = 21 + 1 = 3,
prime,
m = 1 : 221 + 1 = 22 + 1 = 5,
prime,
m = 2 : 222 + 1 = 24 + 1 = 17,
prime,
m = 3 : 223 + 1 = 28 + 1 = 257,
prime,
m = 4 : 224 + 1 = 216 + 1 = 65537, prime,
but the number 225 + 1 = 4294967297 is not prime, since it has the nontrivial
divisor 641.

20
I The Natural Numbers
We note here that Carl Friedrich Gauss showed that the regular p-gon
(p ∈P) can be constructed with straightedge and compass if and only if p is
a Fermat prime, that is, a prime of the form p = 22m + 1 (m ∈N).
Example 2.16. A natural number n is said to be perfect if the sum of all its
divisors is equal to 2n, that is, if
∑
d|n
d = 2n.
In the ﬁrst century, the Greek mathematician Nicomachus of Gerasa pub-
lished a list of the ﬁrst four perfect numbers: 6, 28, 496, and 8128. The myste-
rious nature of the perfect numbers has cast its spell over many mathemati-
cians, including Euclid, Mersenne, and Leonhard Euler. All perfect numbers
found to date are even numbers. Yet it is unknown whether any odd perfect
numbers exist. For even perfect numbers, we can give the following charac-
terization, due to Euler.
Lemma 2.17. A natural number n is an even perfect number if and only if n =
2m · (2m+1 −1) for some m ∈N such that 2m+1 −1 is a prime number.
Proof. We begin the proof with the following observation: For n ∈N, set
S(n) := ∑d|n d. It is easy to see that for natural numbers a,b whose only com-
mon divisor is 1, we have the relationship
S(a · b) = S(a) · S(b).
Exercise 2.18. Prove this assertion.
With this result, we can now attack the proof. Let n ∈N be an even perfect
number. Since n is even, there exist a natural number m > 0 and an odd
natural number b such that
n = 2m · b.
Since n is perfect, our introductory observation yields that S(n) = S(2m · b) =
S(2m) · S(b) = 2n. Since
S(2m) = 20 + 21 + 22 + ··· + 2m = 2m+1 −1
2 −1
= 2m+1 −1,
we obtain the equality
(2m+1 −1) · S(b) = 2m+1 · b.
(3)
Therefore, the number 2m+1 −1 must be a divisor of 2m+1 · b. Using the
following exercise, we have in fact that 2m+1 −1 must divide the number b.

2. Divisibility and Prime Numbers
21
Exercise 2.19. Show that if an odd number d ∈N divides the number 2m+1 · b
(m,b ∈N), then d is a divisor of b.
Therefore, there exists a ∈N, a ̸= 0, such that b = (2m+1 −1) · a. It remains
to show that a = 1 and that 2m+1 −1 is prime.
To this end, we assume that a > 1 and show that such an assumption
leads to a contradiction. Since b = (2m+1 −1) · a, the number b has at least
the divisors {1, (2m+1 −1), a, b}; we therefore have the inequality
S(b) ≥1 + (2m+1 −1) + a + b = 2m+1 + a + b = 2m+1 · (a + 1).
Multiplication by 2m+1 −1 yields the further inequality
(2m+1 −1) · S(b) ≥(2m+1 −1) · 2m+1 · (a + 1) > 2m+1 · (2m+1 −1) · a
= 2m+1 · b,
which contradicts (3). We must therefore have a = 1 and b = 2m+1 −1. From
(3), we conclude that
S(b) = 2m+1 = b + 1.
That is, b has only the divisors 1 and b, and b = 2m+1 −1 is therefore a prime
number. As asserted, we obtain
n = 2m · (2m+1 −1),
with 2m+1 −1 prime.
We now prove the converse of the statement that we have just proved. Let
n = 2m · (2m+1 −1), where 2m+1 −1 is prime. From our initial observation,
we have that
S(n) = S(2m) · S(2m+1 −1) = (2m+1 −1) · (2m+1 −1 + 1)
= 2 · 2m · (2m+1 −1) = 2n.
Therefore, n is an even perfect number.
⊓⊔
Exercise 2.20. (Amicable numbers). Closely related to the perfect numbers are
the amicable numbers. Two distinct natural numbers a and b are said to be
amicable if S(a) = a + b = S(b); that is, the number a is equal to the sum of
the divisors of b that are less than b, and the number b is equal to the sum of
the divisors of a that are less than a.
(a) Verify that the numbers 220 and 284 are amicable. This pair was known
by the Pythagoreans, as early as 500 B.C..
(b) Prove the following theorem of the Arab mathematician Thabit ibn
Qurra: For a ﬁxed natural number n, let us set x = 3 · 2n −1, y = 3 ·
2n−1 −1, z = 9 · 22n−1 −1. If x, y, and z are prime, then both a = 2n · x · y
and b = 2n · z are amicable.

22
I The Natural Numbers
3.
The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic
We come now to the formulation and proof of the fundamental theorem
of arithmetic, which states that the prime numbers are the (multiplicative)
building blocks of the natural numbers.
Theorem 3.1 (Fundamental theorem of arithmetic). Every nonzero natural
number a has a representation of the form
a = pa1
1 ··· parr
as a product of r (r ∈N) prime powers of distinct prime numbers p1,..., pr with
positive natural numbers a1,...,ar as exponents. This representation is unique up
to the order of the factors.
Proof. We ﬁrst prove the existence and then the uniqueness of the claimed
representation, both by induction on a.
Existence: For a = 1, the assertion is true with r = 0 (empty product). This
establishes the basis of the induction. We now consider a ∈N with a > 1, and
we take as our induction hypothesis that there exists a prime factorization
for every natural number a′ with 1 ≤a′ < a. On this assumption, we now
prove that a also has a prime factorization. Since we have a ∈N, a > 1, we
know by Lemma 2.9 that a has a prime divisor p. That is, we have
a = p · b
for some natural number b. Since p > 1, it follows that 1 ≤b < a. By our
induction hypothesis, there exists a prime factorization for b of the form
b = qb1
1 ···qbss ,
where q1,...,qs (s ∈N) are distinct primes, and b1,...,bs are positive natural
numbers. Putting everything together, we obtain
a = p · b = p1 · qb1
1 ···qbss .
If it happens that p = qj for some j ∈{1,...,s}, we can write the result as
a = qb1
1 ···q
bj+1
j
···qbss .
This completes the proof of the existence of a prime factorization for every
positive natural number.
Uniqueness: We again employ a proof by induction. As in the existence
proof, we begin the induction with a = 1 and obtain the uniqueness of
the prime factorization of 1 by the fact that the empty product is deﬁned
uniquely. We now choose some natural number a > 1 and make the induc-

3. The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic
23
tion hypothesis that the uniqueness of factorization (up to the order of fac-
tors) holds for all natural numbers a′ with 1 ≤a′ < a. On this assumption,
we shall now prove that the prime factorization of a is unique.
In order to achieve a contradiction, we assume that a has two distinct
prime factorizations:
a = pa1
1 · pa2
2 ··· parr = p1 · b with b = pa1−1
1
· pa2
2 ··· parr ,
a = qb1
1 · qb2
2 ···qbss = q1 · c
with c = qb1−1
1
· qb2
2 ···qbss ,
where r and s are nonzero natural numbers, p1,..., pr and q1,...,qs are
each sets of distinct primes, where we may assume that p1 is distinct from
q1,...,qs (why?), and a1,...,ar and b1,...,bs are all nonzero natural numbers.
Without loss of generality, we may also assume that p1 < q1. Then a ≥p1 · c,
and by subtraction, we obtain the natural number
a′ = a −p1 · c =
(
p1 · (b −c),
(q1 −p1) · c,
for which we have a′ < a by construction. The factors b −c, q1 −p1, and c of
a′ are all natural numbers that are strictly less than a. By the induction hy-
pothesis, the natural numbers a′, b −c, q1 −p1, c have each a unique prime
factorization. The equality a′ = p1 · (b −c) shows that the prime number p1
must appear in the prime factorization of a′. The equality a′ = (q1 −p1) · c
shows further that p1 must appear in the prime factorization of q1 −p1 or of
c. By our assumption, however, p1 does not appear in the prime factoriza-
tion of c, so that p1 must appear in the prime factorization of the difference
q1 −p1. That is, we must have p1 | (q1 −p1). Putting this together with p1 | p1
and the equality q1 = (q1 −p1) + p1, we obtain with the help of the divis-
ibility properties that p1 | q1. Since 1 < p1 < q1, we must have that p1 is a
nontrivial divisor of q1, which is, of course, impossible. We have obtained
the desired contradiction. Therefore, our assumption that a has two distinct
prime factorizations must also be false. We conclude that the prime factor-
ization of a is unique, which completes the induction step and the proof of
uniqueness.
⊓⊔
Exercise 3.2. Find the prime factorization of the following numbers: 720,
9797, 360360, and 232 −1.
Invoking the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, we can easily prove the
following lemma, which goes back to Euclid.
Lemma 3.3 (Euclid’s lemma). Let a,b be natural numbers and p a prime. Then
p | a · b implies p | a or p | b.

24
I The Natural Numbers
Proof. By the assumed divisibility relationship p | a · b, there exists a natural
number c ̸= 0 such that a · b = p · c. Because of the existence and uniqueness
of prime factorization, the prime p must appear in the prime factorization
of the product a · b. Therefore, p must appear in the prime factorization of a
or b. This implies at once that p | a or p | b.
⊓⊔
Remark 3.4. By the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, every natural num-
ber a ̸= 0 can be written in the form
a = ∏
p∈P
pap,
where the product is taken over all prime numbers; we note that only ﬁnitely
many of the exponents ap are different from 0. We shall formally subsume
the case a = 0, thus far excluded, in this notation by setting ap = ∞for all
p ∈P.
As an application of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, we derive
the following useful divisibility criterion.
Lemma 3.5. Let a,b be natural numbers with prime factorizations
a = ∏
p∈P
pap,
b = ∏
p∈P
pbp.
We then have
b | a
⇐⇒
bp ≤ap
for all p ∈P.
Remark 3.6. Note that this divisibility criterion is applicable to the case in
which a = 0 or b = 0.
Proof. If b is a divisor of a, then there exists a natural number c ̸= 0 with
a = b · c. With the prime factorization
c = ∏
p∈P
pcp
of c, we obtain
∏
p∈P
pap = ∏
p∈P
pbp · ∏
p∈P
pcp = ∏
p∈P
pbp+cp.
This proves the equality ap = bp + cp, from which follows bp ≤ap for all
p ∈P. The proof of the converse is just as easy.
⊓⊔
Exercise 3.7. Using the criterion of Lemma 3.5, prove that 255 is a divisor of
232 −1.

4. Greatest Common Divisor, Least Common Multiple
25
4.
Greatest Common Divisor, Least Common Multiple
We begin with the deﬁnition of the greatest common divisor.
Deﬁnition 4.1. Let a,b be natural numbers, not both equal to 0. A natural
number d with the following two properties is called the greatest common
divisor of 1 and b:
(i)
d | a and d | b; that is, d is a common divisor of a and b;
(ii)
x | d for all x ∈N such that x | a and x | b; that is, every common divisor
of a and b is also a divisor of d.
Remark 4.2. We note that the greatest common divisor of a and b is uniquely
deﬁned. Indeed, let d1, d2 be greatest common divisors of a and b. Using
Deﬁnition 4.1 twice, we see that
d1 | d2,
that is, ∃c1 ∈N: d2 = d1 · c1;
d2 | d1,
that is, ∃c2 ∈N: d1 = d2 · c2.
Substituting the ﬁrst equality into the second yields
d1 = d1 · c1 · c2
⇐⇒
1 = c1 · c2.
Remark 2.3 tells us that c1 = c2 = 1, whence d1 = d2, as asserted.
This uniqueness allows us to speak of the greatest common divisor of two
natural numbers a and b. We denote this greatest common divisor by (a,b)
and note that another notation in common use is gcd(a,b).
Theorem 4.3. Let a,b be two natural numbers, not both equal to 0, with the prime
factorizations
a = ∏
p∈P
pap,
b = ∏
p∈P
pbp.
The greatest common divisor (a,b) of a and b can be calculated as
(a,b) = ∏
p∈P
pdp,
where dp := min(ap, bp).
Proof. We set
d := ∏
p∈P
pdp.
Since the exponents dp = min(ap, bp) are equal to 0 for all but a ﬁnite num-
ber of p ∈P, the natural number d is well deﬁned. We have now to verify
properties (i) and (ii) of Deﬁnition 4.1.
From the inequalities

26
I The Natural Numbers
dp ≤ap
and
dp ≤bp
for all p ∈P,
we obtain at once from Lemma 3.5 (divisibility criterion) that
d | a
and
d | b.
Therefore, d is indeed a common divisor of a and b, and so property (i) is
satisﬁed.
To verify property (ii) for d, let us choose an arbitrary common divisor x
of a and b with prime decomposition
x = ∏
p∈P
pxp.
Again with the help of the divisibility criterion, we conclude that
xp ≤ap,
xp ≤bp,
for all prime numbers p, and we have, therefore,
xp ≤min(ap, bp) = dp.
A further application of the divisibility criterion yields x | d. Hence d also
satisﬁes property (ii), and we have d = (a,b).
⊓⊔
Example 4.4. Consider the natural numbers a = 12 = 22 · 31 and b = 15 =
31 · 51. Then the greatest common divisor (a,b) of a and b is given by
(a,b) = 20 · 31 · 50 = 3.
Remark 4.5. In the special case a = 0 and b = 0, we set (a,b) := 0.
Exercise 4.6. Determine (3600,3240),
 360360,540180
, and
 232 −1,38 −28
.
Deﬁnition 4.7. Let a,b be nonzero natural numbers. A natural number m
is called the least common multiple of a and b if it satisﬁes the following two
properties:
(i)
a | m and b | m, that is, m is a common multiple of a and b;
(ii)
m | y for all y ∈N with a | y and b | y; that is, every common multiple
of a and b is a multiple of m.
Remark 4.8. Analogously to the observation that we made in connection
with the deﬁnition of the greatest common divisor, we can convince our-
selves that the least common multiple is also a well-deﬁned natural number.
We denote it by [a,b] and note that the notation lcm(a,b) is also used.
Theorem 4.9. Let a,b be nonzero natural numbers with prime factorizations

4. Greatest Common Divisor, Least Common Multiple
27
a = ∏
p∈P
pap,
b = ∏
p∈P
pbp.
Then the least common multiple [a,b] of a and b is given by
[a,b] = ∏
p∈P
pmp,
where mp := max(ap,bp).
Proof. We set
m := ∏
p∈P
pmp.
As in the proof of Theorem 4.3, we see that the natural number m is well
deﬁned. We have now to verify properties (i) and (ii) of Deﬁnition 4.7.
From the inequalities
mp ≥ap
and
mp ≥bp
for all p ∈P,
it follows at once from Lemma 3.5 (divisibility criterion) that
a | m
and
b | m.
Therefore, m is in fact a common multiple of a and b, and so property (i) is
satisﬁed.
To verify property (ii) for m, we choose an arbitrary common multiple y
of a and b with prime factorization
y = ∏
p∈P
pyp.
Again using the divisibility criterion, we conclude that for all primes p, we
have
yp ≥ap,
yp ≥bp,
and hence
yp ≥max(ap, bp) = mp.
Using again the divisibility criterion, we see that m | y. Therefore, m satisﬁes
property (ii) as well, and we have m = [a,b].
⊓⊔
Remark 4.10. In the special case a = 0 or b = 0, we set [a,b] := 0.
Example 4.11. We again consider the example a = 12 = 22 · 31 and b = 15 =
31 · 51. Then for the least common multiple [a,b] of a and b, we have
[a,b] = 22 · 31 · 51 = 60.

28
I The Natural Numbers
Remark 4.12. The notions of greatest common divisor and least common
multiple can be extended inductively to more than two arguments. For n
natural numbers a1,...,an, the greatest common divisor (a1,...,an) is de-
ﬁned inductively as follows:
(a1,...,an) :=
 (a1,...,an−1), an

.
Analogously, the least common multiple [a1,...,an] of the natural numbers
a1,...,an is deﬁned inductively by
[a1,...,an] :=
[a1,...,an−1], an

.
In both cases, we may convince ourselves that we obtain the same result
regardless of the order in which the numbers are arranged.
Exercise 4.13. Determine (2880,3000,3240) and [36,42,49].
Deﬁnition 4.14. We now deﬁne the notion of relative primality:
(i)
Two natural numbers a,b are said to be relatively prime if their only
common divisor is 1.
(ii)
The natural numbers a1,...,an are said to be relatively prime if their only
common divisor is 1.
(iii) The natural numbers a1,...,an are said to be pairwise relatively prime if
each pair of numbers are relatively prime.
Exercise 4.15. Find three natural numbers a1, a2, a3 that are relatively prime
but not pairwise relatively prime.
Lemma 4.16. We have the following facts about relative primality:
(i)
For natural numbers a,b, we have (a,b) · [a,b] = a · b.
(ii)
If the natural numbers a1,...,an are relatively prime, then (a1,...,an) = 1.
(iii) If a1,...,an are pairwise relatively prime, then [a1,...,an] = a1 ··· an.
Proof. (i) If a or b is equal to 0, the result is immediate. Otherwise, we con-
sider the prime factorizations
a = ∏
p∈P
pap,
b = ∏
p∈P
pbp,
and set
dp := min(ap, bp),
mp := max(ap, bp).
By Theorems 4.3 and 4.9, we obtain
(a,b) · [a,b] = ∏
p∈P
pdp · ∏
p∈P
pmp = ∏
p∈P
pdp+mp = ∏
p∈P
pap+bp = a · b.

5. Division with Remainder
29
(ii) Our proof is by induction on n. The basis of the induction for n =
2 is established by the fact that for two relatively prime natural numbers
a1,a2, we clearly have (a1,a2) = 1. We now assume that the assertion holds
for n ≥2 relatively prime natural numbers a1,...,an and prove that on that
assumption, the assertion holds for n + 1 relatively prime natural numbers.
We distinguish two cases: d := (a1,...,an) is equal to 1 and d := (a1,...,an)
is greater than 1. In the ﬁrst case, we have immediately that
(a1,...,an,an+1) = (d,an+1) = (1,an+1) = 1.
In the second case, we obtain from the relative primality of a1,...,an+1 that d
and an+1 can have no common divisor greater than 1, from which it follows
that
(a1,...,an,an+1) = (d,an+1) = 1.
This completes the proof of (ii) by induction.
(iii) We again carry out a proof by induction. The basis of the induction
is the same as in part (ii). For the induction hypothesis, we now assume
that the assertion holds for n ≥2 pairwise relatively prime natural numbers
a1,...,an, and we shall prove that on that assumption, the assertion holds for
n + 1 pairwise relatively prime natural numbers. We begin by noting that
[a1,...,an,an+1] =
[a1,...,an],an+1
 = [a1 ··· an,an+1].
Since a1,...,an, an+1 are pairwise relatively prime by assumption, we have
in particular that a1 ··· an and an+1 are relatively prime. Thus the induction
step follows from (i) and (ii), namely
[a1,...,an,an+1] = 1 · [a1 ··· an,an+1]
= (a1 ··· an,an+1) · [a1 ··· an,an+1]
= a1 ··· an · an+1.
This completes the proof of part (iii).
⊓⊔
Exercise 4.17. Determine the conditions on the natural numbers a1,...,an
under which the following generalization of Lemma 4.16 is valid:
(a1,...,an) · [a1,...,an] = a1 ··· an.
5.
Division with Remainder
Let a,b be natural numbers. We assume for the moment that b < a. We con-
sider the multiples 1 · b, 2 · b, 3 · b,..., of b. It is clear that in a ﬁnite number of
steps, we will arrive at a multiple of b that is strictly greater than a, at which
point the previous multiple will be less than or equal to a. In mathematical

30
I The Natural Numbers
terms, this means that there exist natural numbers q,r such that
a = q · b + r
with 0 ≤r < b. We call this process and result division of a by b with remainder
r. If r = 0, then b is a divisor of a.
0
b
qb
a
z}|{
r
Fig. 1. Division with remainder.
We shall now state and prove this obvious result.
Theorem 5.1 (Division with remainder). Let a,b with b ̸= 0 be natural num-
bers. Then there exist two uniquely determined natural numbers q,r with 0 ≤r < b
such that
a = q · b + r.
(4)
Proof. We must show both the existence and uniqueness of the natural num-
bers q,r.
Existence: For every natural number q such that q · b ≤a, we construct the
natural number r(q) := a −q · b. We then consider the set
M(a,b) := {r(q) | q ∈N, q · b ≤a}.
With the choice q = 0, we establish that r(0) = a. Therefore, the set M(a,b)
is not empty. By Lemma 1.21 (the well-ordering principle), there exists a
natural number q0 such that r0 := r(q0) is the smallest element of M(a,b).
The element r0 satisﬁes the equality r0 = a −q0 · b if and only if
a = q0 · b + r0.
(5)
We now show that 0 ≤r0 < b, that is, that (5) is the desired representation.
Let us assume the contrary, namely that r0 ≥b. Then there must exist r1 ∈N
with r0 = b + r1. We note that r1 < r0, since b ̸= 0 by assumption, whence
b > 0. From the equivalent equations
b + r1 = r0 = a −q0 · b
⇐⇒
r1=a −(q0 + 1) · b,
it follows that r1 ∈M(a,b). We have already shown that r1 < r0, which con-
tradicts the minimal choice of r0. This completes the proof of the existence
of the representation (4).
Uniqueness: Let q1,r1 and q2,r2 be natural numbers with 0 ≤r1 < b and
0 ≤r2 < b that satisfy the equations

5. Division with Remainder
31
a = q1 · b + r1,
(6)
a = q2 · b + r2.
(7)
Without loss of generality, we may assume that r2 ≥r1. From the inequalities
that r1 and r2 satisfy, we obtain
0 ≤r2 −r1 < b.
Subtracting (6) from (7) yields the equality of natural numbers
r2 −r1 = (q1 −q2) · b.
If we had q1 ̸= q2, then we would have q1 −q2 ≥1, whence
r2 −r1 = (q1 −q2) · b ≥b.
But this contradicts the inequality r2 −r1 < b. We must therefore have q1 =
q2, which at once yields r1 = r2. This completes the proof of the uniqueness
of (4).
⊓⊔
Exercise 5.2. Carry out division with remainder for the following pairs of
natural numbers: 773 and 337, 25 · 34 · 52 and 23 · 32 · 53, 232 −1 and 48 + 1.
Remark 5.3. Division with remainder is the basis of the decimal representation
of natural numbers.
If n ∈N, n ̸= 0, then there exists a maximal ℓ∈N such that
n = qℓ· 10ℓ+ rℓ
with uniquely determined natural numbers 1 ≤qℓ≤9 and 0 ≤rℓ< 10ℓ.
Treating the “remainder” rℓin the same manner, one eventually arrives at
the representation
n = qℓ· 10ℓ+ qℓ−1 · 10ℓ−1 + ··· + q1 · 101 + q0 · 100
with natural numbers 0 ≤qj ≤9 (j = 0,...,ℓ) and qℓ̸= 0. This leads to the
decimal representation of the natural number n as the sequence of digits
n = qℓqℓ−1 ...q1q0.
Exercise 5.4. Can this procedure be carried out for natural numbers g > 0
other than 10?

32
I The Natural Numbers
A.
Prime Numbers: Facts and Conjectures
In this closing section, we present some interesting recent developments re-
garding one of the topics of this chapter, namely the prime numbers. We will
exhibit a selection of deep results and unsolved conjectures.
A.1
Formulas for Prime Numbers
By Euclid’s theorem, Theorem 2.10, we know that there are inﬁnitely many
prime numbers. It would be nice if we could ﬁnd a “formula” for primes.
The Mersenne primes and Fermat primes introduced in Example 2.14 of-
fer such a formula only to a small extent. On the one hand, not all prime
numbers are included, since, for example, the primes 11 and 13 are neither
Mersenne primes nor Fermat primes. On the other hand, it remains an open
question whether there are inﬁnitely many Mersenne or Fermat primes.
An astounding result achieved in the 1970s by the Russian mathematician
Yuri Matiyasevich is that there exists a polynomial of several variables with
integer coefﬁcients that generates all the prime numbers [6]. However, the
polynomial was not given explicitly. Later, James Jones, Daihachiro Sato,
Hideo Wada, und Douglas Wiens constructed the following polynomial in
the 26 variables A,B,...,Y,Z,
P(A,B,...,Y,Z) := (K + 2)
×
 1 −[WZ + H + J −Q]2 −[(GK + 2G + K + 1) · (H + J) + H −Z]2
−[16(K + 1)3(K + 2)(N + 1)2 + 1 −F2]2 −[2N + P + Q + Z −E]2
−[E3(E + 2)(A + 1)2 + 1 −O2]2 −[(A2 −1)Y2 + 1 −X2]2
−[16R2Y4(A2 −1) + 1 −U2]2 −[N + L + V −Y]2
−[(A2 −1)L2 + 1 −M2]2 −[AI + K + 1 −L −I]2
−[((A + U2(U2 −A))2 −1)(N + 4DY)2 + 1 −(X + CU)2]2
−[P + L(A −N −1) + B(2AN + 2A −N2 −2N −2) −M]2
−[Q + Y(A −P −1) + S(2AP + 2A −P2 −2P −2) −X]2
−[Z + PL(A −P) + T(2AP −P2 −1) −PM]2
,
and proved the following theorem.
Theorem A.1 (Jones, Sato, Wada, Wiens [4]). For every prime number p, there
exist natural numbers a,b,...,y,z such that
p = P(a,b,...,y,z).
⊓⊔

A. Prime Numbers: Facts and Conjectures
33
From an epistemological point of view, this formula is quite interesting.
From a practical standpoint, however, it is not of immediate usefulness. If,
for example, we are searching for very large primes, then Mersenne primes
turn out to be very useful. The currently largest known prime number (as of
2016; see http://primes.utm.edu/largest.html) is
p = 274207281 −1.
It is a Mersenne prime with 22338618 digits. It begins thus:
300376418084606182052986098359166050056875863030
301484843941693345547723219067994296893655300772
688320448214882399426727835290700904836432218015
348199652241372287684310213386284573666361506667
532122772859359864057780256875647795865832142051
171109635844262936572650387240710147982631320437
143129112198392188761288503958771920355017186438...
To print the entire number in a normal font size would take about 6 200
sheets of typewriter paper.
We might add that the current state of research in this area leaves much
room for improvement, since there is to date no efﬁcient closed formula for
generating prime numbers.
A.2
Distribution of Primes
Since there does not seem to be a way of capturing the essence of prime
numbers through formulas, one can ask instead for the probability that a
randomly chosen natural number will turn out to be prime. To this end, we
deﬁne the prime-counting function.
Deﬁnition A.2. For a positive real number x (the real numbers will be de-
veloped systematically in Chapter IV), the prime-counting function π(x) is
deﬁned by
π(x) := #{p ∈P | p ≤x};
that is, π(x) gives the number of primes less than or equal to x.
The probability that a randomly selected natural number in the interval
[0,x] is prime is given by the quotient π(x)/x.
The function π(x) is a step function: whenever a new prime number ap-
pears, the value of the function increases by 1. In the interval 0 < x ≤100,
one can easily determine that there are 25 primes.

34
I The Natural Numbers
π(x)
Although at ﬁrst glance, this function appears to reﬂect an irregularity in the
prime numbers, when viewed on a larger scale, the function behaves quite
regularly. For example, in the interval 0 < x ≤1000, we get the following
graph:
π(x)
x/ log(x)
This impression of regularity is conﬁrmed by the prime number theorem,
which was conjectured in a rudimentary form by Gauss, though it did not
see a rigorous proof until the end of the nineteenth century, when the French
mathematician Jacques Hadamard and the Belgian mathematician Charles-
Jean de la Vallée Poussin gave independent proofs.
Theorem A.3 (Prime number theorem [2, 9]). As x →∞, we have the asymp-
totic relation
π(x) ∼
x
log(x) ;
that is, we have
lim
x→∞

π(x)
x/log(x)

= 1.
⊓⊔
This result can also be formulated as follows: we have

A. Prime Numbers: Facts and Conjectures
35
π(x) =
x
log(x) + R(x),
with a “remainder term” R(x) that as x →∞, grows more slowly than the
function x/log(x). The question then naturally arises how large the growth
of R(x) can be.
Conjecture (Remainder-term conjecture). As x →∞, the remainder term
R(x) satisﬁes the estimate
R(x) = O
 √
x log(x)

;
that is, there exists a positive constant C such that as x →∞, we have
|R(x)| ≤C√
xlog(x).
For example, in the interval 0 < x ≤1000, we have the following graph:
R(x)
√x log(x)/10
It seems at present that mathematicians are a long way from being able to
prove this estimate. The best estimates that one can prove right now are of
the form
R(x) = O

x · exp

−Dlog(x)3/5
as x →∞for some positive constant D, which go back to ideas of Ivan Vino-
gradov from the year 1958 [10].
A.3
Prime Gaps and Twin Primes
A prime gap describes the distance between two successive prime num-
bers. By the prime number theorem, we know that there are approximately
x/log(x) prime numbers less than x. Therefore, the average gap between
prime numbers less than x is about log(x). This observation must be consid-
ered in the light of the following two extreme cases.

36
I The Natural Numbers
The ﬁrst is that it can be shown that there are arbitrarily large prime gaps.
To see this, let k ∈N. We shall show that there exists a prime gap of length
at least k. Let q denote the product of all prime numbers less than or equal
to k + 1. Then none of the k numbers
q + 2, ..., q + k + 1
is prime. We have thereby constructed a prime gap of length at least k.
The other extreme case has to do with the smallest possible gap between
odd prime numbers, namely a sole even number lying between two primes.
Such pairs are called twin primes. Here are a few simple examples of twin
primes:
(5,7),
(11,13),
(17,19),
(29,31).
Conjecture (Twin prime conjecture). There are inﬁnitely many twin primes.
This conjecture remains unproved. The largest known twin prime pair (as
of 2016; see http://primes.utm.edu/largest.html#twin) is
 3756801695685 · 2666669 −1,
3756801695685 · 2666669 + 1

.
We should not fail to mention here that in 2013, the Chinese-born American
mathematician Yitang Zhang achieved a breakthrough toward a proof of
the twin prime conjecture [12]. His result, as subsequently reﬁned by other
mathematicians, is that there are inﬁnitely many pairs of prime numbers
with a gap of length at most 272.
A.4
Riemann’s Zeta Function
A study of Riemann’s zeta function (after Georg Friedrich Bernhard Rie-
mann) will lead us to a formulation of the Riemann hypothesis, which
is equivalent to the remainder term conjecture. For this section, we refer
the reader to Riemann’s original work [8] as well as to Harold Edwards’s
book [1].
Deﬁnition A.4. For a real number s > 1, the Riemann zeta function is deﬁned
by the series
ζ(s) := 1 + 1
2s + 1
3s + 1
4s + 1
5s + ··· =
∞
∑
n=1
1
ns .
For s > 1, the function ζ(s) is inﬁnitely differentiable. The domain of def-
inition of ζ(s) can be extended to the ﬁeld C of complex numbers (we shall
study the complex numbers systematically in Chapter V), and it turns out

A. Prime Numbers: Facts and Conjectures
37
that for s ∈C with Re(s) > 1, ζ(s) is a holomorphic function (that is, it is
complex differentiable at every point of the indicated domain).
At s = 1, the function becomes the harmonic series, which is well known
to diverge, since for natural numbers N, one has, as N →∞, the relation
N
∑
n=1
1
n = log(N) + γ + O
 1
N

,
where γ is the Euler–Mascheroni constant, whose value is 0.5772156649....
For Re(s) > 1, the Riemann zeta function can also be written as an inﬁnite
product. It is called the Euler Product expansion of ζ(s), and it is given by
ζ(s) = ∏
p∈P
1
1 −p−s .
The validity of this product representation can be seen relatively easily as
follows. Since Re(s) > 1, we have for every prime p ∈P, the formula
1
1 −p−s =
∞
∑
m=0
1
pms = 1 + 1
ps + 1
p2s + ··· ,
obtained with the help of geometric series, which leads to
∏
p∈P
1
1 −p−s =

1 + 1
2s + 1
22s + ···

1 + 1
3s + 1
32s + ···

··· .
Multiplying out formally yields
∏
p∈P
1
1 −p−s = 1 + 1
2s + 1
3s +
1
(2 · 2)s + 1
5s +
1
(2 · 3)s + ··· .
In the numerators of the fractions on the right-hand side, every possible
product of prime powers appears exactly once. By the fundamental theorem
of arithmetic, Theorem 3.1, we know that each of these products is equal to
a positive natural number, which proves the asserted equality. It can even
be proved that the fundamental theorem of arithmetic is equivalent to the
validity of the Euler product development.
Moreover, we see from the divergence of the harmonic series and the ex-
istence of the Euler product development as s approaches 1 from the right
that there must be inﬁnitely many prime numbers. That is, we have obtained
an alternative proof of Theorem 2.10 of Euclid. In sum, we see that the Rie-
mann zeta function somehow encodes fundamental arithmetic properties of
the natural numbers.

38
I The Natural Numbers
To formulate the Riemann hypothesis, we begin by proving the theorem
that the Riemann zeta function ζ(s) can be deﬁned for an arbitrary complex
argument s. To illustrate this deep result, we shall go into the proof rather
extensively.
Theorem A.5. The Riemann zeta function ζ(s) has a meromorphic continuation
to the entire complex plane C. It is holomorphic for all s ∈C except for s = 1, where
it has a simple pole. Moreover, for all s ∈C, the zeta function satisﬁes the following
functional equation:
π−s/2 Γ
 s
2

ζ(s) = π−(1−s)/2 Γ
1 −s
2

ζ(1 −s).
Here Γ(s) is Euler’s gamma function, which is deﬁned for Re(s) > 0 by the formula
Γ(s) :=
∞
Z
0
e−x xs−1 dx.
Proof. We shall sketch the proof of this fundamental theorem. Using the
Poisson summation formula, we obtain for t > 0 the equality
∞
∑
k=−∞
e−πk2t = 1
√
t
∞
∑
k=−∞
e−πk2/t.
If we deﬁne the function Θ(t) by
Θ(t) :=
∞
∑
k=1
e−πk2t,
we obtain the identity
2Θ(t) + 1 = 1
√
t

2Θ
1
t

+ 1

,
and by rearranging terms,
Θ(t) = 1
√
t

Θ
1
t

+ 1
2

−1
2 .
(8)
If we replace s with s/2 in the deﬁnition of the gamma function and make
the substitution x 7→πn2x, we obtain
Γ
 s
2

= πs/2 ns
∞
Z
0
e−πn2x xs/2−1 dx.

A. Prime Numbers: Facts and Conjectures
39
If we solve this equation for 1/ns and sum over all positive natural numbers,
we obtain
∞
∑
n=1
1
ns =
πs/2
Γ(s/2)
∞
∑
n=1
∞
Z
0
e−πn2x xs/2−1 dx.
The rapid rate of decay of the exponential function implies the uniform con-
vergence of the integral on the right-hand side for n ∈N, n > 1. That allows
us to invert the order of summation and integration. Using the deﬁnition of
the function Θ(x), we obtain
ζ(s) =
πs/2
Γ(s/2)
∞
Z
0
Θ(x) xs/2−1 dx,
or
π−s/2 Γ
 s
2

ζ(s) =
1
Z
0
xs/2−1 Θ(x)dx +
∞
Z
1
xs/2−1 Θ(x)dx.
Application of (8) yields
π−s/2 Γ
 s
2

ζ(s) =
1
Z
0
xs/2−1
 1
√x Θ
 1
x

+
1
2√x −1
2

dx
+
∞
Z
1
xs/2−1 Θ(x)dx.
The substitution x 7→1/x and a short calculation give us
π−s/2 Γ
 s
2

ζ(s) =
1
s(s −1) +
∞
Z
1

x−s/2−1/2 + xs/2−1
Θ(x)dx.
(9)
The integral on the right-hand side converges for all s ∈C, since Θ(x) decays
exponentially as x →∞, while x−s/2−1/2 + xs/2−1 exhibits at most polyno-
mial growth as x →∞. The ﬁrst summand on the right-hand side has simple
poles at s = 0 and at s = 1. But since Γ(s) has a simple pole at s = 0, ζ(0) is
well deﬁned. We have obtained the desired meromorphic continuation of
ζ(s) to the entire complex plane C with ζ(s) holomorphic everywhere ex-
cept at s = 1, where it has a simple pole.
Using (9), we can see that the Riemann zeta function has a symmetry with
respect to the transformation s 7→1 −s, for we have

40
I The Natural Numbers
π−(1−s)/2 Γ
1 −s
2

ζ(1 −s)
=
1
(1 −s)((1 −s) −1) +
∞
Z
1

x−(1−s)/2−1/2 + x(1−s)/2−1
Θ(x)dx
=
1
s(s −1) +
∞
Z
1

x−s/2−1/2 + xs/2−1
Θ(x)dx.
With (9), we obtain the asserted functional equation
π−s/2 Γ
 s
2

ζ(s) = π−(1−s)/2 Γ
1 −s
2

ζ(1 −s),
which ends our proof sketch.
⊓⊔
With the help of (9) and the fact that the gamma function has poles at
s = 0,−1,−2,..., we see at once that ζ(s) has zeros at s = −2,−4,−6,...,
called the trivial zeros of the Riemann zeta function. The Riemann hypothe-
sis concerns the further zeros of ζ(s), which we discuss next. From the func-
tional equation of the Riemann zeta function, we obtain, using our knowl-
edge of the gamma function, that the behavior of ζ(s) for Re(s) < 0 can be
derived from the known behavior of ζ(s) for Re(s) > 1. What is left is the
behavior of ζ(s) in the strip 0 ≤Re(s) ≤1, which is therefore known as the
critical strip. The line deﬁned by the equation Re(s) = 1/2 plays a special
role under the transformation s 7→1 −s, since it remains invariant.
Conjecture (Riemann hypothesis). Aside from the trivial zeros of the Riemann
zeta function ζ(s), namely those located at s = −2,−4,−6,..., all the remaining
zeros, the nontrivial zeros, lie on the critical line Re(s) = 1/2.
|ζ(1/2 + it)|
About 10 trillion nontrivial zeros of the Riemann zeta function have been
calculated numerically, and all of them lie on the critical line Re(s) = 1/2.
In fact, it is known that inﬁnitely many zeros of the Riemann zeta function

A. Prime Numbers: Facts and Conjectures
41
lie on the critical line. For example, the locations of the zeros of the function
|ζ(1/2 + it)| in the range 0 ≤t ≤100 are shown in the preceding graph.
The Riemann hypothesis remains to this day an open problem, and it is
one of the most important, if not the most important, conjectures in num-
ber theory. It is one of the six remaining unsolved Millennium Problems.
Its proof would have a host of implications. In particular, the vast number
of theorems that have been proved conditionally on the validity of the Rie-
mann hypothesis would at once become unconditional proofs.
A weak form of the Riemann hypothesis is given by the Lindelöf hypoth-
esis (after Ernst Leonard Lindelöf), which also has deﬁed all attempts at
proof.
Conjecture (Lindelöf hypothesis [5]). For every ε > 0, we have the following
estimate for t ≫1:
ζ
1
2 + it

= o
 tε
.
Ralf Backlund a doctoral student of Ernst Lindelöf, showed that the Lin-
delöf hypothesis is equivalent to the statment
#

s ∈C | ζ(s) = 0, Re(s) ≥1/2 + ε, T ≤Im(s) ≤T + 1
	 = o(log(T)).
All that is known as of today is that the last quantity above is bounded by
O(log(T)) for T ≫1.
A.5
The Goldbach Conjecture
By the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, Theorem 3.1, the prime numbers
are the multiplicative building blocks of the natural numbers. If we now
bring into play the other fundamental operation on the natural numbers,
namely addition, there arise numerous questions that are not always easy
to answer. One of the most famous problems of this sort goes back to a 1742
exchange of letters between Christian Goldbach and Leonhard Euler, where
the question was raised whether it is possible to express every natural num-
ber greater than 5 as a sum of three primes. The following equivalent form
is known as the Goldbach conjecture.
Conjecture (Goldbach conjecture). Every even number greater than 2 can be
written as the sum of two primes.
This conjecture remains to this day only a conjecture, having withstood
numerous attempts to prove it. Nonetheless, some progress has been made
in the course of trying to prove the full conjecture. It is known, for example,

42
I The Natural Numbers
that every natural number greater than 6 can be written as the sum of dis-
tinct primes. A breakthrough was obtained by the Peruvian mathematician
Harald Helfgott, who in 2013 announced a proof of the following weaker
conjecture, known as the ternary Goldbach conjecture [3].
Conjecture (Ternary Goldbach conjecture). Every odd number greater than 5
can be written as the sum of three primes.
For his proof, Helfgott used the fact that it was already known that
the ternary Goldbach conjecture is true for all odd numbers greater than
2 · 101346. Then, with the help of computers, he was able to verify the con-
jecture for odd numbers less than 1027. The proof was then reduced to es-
tablishing the conjecture for odd numbers in the interval between those two
numbers. Helfgott was able to do this using methods of analytic number
theory, namely a reﬁnement of the circle method, which goes back to God-
frey Harold Hardy, John Littlewood, and Ivan Vinogradov.
With this, we complete our brief tour of questions surrounding the prime
numbers. For more on primes, we refer the interested reader to the vast lit-
erature on the subject. A good introduction can be found in the book [7], by
Paulo Ribenboim, and the review article [11] by Don Zagier.
References
[1] H. M. Edwards: Riemann’s zeta function. Dover, New York, 2001.
[2] J. Hadamard: Sur la distribution des zéros de la fonction ζ(s) et ses conséquences
arithmétiques. Bull. Soc. Math. de France 24 (1896), 199–220.
[3] H. A. Helfgott: The ternary Goldbach conjecture is true. Preprint, December 30,
2013. Available online at arXiv:1312.7748.
[4] J. Jones, D. Sato, H. Wada, D. Wiens: Diophantine representation of the set of prime
numbers. Amer. Math. Monthly 83 (1976), 449–464.
[5] E. Lindelöf: Le calcul des résidus et ses applications dans la théorie des fonctions.
Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1905.
[6] Y. Matiyasevich: A Diophantine representation of the set of prime numbers. Dokl.
Akad. Nauk. SSSR 196 (1971), 770–773. English translation by R. N. Goss in
Soviet Math. Dokl. 12 (1971), 249–254.
[7] P. Ribenboim: The little book of bigger primes. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New
York, 2004.
[8] B. Riemann: Ueber die Anzahl der Primzahlen unter einer gegebenen Grösse.
Monatsberichte der Königlichen Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften
zu Berlin aus dem Jahre 1859 (1860), 671–680. In: Gesammelte Werke, Teub-
ner, Leipzig, 1892. English translation by David R. Wilkins available online at
www.claymath.org/sites/default/files/ezeta.pdf.
[9] C.-J. de la Vallée Poussin: Recherches analytiques de la théorie des nombres premiers.
Ann. Soc. Scient. Bruxelles 20 (1896), 183–256.
[10] I. M. Vinogradov: A new estimate of the function ζ(1 + it). Izv. Akad. Nauk. SSSR
Ser. Mat. 22 (1958), 161–164.

A. Prime Numbers: Facts and Conjectures
43
[11] D. Zagier: The ﬁrst 50 million prime numbers. Math. Intel. 0 (1977), 221–224.
[12] Y. Zhang: Bounded gaps between primes. Ann. of Math. (2) 179 (2014), 1121–1174.

II
The Integers
1.
Semigroups and Monoids
In Chapter I, we learned about the natural numbers with the operations of
addition and multiplication. We may think about addition and multiplica-
tion as processes whereby we take two natural numbers m1,m2 and form
another natural number, namely the sum m1 + m2 or the product m1 · m2.
We may formalize this idea by saying that the set of natural numbers has de-
ﬁned on it the operations + and · that assign to two natural numbers m1,m2
the respective natural numbers m1 + m2 and m1 · m2. If we let N × N de-
note the set of all ordered pairs of natural numbers, called the Cartesian
product of N with itself, we may consider the operations of addition and
multiplication to be mappings from N × N to N given by the assignments
(m1,m2) 7→m1 + m2 and (m1, m2) 7→m1 · m2.
In what follows, we shall investigate the idea of a nonempty set M on
which an operation ◦M is deﬁned. In this case, we have a mapping from
M × M to M given by the assignment (m1,m2) 7→m1 ◦M m2.
Generalizing the associativity of addition and multiplication of natural
numbers, we call an operation ◦M on a set M associative if for all elements
m1,m2,m3 of M, we have
(m1 ◦M m2) ◦M m3 = m1 ◦M (m2 ◦M m3).
If we are given an associative operation ◦M on M, we can perform the op-
eration on three elements m1,m2,m3 either by operating on the ﬁrst two and
then operating on that result with the third, or by operating on the last two
and then operating on the ﬁrst with that result. We may therefore write sim-
ply m1 ◦M m2 ◦M m3.
Deﬁnition 1.1. A nonempty set H with an associative operation ◦H is called
a semigroup.
For such a semigroup, we write (H,◦H). If the context makes clear the
connection with H, we may write simply (H,◦). If it is clear that we are
dealing with a semigroup, we may suppress reference to the operation and
write simply H.
Example 1.2.
(i) The natural numbers N with addition and with multi-
plication forms the semigroups (N,+) and (N,·).
(ii) Let A be an arbitrary nonempty set. On the set
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69429-0_2
J. Kramer and A.-M. von Pippich, From Natural Numbers to Quaternions, 

46
II The Integers
map(A) := { f | f : A −→A}
of all mappings of A to itself, we deﬁne the operation ◦of composition
of mappings, which is well known to be associative. With this operation,
 map(A),◦

is a semigroup.
(iii) Let n be a nonzero natural number. Consider the subset
Rn := {0,...,n −1}
of the natural numbers comprising the ﬁrst n natural numbers. On the set
Rn, we can deﬁne two operations. Let us denote by Rn(c) the remainder
resulting from the division of a natural number c by n; that this number is
uniquely determined is guaranteed by Theorem 5.1 of Chapter I. We observe
that we have Rn(c) ∈Rn. For two numbers a,b ∈Rn, we now deﬁne the
mappings
⊕: Rn × Rn −→Rn, deﬁned by a ⊕b := Rn(a + b),
(1)
⊙: Rn × Rn −→Rn, deﬁned by a ⊙b := Rn(a · b).
(2)
We leave it as an exercise for the reader to verify that the operations ⊕and ⊙
are associative (the associativity is derived from the associativity of addition
and multiplication on the set of natural numbers). We thereby obtain two
semigroups, (Rn,⊕) and (Rn,⊙).
Exercise 1.3. Verify that the operations ⊕and ⊙from Example 1.2 (iii) are
associative.
Exercise 1.4.
(a) Prove that the natural numbers with addition and with multiplication
form semigroups, while for the odd natural numbers, a semigroup arises
only under multiplication.
(b) Find other proper subsets of the natural numbers N that form semi-
groups under addition or multiplication.
Exercise 1.5. Does the set N of natural numbers under the operation of ex-
ponentiation,
n ◦m := nm
(m, n ∈N),
form a semigroup?
Deﬁnition 1.6. A semigroup (H,◦) is said to be commutative, or abelian, if
for all elements h1,h2 ∈H, we have
h1 ◦h2 = h2 ◦h1.
The term abelian is in honor of the Norwegian mathematician Niels Henrik
Abel.

1. Semigroups and Monoids
47
Example 1.7. The examples of semigroups (i) and (iii) above are both abelian.
Example (ii) exhibits a semigroup that is in general nonabelian.
Exercise 1.8. Find two sets A1 and A2 such that (map(A1),◦) is an abelian
semigroup but (map(A2), ◦) is a nonabelian semigroup.
A modest generalization of the notion of semigroup leads to the concept
of a monoid.
Deﬁnition 1.9. A monoid is a semigroup (H,◦) that contains an identity ele-
ment e with respect to the operation ◦, that is, an element such that
e ◦h = h = h ◦e
for every h ∈H.
Lemma 1.10. The identity element e of a monoid (H,◦) is uniquely determined.
Proof. Let e,e′ be identity elements of the monoid (H,◦). By applying the
identity element e, we obtain the equality
e ◦e′ = e′ = e′ ◦e.
(3)
If we now bring the identity element e′ into play, we obtain
e′ ◦e = e = e ◦e′.
(4)
From equalities (3) and (4), we obtain at once the equality
e′ = e′ ◦e = e.
This proves the uniqueness of the identity element.
⊓⊔
Remark 1.11. We can reﬁne Deﬁnition 1.9 of a monoid by requiring only the
existence of a left identity element eℓ(or right identity element er), which would
satisfy the respective conditions
eℓ◦h = h
and
h ◦er = h
for all h ∈H. However, it is easily shown that the left identity element is
equal to the right identity element. We call such an element simply the iden-
tity element. With the preceding lemma, we can see that H has exactly one
left identity element and one right identity element and that those two ele-
ments coincide.
Exercise 1.12. Let (H,◦) be a semigroup and eℓa left identity element and er
a right identity element in H. Show that then eℓ= er.

48
II The Integers
Example 1.13. The examples of semigroups from Example 1.2 are all exam-
ples of monoids:
(i) The identity element of N with respect to addition is 0; the identity
element of N with respect to multiplication is 1.
(ii) The identity element of
 map(A), ◦

is the identity mapping idA :
A −→A, which maps every element a ∈A to itself.
(iii) The identity element of Rn with respect to ⊕is 0; the identity ele-
ment of Rn with respect to ⊙is 1.
Exercise 1.14.
(a) Show that the even natural numbers form a monoid under addition, but
only a semigroup under multiplication.
(b) Find other examples of semigroups that are not monoids.
2.
Groups and Subgroups
We begin with the important deﬁnition of a group.
Deﬁnition 2.1. A monoid (G,◦) with identity element e is called a group if
for every g ∈G, there exists an element g′ ∈G such that
g′ ◦g = e = g ◦g′.
Such an element g′ is called an inverse element to g or simply an inverse of g.
Remark 2.2. In analogy to the uniqueness of the identity element of a monoid,
one can show that the inverse g′ of an element g of a group G is uniquely
determined. We may therefore speak of the inverse g′ of g ∈G. The usual
notation for the inverse g′ of g ∈G is g−1.
One can also reﬁne Deﬁnition 2.1 of a group by requiring only the exis-
tence of a left inverse g′
ℓ(or a right inverse g′
r) for every g ∈G, satisfying the
respective conditions
g′
ℓ◦g = e
(or g ◦g′
r = e).
But as before, it can be shown that if there is a left inverse, then there is also a
right inverse, and they are equal. Such an element is called simply an inverse
element. We can then state that for every g ∈G, there exists precisely one left
inverse and one right inverse in G and that those two elements coincide.
Exercise 2.3.
(a) Prove that the inverse g−1 of an element g of a group (G,◦) is uniquely
determined.
(b) Let (G,◦) be a group, g ∈G, g′
ℓa left inverse, and g′
r a right inverse of g.
Show that g′
ℓ= g′
r.

2. Groups and Subgroups
49
With the knowledge of the uniqueness of the identity element and in-
verses, we may state the deﬁnition of a group as follows.
Deﬁnition 2.4. A group (G,◦) consists of a nonempty set G together with
an associative operation ◦such that the following two properties are satis-
ﬁed:
(i)
There exists a unique element e ∈G such that
e ◦g = g = g ◦e
for all g ∈G. The element e is the identity element of G.
(ii)
For each g ∈G, there exists a uniquely determined element g−1 ∈G
such that
g−1 ◦g = e = g ◦g−1.
The element g−1 is the inverse element to g.
Remark 2.5. For a group (G,◦) with identity element e and n ∈N, we intro-
duce the following useful exponential notation for the n-fold operation of
an element g ∈G on itself:
gn := g ◦··· ◦g
|
{z
}
n times
and g0 := e.
(5)
Exercise 2.6. Show that in the terminology of Remark 2.5, we have the fol-
lowing rules of calculation:
(a) (g−1)−1 = g for all g ∈G.
(b) (g ◦h)−1 = h−1 ◦g−1 for all g,h ∈G.
(c) gn ◦gm = gn+m for all g ∈G and n,m ∈N.
(d) (gn)m = gn·m for all g ∈G and n,m ∈N.
Deﬁnition 2.7. A group (G,◦) is called commutative or abelian if for all ele-
ments g1,g2 ∈G, we have
g1 ◦g2 = g2 ◦g1.
Example 2.8.
(i) (G,◦) = (N,+) is not a group, since for no nonzero ele-
ment n ∈N does there exist a natural number n′ that satisﬁes the equation
n′ + n = 0 = n + n′. That is, the nonzero natural numbers do not have (ad-
ditive) inverses.
(ii) (G,◦) = (Rn, ⊕) is a commutative group. If a ∈Rn, a ̸= 0, then the
inverse to a is given by the difference n −a, where we note that indeed,
n −a ∈Rn.
The semigroup (G,◦) = (Rn,⊙), on the other hand, is never a group, since
the element 0 has no inverse. But even if we remove the zero element and
consider the semigroup (Rn \ {0}, ⊙), it is still not, in general, a group. If,

50
II The Integers
for example, we consider the case n = 4, then the element 2 ∈R4 has no
inverse, for we have
2 ⊙0 = 0,
2 ⊙1 = 2,
2 ⊙2 = 0,
2 ⊙3 = 2,
and so there is no a ∈R4 such that 2 ⊙a = 1. If, however, we select a prime
p ∈P, then it turns out that (Rp \ {0}, ⊙) is a group.
(iii) Our next example of a group, the dihedral group, arises from geom-
etry. Let n ∈N be a nonzero natural number. For n ≥3, let D2n denote the
set of all isometries of the Euclidean plane that map a regular n-gon to itself.
The elements of D2n are the rotations dj through the angle 360◦· j/n about
the center M of the n-gon as well as the reﬂections sj in the medians Sj when
n is odd, and when n is even, the reﬂections sj in the diagonals and the per-
pendicular bisectors Sj of the n-gon. In both the even and odd cases, we let
the index j run from 0 to n −1. Since the elements of D2n are mappings, it
makes sense to consider composition of mappings ◦as the operation. With
this operation, D2n becomes a monoid with identity element d0. Since each
reﬂection sj ∈D2n can be written in the form sj = dj ◦s0 with suitable nu-
meration, we see that D2n consists of the following 2n elements:
D2n = {d0, d1,..., dn−1, d0 ◦s0, d1 ◦s0,..., dn−1 ◦s0}.
M
d1
s4
s3
s2
s1
s0
Fig. 1. Isometries of the regular pentagon.
Since every one of these elements obviously has an inverse (isometries of
the plane are, after all, bijections), all the properties of a group are satisﬁed.
We observe that the dihedral group (D2n, ◦) for n ≥3 is nonabelian, since,
for example, s0 ◦d1 = d−1
1
◦s0.
For the cases n = 1,2, we deﬁne the dihedral group analogously as follows:

2. Groups and Subgroups
51
D2 := {d0,s0} and D4 := {d0,d1,s0,d1 ◦s0}. We may interpret D2 and D4 as
symmetry groups of the following 1-gon and 2-gon respectively:
Fig. 2. The 1-gon and 2-gon.
For n = 1,2, the dihedral group (D2n,◦) is abelian.
(iv) As our last example, we consider a combinatorially based example
of a group, the nth symmetric group:
Sn =

π
π : {1,..., n} −→{1,...,n} and π is bijective
	
.
The elements of Sn can be written in the convenient form
π =
 1
2 ··· n
π1 π2 ··· πn

,
where πj := π(j) for 1 ≤j ≤n. For the associative operation on Sn, we again
choose composition of mappings; that is, for π,σ ∈Sn, we have
π ◦σ :=
 1 2 ··· n
τ1 τ2 ··· τn

,
with τj := π
 σ(j)

for 1 ≤j ≤n. The identity element is the identity per-
mutation, given by the identity mapping on the set {1,...,n}. Furthermore,
the existence of the inverse of a permutation is guaranteed by the fact that
every bijective mapping π : {1,..., n} −→{1,..., n} has an inverse mapping
π−1. Under this operation, the set (Sn, ◦) forms a group, which for n ≥3 is
nonabelian.
Exercise 2.9. (Cayley tables). For a ﬁnite group, the result of the group oper-
ation on pairs of elements can be displayed in a Cayley table, named for the
British mathematician Arthur Cayley, in which the elements of the group are
listed in the ﬁrst row and ﬁrst column of a table, and the remaining ﬁelds
are ﬁlled in with the result of the group operation. For example, the Cayley
table for (R2, ⊕) is as follows:
⊕0 1
0 0 1
1 1 0
Fig. 3. Cayley table for the group (R2, ⊕)

52
II The Integers
Draw the Cayley tables for (R4, ⊕), (R5 \ {0}, ⊙), (R6, ⊕), (D4, ◦), and
(D6, ◦), as well as for (S2, ◦) and (S3, ◦). What similarities and differences
do you notice?
Exercise 2.10.
(a) For the prime numbers p = 3 and p = 5, verify the assertion of Exam-
ple 2.8 (ii) that (Rp \ {0}, ⊙) is a group.
(b) Verify in detail the assertions of Example 2.8 (iii) regarding the dihedral
group (D2n, ◦).
(c) Think about why the symmetric group (Sn, ◦) from Example 2.8 (iv) is
nonabelian for all natural numbers n ≥3.
Deﬁnition 2.11. Let (G,◦) be a group. The cardinality of the set G underly-
ing the group is called the order of G and is denoted by |G|. If the order of G
is inﬁnite, we write |G| := ∞.
Example 2.12. For the groups in Example 2.8 (ii) and (iii), we have
|Rn| = n
and
|D2n| = 2n.
Exercise 2.13. Show that for the symmetric group (Sn, ◦), we have
|Sn| = n!.
Here n! for n ∈N is the factorial function, deﬁned inductively as follows:
0! := 1, (n∗)! := n∗· n!.
Deﬁnition 2.14. A group (G,◦) is said to be cyclic if there exists an element
g ∈G such that
G = {..., (g−1)2, g−1, g0 = e, g1 = g, g2,...}.
In such a case, we write G = ⟨g⟩and say that g generates the group G.
Example 2.15. The group (Rn, ⊕) is generated by the element 1, that is, we
have (Rn, ⊕) = ⟨1⟩, since every a ∈Rn can be represented in the form
a = 1 ⊕··· ⊕1
|
{z
}
a times
.
Remark 2.16. Let G = ⟨g⟩be a cyclic group of order n < ∞. Then we have
G = ⟨g⟩= {e, g, g2,..., gn−1}.
This shows in particular that gn = e, gn+1 = g, etc.

2. Groups and Subgroups
53
Deﬁnition 2.17. Let (G,◦) be a group with identity element e and let g be
an arbitrary element of G. The smallest nonzero natural number n such that
gn = e is called the order of g and is denoted by ordG(g). If there is no such
n ∈N, then the order of g is said to be inﬁnite, that is, ordG(g) := ∞.
If the group to which the order of g refers is clear from context, then we
write simply ord(g).
Example 2.18. We present here as an example the orders of the elements of
the four-element group (R4, ⊕):
ord(0) = 1,
ord(1) = 4,
ord(2) = 2,
ord(3) = 4.
Exercise 2.19. Determine the orders of all elements of the group S3.
Remark 2.20. Let G = ⟨g⟩be a cyclic group of order n < ∞. Then ordG(g) = n.
Deﬁnition 2.21. Let (G,◦) be a group. A subset U ⊆G is called a subgroup
of G if the restriction ◦|U of the operation ◦to U deﬁnes a group structure on
U, that is, if (U, ◦|U) is itself a group. We express this relationship by writing
U ≤G.
Example 2.22. Let m, n be natural numbers with m ≤n. Then the mth sym-
metric group Sm is a subgroup of the nth symmetric group Sn if we identify
a permutation in Sm with the corresponding permutation of Sn that leaves
m + 1,...,n ﬁxed. That is, Sm ≤Sn.
Exercise 2.23. Show that the rotations {d0,..., dn−1} form a cyclic subgroup
of the dihedral group D2n.
Remark 2.24. Let (G,◦) be a group, and U a subgroup of G. The identity
element e of G is also the identity element of U. If h is an element of U, then
its inverse in U is given by the inverse of h in G, that is, by h−1, since
h ◦|Uh−1 = h ◦h−1 = e.
Lemma 2.25 (Subgroup criterion). Let (G,◦) be a group and U ⊆G a nonempty
subset. Then we have the equivalence
U ≤G
⇐⇒
h1 ◦h−1
2
∈U
∀h1, h2 ∈U.
Proof. (i) Suppose ﬁrst that U is a subgroup of G. We must then show that
for all h1, h2 ∈U, we have the inclusion h1 ◦h−1
2
∈U. But that is easy, since
if h2 ∈U, then we also have h−1
2
∈U, and by applying the group operation
to h1 ∈U, we at once obtain h1 ◦h−1
2
∈U.
(ii) Now suppose that conversely, h1 ◦h−1
2
∈U for all h1, h2 ∈U. Since U
is nonempty, there is at least one element h ∈U, for which we then have

54
II The Integers
e = h ◦h−1 ∈U. That is, U contains the identity element. If h′ is an arbitrary
element of U, we see that
h′−1 = e ◦h′−1 ∈U.
That is, h′ ∈U implies that h′−1 ∈U. Finally, let h1 and h2 be arbitrary ele-
ments of U. We must convince ourselves that the element h1 ◦h2 is also in U.
We recall that h2 ∈U implies h−1
2
∈U. Using rule (a) from Exercise 2.6, we
obtain
h1 ◦h2 = h1 ◦
 h−1
2
−1 ∈U.
We conclude that ◦is an associative operation deﬁned on U and that (U, ◦)
satisﬁes all the group axioms. This completes the proof that U is a subgroup
of G.
⊓⊔
Exercise 2.26. Find all subgroups of the group S3. Which of these are cyclic
groups?
3.
Group Homomorphisms
In this section, we are going to compare groups using mappings that respect
the group operation. The ﬁrst thing, then, is to explain what is meant by
preserving the group operation, or group structure.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Let (G, ◦G) and (H, ◦H) be groups. A mapping
f : (G, ◦G) −→(H, ◦H)
is called a group homomorphism if for all g1, g2 ∈G, we have the equality
f (g1 ◦G g2) = f (g1) ◦H f (g2).
The signiﬁcance of a homomorphism is, then, that the image under f of the
composition of two elements g1 and g2 in G is equal to the composition of
the images under f of g1 and g2 in H. We sometimes say that the mapping
f preserves the group structure.
A bijective (that is, both injective and surjective) group homomorphism is
called a group isomorphism. If f : (G, ◦G) −→(H, ◦H) is a group isomorphism,
we say that the groups G and H are isomorphic, and we write G ∼= H.
Example 3.2. Consider the dihedral group G = D6 and the symmetric group
H = S3. The dihedral group D6 consists of all symmetries of an equilateral
triangle △. Let us denote the vertices of △in counterclockwise order by the
natural numbers 1, 2, 3. If we choose one of the symmetry mappings g ∈D6
and allow it to act on △, the result is a permutation π of the set {1, 2, 3}. The
assignment g 7→π thereby induces a mapping

3. Group Homomorphisms
55
f : D6 −→S3.
If we consider all possible compositions of symmetries and their images un-
der f and compare them with the corresponding compositions of permuta-
tions, we see that f is a group homomorphism.
Exercise 3.3. Is this mapping also a group isomorphism?
Deﬁnition 3.4. Let (G, ◦G) be a group with identity element eG, and let
(H, ◦H) be a group with identity element eH. Furthermore, let f : (G, ◦G) −→
(H, ◦H) be a group homomorphism. Then
ker( f ) := {g ∈G | f (g) = eH}
is called the kernel of f, and
im( f ) := {h ∈H | ∃g ∈G : h = f (g)}
is called the image of f.
Exercise 3.5. Let D2n be the dihedral group from Example 2.8 (iii). In that
example, we noted that every element can be expressed uniquely in the
form dj ◦sk
0 with j ∈{0,..., n −1} and k ∈{0, 1}. Show that the mapping
sgn : (D2n, ◦) −→(R2, ⊕), given by the assignment dj ◦sk
0 7→k, is a group
homomorphism, and determine the kernel and image of sgn.
Lemma 3.6. Let f : (G, ◦G) −→(H, ◦H) be a group homomorphism. Then we
have the following:
(i)
f is injective if and only if ker( f ) = {eG}.
(ii)
f is surjective if and only if im( f ) = H.
Proof. (i) By deﬁnition, the mapping f is injective if and only if for all
g1,g2 ∈G,
f (g1) = f (g2)
(6)
implies that g1 and g2 are equal. We therefore take equality (6) and transform
it by means of the group homomorphism property of f into the equivalent
form
f (g1) ◦H
 f (g2)
−1 = eH
⇐⇒
f (g1) ◦H f (g−1
2 ) = eH.
Applying again the group homomorphism property of f yields f (g1 ◦G
g−1
2 ) = eH, that is, g1 ◦G g−1
2
∈ker( f ). Finally, the equivalence
g1 ◦G g−1
2
= eG
⇐⇒
g1 = g2
shows that we have ker( f ) = {eG} if and only if g1 = g2, that is, if and only
if f is injective.

56
II The Integers
(ii) The proof of this assertion is obvious, since the surjectivity of f means
precisely that every element of H is the image of some element of G under
the mapping f.
⊓⊔
Exercise 3.7. Let f : (G, ◦) −→(G, ◦) be a group homomorphism and as-
sume that |G| < ∞. Prove the equivalence
ker( f ) = {eG}
⇐⇒
f is a group isomorphism.
Exercise 3.8. Let f : (G, ◦G) −→(H, ◦H) be a group homomorphism. Show
that for every element g ∈G, we have ordG(g) ≥ordH
 f (g)

.
Exercise 3.9. Does there exist a group isomorphism between D24 and S4?
Lemma 3.10. Let f : (G, ◦G) −→(H, ◦H) be a group homomorphism. Then
ker( f ) is a subgroup of G, and im( f ) is a subgroup of H.
Proof. We begin with the proof that ker( f ) is a subgroup of G. We ﬁrst ob-
serve that because we have f (eG) = eH, that is, eG ∈ker( f ), the kernel of f is
nonempty. We now apply the subgroup criterion (Lemma 2.25). To this end,
we choose g1, g2 ∈ker( f ) and must show that g1 ◦G g−1
2
∈ker( f ). But this
follows easily from the homomorphism property of f:
f (g1 ◦G g−1
2 ) = f (g1) ◦H f (g−1
2 ) = eH ◦H
 f (g2)
−1 = eH ◦H e−1
H = eH.
To prove the subgroup property of im( f ), we proceed analogously. Again,
since eH = f (eG), that is, eH ∈im( f ), the image of f is nonempty. We again
make use of the subgroup criterion and must establish for h1, h2 ∈im( f )
the relationship h1 ◦H h−1
2
∈im( f ). Since h1, h2 ∈im( f ), there exist g1, g2 ∈
G such that h1 = f (g1) and h2 = f (g2). Again using the homomorphism
property of f yields
h1 ◦H h−1
2
= f (g1) ◦H
 f (g2)
−1 = f (g1) ◦H f (g−1
2 ) = f (g1 ◦G g−1
2 );
that is, the element h1 ◦H h−1
2
is the image of the element g1 ◦G g−1
2 . This
completes the proof of the lemma.
⊓⊔
Exercise 3.11.
(a) Find all group homomorphisms f : (R4, ⊕) −→(R4, ⊕).
(b) Let p be a prime number and n ∈N a natural number that is not divisible
by p. Find all group homomorphisms g : (Rp, ⊕) −→(Rn, ⊕).
Determine the image and kernel of each homomorphism.

4. Cosets and Normal Subgroups
57
4.
Cosets and Normal Subgroups
Before we introduce the notion of a coset (with respect to a subgroup), we
recall the deﬁnition of an equivalence relation.
Deﬁnition 4.1. Let M be a set. A (binary) relation ∼on M is called an equiv-
alence relation if the following three conditions are satisﬁed:
(i)
The relation ∼is reﬂexive, that is, for all m ∈M, we have m ∼m.
(ii)
The relation ∼is symmetric, that is, for all m1, m2 ∈M such that m1 ∼
m2, we have also m2 ∼m1.
(iii) The relation ∼is transitive, that is, for all m1, m2, m3 ∈M such that
m1 ∼m2 and m2 ∼m3, we have also m1 ∼m3.
Example 4.2. The equality “=” of elements of a set deﬁnes an equivalence
relation.
Exercise 4.3.
(a) Verify the assertion of Example 4.2.
(b) Is the order relation ≤on N an equivalence relation?
(c) Consider a relation ∼on the set of natural numbers N whereby m ∼n
if m is a power of n or n is a power of m. Determine whether ∼is an
equivalence relation.
Remark 4.4. Let M be a set equipped with an equivalence relation ∼. For
each m ∈M, we can construct the set
Mm := {m′ ∈M | m′ ∼m}.
The set Mm is called the equivalence class of m.
Lemma 4.5. Let M be a set equipped with an equivalence relation ∼. Then we
have the following:
(i)
Two equivalence classes in M are either disjoint or identical.
(ii)
The set M is the disjoint union of its equivalence classes. We indicate this by
writing
M =
˙[
m∈I
Mm,
where I ⊆M is a subset containing exactly one representative from each
equivalence class.
Proof. (i) Let m1, m2 ∈M be such that Mm1 ∩Mm2 ̸= ∅, where ∅is the stan-
dard notation for the empty set. We must show that Mm1 = Mm2. Since
Mm1 ∩Mm2 ̸= ∅, there exists m ∈Mm1 ∩Mm2; that is, we have m ∼m1
and m ∼m2, and therefore, by the symmetry and transitivity of the equiv-
alence relation ∼, we have m1 ∼m2, whence we have m1 ∈Mm2. It fol-
lows by another application of transitivity that we likewise have m′ ∈Mm2

58
II The Integers
for all m′ ∈Mm1. We see, then, that Mm1 ⊆Mm2. Interchanging the roles
of the equivalence classes Mm1 and Mm2, we obtain the reverse inclusion
Mm2 ⊆Mm1, from which follows the equality Mm1 = Mm2.
(ii) To prove the second part of the assertion, we begin with the case that
M is a ﬁnite set. In this case, we can proceed constructively. If M is empty,
then there is nothing to prove. Otherwise, there exists m1 ∈M with its equiv-
alence class Mm1. The set-theoretic difference M \ Mm1 is now either empty,
that is, M = Mm1, or there exists m2 ∈M \ Mm1 with equivalence class Mm2.
We have now the two alternatives
M = Mm1 ˙∪Mm2
and
∃m3 ∈M \ (Mm1 ˙∪Mm2).
Since the set M is ﬁnite, this process must end after ﬁnitely many steps, say
k steps, and we obtain M as the disjoint union
M =
k[
j=1
Mmj.
Now that we have illustrated the proof in the case of ﬁnite sets, let us turn
our attention to the general situation. Since the equivalence class Mm asso-
ciated with m ∈M contains the element m, it is clear that M is the union of
all its equivalence classes. That is,
M =
[
m∈M
Mm.
This union, however, is not in general disjoint. By selecting a unique rep-
resentative of each equivalence class, we obtain a subset I ⊆M such that
for each m ∈I, the associated equivalence class Mm in the above union ap-
pears exactly once. The subset I is called a complete set of equivalence class
representatives. We thereby obtain the representation of M as the disjoint
union
M =
˙[
m∈I
Mm ,
as asserted.
⊓⊔
Exercise 4.6. Describe the equivalence classes of the equality relation “=”
from Example 4.2. Come up with other equivalence relations and determine
the associated equivalence classes.
We now introduce a particular equivalence relation on a group induced
by a subgroup.
Remark 4.7. Let (G,◦) be a group, and U ≤G a subgroup. We deﬁne on G
the relation

4. Cosets and Normal Subgroups
59
g1 ∼g2
⇐⇒
g−1
1
◦g2 ∈U
(g1, g2 ∈G).
We assert that this deﬁnes an equivalence relation on G. The reﬂexivity g ∼g
is immediate from the fact that g−1 ◦g = e ∈U. If g1 ∼g2, whence g−1
1
◦g2 ∈
U, it follows by taking inverses that
U ∋(g−1
1
◦g2)−1 = g−1
2
◦g1.
That is, g2 ∼g1, which proves symmetry. Finally, if we have g1 ∼g2 and
g2 ∼g3, whence g−1
1
◦g2 ∈U and g−1
2
◦g3 ∈U, it follows by composition
that
U ∋(g−1
1
◦g2) ◦(g−1
2
◦g3) = g−1
1
◦g3,
that is, g1 ∼g3, which establishes transitivity.
Deﬁnition 4.8. Let (G,◦) be a group, U ≤G a subgroup, and ∼the equiv-
alence relation from Remark 4.7. We call the equivalence class of g ∈G, that
is, the set of group elements
{g′ ∈G | g′ ∼g},
the left coset of g with respect to the subgroup U. From the equivalence
g′ ∼g
⇐⇒
g−1 ◦g′ ∈U
⇐⇒
∃h ∈U : g′ = g ◦h,
we obtain
{g′ ∈G | g′ ∼g} = {g ◦h | h ∈U}.
We may therefore denote the left coset of g with respect to U simply by g ◦U.
Remark 4.9. Let (G,◦) be a group, U ≤G a subgroup, and ∼the equivalence
relation from Remark 4.7. Then using Lemma 4.5, we obtain a decomposi-
tion of G into disjoint left cosets; that is,
G = ˙[
g∈I
g ◦U,
where I ⊆G is a complete set of representatives of all left cosets with respect
to U.
Deﬁnition 4.10. Let (G,◦) be a group and U ≤G a subgroup. We denote
by G/U the set of all left cosets of elements of G with respect to U, that is,
G/U = {g ◦U | g ∈I},
where I ⊆G is a complete set of representatives of all left cosets with respect
to U.

60
II The Integers
Exercise 4.11. Let m, n be natural numbers with 1 ≤m ≤n. Find a complete
set of representatives of the set of left cosets Sn/Sm.
Exercise 4.12. From among the subgroups of S3 determined in Exercise 2.26,
choose a subgroup of order two and determine all left cosets of S3 with re-
spect to this subgroup.
Lemma 4.13. Let (G,◦) be a group, and U ≤G a subgroup. All left cosets of G
with respect to U have the same order as the subgroup U.
Proof. Let g ◦U be the left coset of g with respect to U, and consider the
mapping
ϕ : g ◦U −→U,
given by g ◦h 7→h (h ∈U). The assignment h 7→g ◦h clearly induces the
inverse mapping to ϕ, namely ϕ−1. We see, then, that ϕ is bijective, from
which it follows that g ◦U and U have the same order. That is, we have the
equality
|g ◦U| = |U|,
as asserted.
⊓⊔
Theorem 4.14 (Lagrange’s theorem). Let (G,◦) be a ﬁnite group (that is, |G| <
∞), and let U ≤G be a subgroup. Then the order of U divides the order of G, that
is, |U| | |G|.
Proof. Since the group G is ﬁnite, it can be decomposed into ﬁnitely many
left cosets with respect to U. That is, we have a disjoint decomposition of the
form
G = (g1 ◦U) ˙∪··· ˙∪(gk ◦U).
Since the left cosets gj ◦U (j = 1,...,k) are mutually disjoint and each of their
orders is equal to |U| by Lemma 4.13, we obtain
|G| =
k
∑
j=1
|gj ◦U| = k · |U|.
This completes the proof of the theorem.
⊓⊔
Exercise 4.15.
(a) Derive from Lagrange’s theorem the fact that in a ﬁnite group, the order
of each element is a divisor of the order of the group.
(b) Conclude from part (a) that a group whose order is a prime number
must be cyclic.
(c) Determine all possible groups of orders 4 and 6 up to isomorphism.

4. Cosets and Normal Subgroups
61
Deﬁnition 4.16. Let (G,◦) be a group, and U ≤G a subgroup. The order of
G/U is called the index of U in G and is denoted by [G : U].
Remark 4.17. If (G,◦) is a ﬁnite group and U ≤G a subgroup, it follows from
the proof of Lagrange’s theorem that the order of G is equal to the product
of the order of U and the index of U in G. That is, we have
|G| = [G : U] · |U|.
In analogy to the left cosets, we can, of course, construct the set of right
cosets.
Remark 4.18. Let (G,◦) be a group, and U ≤G a subgroup. We deﬁne on G
the additional relation
g1 ∼r g2
⇐⇒
g1 ◦g−1
2
∈U
(g1, g2 ∈G).
We leave it as an exercise to the reader to show that this deﬁnes an equiva-
lence relation on G. The equivalence class of g ∈G is called the right coset of
g with respect to U. This leads to the following:
{g′ ∈G | g′ ∼r g} = {h ◦g | h ∈U} =: U ◦g.
We have thus obtained a decomposition of G into disjoint right cosets; that
is,
G =
˙[
g∈Ir
U ◦g,
where Ir ⊆G is a complete system of right coset representatives with respect
to U.
We denote the set of right cosets with respect to U by U\G. Just as in the
case of left cosets, all the right cosets of G with respect to U have the same
order as the subgroup U.
Finally, it is easy to verify that by associating the left coset g ◦U with the
right coset U ◦g−1, we induce a bijection between the sets G/U and U\G.
That is, we have
|G/U| = [G : U] = |U\G|.
If the group G is abelian, then the left and right cosets coincide.
Exercise 4.19. Solve Exercises 4.11 and 4.12 for right cosets.
Deﬁnition 4.20. Let (G,◦) be a group. A subgroup N of G is said to be a
normal subgroup if all left and right cosets with respect to N coincide, that is,
if for all g ∈G, we have g ◦N = N ◦g.
Since left and right cosets with respect to a normal subgroup N coincide,
we speak in this case simply of cosets. If N ≤G is a normal subgroup, then
we indicate this fact by writing N ⊴G.

62
II The Integers
Exercise 4.21. Is the subgroup chosen in Exercise 4.12 normal?
Remark 4.22. The following is equivalent to the deﬁnition above: A sub-
group N of G is normal if and only if for every g ∈G, we have
g ◦N ◦g−1 = N,
where
g ◦N ◦g−1 = {g′ ∈G | g′ = g ◦h ◦g−1 with h ∈N}.
We have yet another equivalent description of a normal subgroup: a sub-
group N of G is normal if and only if for all g ∈G and h ∈N, we have
g ◦h ◦g−1 ∈N. We can see that this deﬁnition is equivalent to the previ-
ous one: We note ﬁrst that we clearly have g ◦N ◦g−1 ⊆N for all g ∈G.
To prove the reverse inclusion, we observe that from g ◦h ◦g−1 ∈N for all
g ∈G, h ∈N, we have in particular that g−1 ◦h ◦g ∈N for all g ∈G, h ∈N.
From this we conclude that g−1 ◦N ◦g ⊆N for all g ∈G. By operating on
this relation on the left by g and on the right by g−1, we obtain
N = g ◦(g−1 ◦N ◦g) ◦g−1 ⊆g ◦N ◦g−1,
which is precisely the desired reverse inclusion. Therefore, we have indeed
the equality g ◦N ◦g−1 = N for all g ∈G.
Example 4.23. We now consider the example of a normal subgroup of the
symmetric group S3. The reader will recall that S3 is given by the six permu-
tations
S3 = {π1, π2, π3, π4, π5, π6},
where
π1 =
 1 2 3
1 2 3

,
π2 =
 1 2 3
2 3 1

,
π3 =
 1 2 3
3 1 2

,
π4 =
 1 2 3
1 3 2

,
π5 =
 1 2 3
3 2 1

,
π6 =
 1 2 3
2 1 3

.
The three permutations π1, π2, π3 form a cyclic subgroup of order 3, de-
noted by A3 = ⟨π2⟩and called the alternating group of degree 3. We shall now
prove that A3 is a normal subgroup of S3. For j = 1, 2, 3, we have the obvious
equality
πj ◦A3 = A3 = A3 ◦πj.
An explicit calculation with the element π4 shows that
π4 ◦A3 = {π4 ◦π1, π4 ◦π2, π4 ◦π3} = {π4, π5, π6},
A3 ◦π4 = {π1 ◦π4, π2 ◦π4, π3 ◦π4} = {π4, π6, π5},

5. Quotient Groups and the Homomorphism Theorem
63
which establishes the equality π4 ◦A3 = A3 ◦π4. One can perform a similar
calculation for j = 5, 6:
πj ◦A3 = A3 ◦πj,
which proves the normality of A3. Our calculations have shown furthermore
that the set of (left) cosets with respect to A3 is given by
S3/A3 = {A3, π4 ◦A3}.
In particular, we see that
[S3 : A3] = |S3|/|A3| = 6
3 = 2.
Exercise 4.24. Let G be a group and H ≤G a subgroup of index 2.
(a) Show that H is a normal subgroup of G.
(b) Give a surjective group homomorphism from G to the group (R2, ⊕).
Lemma 4.25. Let f : (G, ◦G) −→(H, ◦H) be a group homomorphism. Then the
kernel ker( f ) of f is a normal subgroup of G.
Proof. For simplicity of notation, we shall write simply ◦in place of both ◦G
and ◦H.
By Lemma 3.10, ker( f ) is a subgroup of G. It remains to prove the nor-
mality property for ker( f ), namely that
g ◦h ◦g−1 ∈ker( f )
for all g ∈G and h ∈ker( f ). So let g ∈G and h ∈ker( f ) be arbitrary elements.
We observe that f (h) = eH. Using the homomorphism property of f, we
obtain
f (g ◦h ◦g−1) = f (g) ◦f (h) ◦f (g−1) = f (g) ◦eH ◦
 f (g)
−1
= f (g) ◦f (g)−1 = eH.
We have therefore g ◦h ◦g−1 ∈ker( f ), and the lemma is proved.
⊓⊔
Exercise 4.26. Let f : (S3, ◦) −→(R3, ⊕) be a group homomorphism. Show
that we must have f (π) = 0 for all π ∈S3.
5.
Quotient Groups and the Homomorphism Theorem
We shall now show how we can provide, in a natural way, the set G/N of
(left) cosets of a group G with respect to a normal subgroup N with a group
structure. As a rule, the structure of the group G/N will be in some respect

64
II The Integers
simpler than the structure of the group G. Studying the group G/N provides
information about the structure of the group G.
Deﬁnition 5.1. Let (G,◦) be a group, and N ⊴G a normal subgroup. We
deﬁne an operation • on the set of (left) cosets with respect to N as follows:
(g1 ◦N) • (g2 ◦N) := (g1 ◦g2) ◦N
(g1, g2 ∈G).
(7)
This deﬁnition appears to depend on the choice of representatives g1 and g2
for the cosets g1 ◦N and g2 ◦N. We shall show, however, in the following
lemma that the operation • is in fact independent of the choice of represen-
tatives.
Lemma 5.2. Let (G,◦) be a group, and N ⊴G a normal subgroup. Then the
operation • deﬁned on G/N in Deﬁnition 5.1 is well deﬁned.
Proof. Let g1, g′
1 and g2, g′
2 be representatives of the respective cosets g1 ◦N
and g2 ◦N. To prove that the operation (7) is independent of the choice of
representatives, we must prove the equality
(g1 ◦g2) ◦N = (g′
1 ◦g′
2) ◦N.
Since g′
1 ∈g1 ◦N, there exists h1 ∈N such that g′
1 = g1 ◦h1; analogously, we
obtain g′
2 = g2 ◦h2 for some h2 ∈N. We now calculate, taking into account
the associativity of ◦,
(g′
1 ◦g′
2) ◦N =
 (g1 ◦h1) ◦(g2 ◦h2)
 ◦N = (g1 ◦h1 ◦g2) ◦(h2 ◦N)
=
 g1 ◦(h1 ◦g2)
 ◦N,
where in the last step, we used the equality h2 ◦N = N, which holds because
we have h2 ∈N. Since N is normal in G, there exists h′
1 ∈N such that h1 ◦
g2 = g2 ◦h′
1. Substituting this in the previous equation yields, as asserted,
(g′
1 ◦g′
2) ◦N =
 g1 ◦(g2 ◦h′
1)
 ◦N = (g1 ◦g2) ◦N;
here we have again used the associativity of ◦and the equality h′
1 ◦N = N.
This completes the proof of the lemma.
⊓⊔
With the help of Lemma 5.2, we now have a well-deﬁned operation,
namely •, on the set G/N. The following proposition asserts that (G/N, •)
is in fact a group.
Proposition 5.3. Let (G,◦) be a group, and N ⊴G a normal subgroup. The set
G/N of (left) cosets of G with respect to N together with the operation • forms a
group.

5. Quotient Groups and the Homomorphism Theorem
65
Proof. We begin by establishing that the set G/N is nonempty, which can be
seen from the fact that it contains the coset eG ◦N = N, that is, the element N.
The associativity of the operation • follows at once from that of the operation
◦on the group G. Namely, using the deﬁnition of • and Lemma 5.2, we
obtain
 (g1 ◦N) • (g2 ◦N)
 • (g3 ◦N)
=
 (g1 ◦g2) ◦N
 • (g3 ◦N) =
 (g1 ◦g2) ◦g3
 ◦N
=
 g1 ◦(g2 ◦g3)
 ◦N = (g1 ◦N) •
 (g2 ◦g3) ◦N

= (g1 ◦N) •
 (g2 ◦N) • (g3 ◦N)

for all g1,g2,g3 ∈G. The identity element of G/N is given by N. Indeed, for
every coset g ◦N ∈G/N, we have
N • (g ◦N) = (eG ◦N) • (g ◦N) = (eG ◦g) ◦N = g ◦N,
(g ◦N) • N = (g ◦N) • (eG ◦N) = (g ◦eG) ◦N = g ◦N.
Finally, the inverse element to g ◦N is given by the coset g−1 ◦N, for we
have
(g−1 ◦N) • (g ◦N) = (g−1 ◦g) ◦N = eG ◦N = N,
(g ◦N) • (g−1 ◦N) = (g ◦g−1) ◦N = eG ◦N = N.
Thus (G/N, •) satisﬁes all the properties of a group, and the lemma is
proved.
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition 5.4. Let (G,◦) be a group, and N ⊴G a normal subgroup. The
group (G/N, •) is called the quotient group of G by the normal subgroup N.
Example 5.5.
(i) In an abelian group G, every subgroup H is normal.
Therefore, we can form the quotient group (G/H, •) for every subgroup
H of G. Each such quotient group is abelian.
(ii) In Example 4.23, we proved that the alternating group A3 is a normal
subgroup of the symmetric group S3. We may therefore form the quotient
group S3/A3, which (in the notation of Example 4.23) consists of the two
elements e := A3 and g := π4 ◦A3. The element e is the identity element in
S3/A3, and the element g satisﬁes the relation g • g = e. We may therefore
identify the quotient group S3/A3 with the familiar group (R2, ⊕), which
consists of the elements 0 and 1, by mapping the element e to 0 and the
element g to 1. It is easy to see that this identiﬁcation is a bijective group ho-
momorphism from S3/A3 to R2. We have therefore the group isomorphism
(S3/A3, •) ∼= (R2, ⊕).

66
II The Integers
Remark 5.6. Let f : (G, ◦G) −→(H, ◦H) be a group homomorphism. Lemma
4.25 asserts that ker( f ) is a normal subgroup of G. We may therefore form
the quotient group (G/ker( f ), •). We now deﬁne the mapping
π : (G, ◦G) −→(G/ker( f ), •)
via g 7→g ◦G ker( f ). The deﬁnition of the operation • now shows that
π(g1 ◦G g2) = (g1 ◦G g2) ◦G ker( f ) =
 g1 ◦G ker( f )
 •
 g2 ◦G ker( f )

= π(g1) • π(g2);
that is, the mapping π is a group homomorphism, and it is surjective. The
homomorphism π is called the canonical group homomorphism.
Theorem 5.7 (Homomorphism theorem for groups). Let f : (G, ◦G) −→
(H, ◦H) be a group homomorphism. Then f induces a uniquely determined in-
jective group homomorphism
¯f :
 G/ker( f ), •
 −→(H, ◦H)
such that ¯f
 g ◦G ker( f )
 = f (g) for all g ∈G. The statement of the theorem can
be illustrated by saying that the diagram
(G, ◦G)
π

f
'
(G/ker( f ), •)
∃! ¯f
/ (H, ◦H)
is commutative, that is, that we obtain the same result by applying the mapping f
directly or by ﬁrst applying π and then the mapping ¯f.
Proof. To simplify notation, we deﬁne N := ker( f ), and furthermore, we
shall write simply ◦in place of ◦G and ◦H. By Lemma 4.25, N is a normal
subgroup of G. We thereby obtain the quotient group (G/N, •). We now
deﬁne a mapping ¯f from (G/N, •) to (H, ◦H) as follows:
¯f (g ◦N) := f (g)
(g ∈G).
Since we deﬁned ¯f in terms of a particular representative g of the coset g ◦N,
we must show that ¯f is well deﬁned. To this end, let g′ ∈G be an arbitrary
representative of the coset g ◦N; that is, there exists h ∈N such that g′ =
g ◦h. We then obtain
f (g′) = f (g ◦h) = f (g) ◦f (h) = f (g) ◦eH = f (g),

5. Quotient Groups and the Homomorphism Theorem
67
which shows that the deﬁnition of ¯f is independent of the choice of repre-
sentative of g ◦N.
In a further step, we show that ¯f is a group homomorphism. Choose two
arbitrary cosets g1 ◦N and g2 ◦N in G/N, and using the deﬁnition of ¯f and
the homomorphism f, calculate
¯f
 (g1 ◦N) • (g2 ◦N)
 = ¯f
 (g1 ◦g2) ◦N
 = f (g1 ◦g2) = f (g1) ◦f (g2)
= ¯f (g1 ◦N) ◦¯f (g2 ◦N).
This shows that ¯f is in fact a homomorphism.
In a third step, we show the injectivity of ¯f. Let g1 ◦N, g2 ◦N ∈G/N be
such that ¯f (g1 ◦N) = ¯f (g2 ◦N). We have to show that g1 ◦N = g2 ◦N. By
deﬁnition, this proposed equality is equivalent to the equality f (g1) = f (g2).
If we apply f (g1)−1 to both sides of this equality from the left, we obtain
eH = f (g1)−1 ◦f (g1) = f (g1)−1 ◦f (g2) = f (g−1
1
◦g2);
that is, we have g−1
1
◦g2 ∈ker( f ) = N. This yields at once that g2 is an ele-
ment of the coset g1 ◦N, that is, g2 ∼g1. We have, therefore, the equality
g1 ◦N = g2 ◦N,
as asserted. Putting all of this together, we have shown that
¯f : (G/ker( f ), •) −→(H, ◦H)
is a well-deﬁned injective group homomorphism. It remains to prove the
uniqueness of ¯f such that ¯f
 g ◦ker( f )
 = f (g) (g ∈G). Let
˜f : (G/ker( f ), •) −→(H, ◦H)
be another injective group homomorphism such that ˜f
 g ◦ker( f )
 = f (g)
(g ∈G). Then we have
˜f
 g ◦ker( f )
 = f (g) = ¯f
 g ◦ker( f )

(g ∈G),
which means precisely that the action of ˜f is identical to the action of ¯f on
(G/ker( f ), •). That is, we have ˜f = ¯f, which proves the uniqueness of ¯f.
This completes the proof of the homomorphism theorem for groups.
⊓⊔
Corollary 5.8. Let f : (G, ◦G) −→(H, ◦H) be a surjective group homomorphism.
Then f induces a uniquely determined group isomorphism
¯f :
 G/ker( f ), •
 ∼= (H, ◦H)
such that ¯f
 g ◦G ker( f )
 = f (g) for all g ∈G.
⊓⊔

68
II The Integers
Example 5.9. We consider the symmetric group Sn and recall from linear
algebra that every permutation π can be written as a composition of trans-
positions (i.e., permutations that interchange two elements and leave the
others ﬁxed) and that while such a representation is not unique, the number
of transpositions that occur in the representation of a given permutation is
always even or always odd, and depending on which it is, we speak of a
permutation as itself being either even or odd. We may therefore deﬁne the
mapping
f : (Sn, ◦) −→(R2, ⊕)
by sending π to 0 if the permutation is even, and to 1 if it is odd. It is easily
veriﬁed that f is a surjective group homomorphism. The kernel ker( f ) of
f consists of the even permutations, that is, those that can be represented
by an even number of transpositions. We call this subgroup the alternating
group of degree n and denote it by An. By Corollary 5.8, we obtain the group
isomorphism
(Sn/An, •) ∼= (R2, ⊕).
Exercise 5.10. Generalize the above discussion to the case of Exercise 4.24.
That is, construct a group isomormphism
(G/H, •) ∼= (R2, ⊕)
for a subgroup H ≤G of index 2.
From the homomorphism theorem for groups, one can deduce a number
of additional isomorphisms between groups. Here is a typical example.
Exercise 5.11. Let G be a group, and H, K ⊴G normal subgroups in G such
that K ⊆H. Show that K is normal in H, and we have the isomorphism
(G/K)/(H/K) ∼= G/H.
6.
Construction of Groups from Regular Semigroups
In Remark 1.26 of Chapter I, we noted the bothersome fact that in the semi-
group (N, +), the equation
n + x = m
is not solvable for arbitrary m, n ∈N. If m ≥n, then the unique solution is
given by the difference x = m −n. If, on the other hand, we have m < n, then
there is no solution in the set of natural numbers. This difﬁculty will now be
overcome by extending the semigroup (N, +) to a group (G, ◦G), by which
we mean that N ⊆G, and the restriction of the operation ◦G to the subset
N coincides with the operation of addition +. Under these conditions, the

6. Construction of Groups from Regular Semigroups
69
equation n + x = m becomes transformed as an equation in G to n ◦G x = m,
which has the unique solution
x = n−1 ◦G m.
Since the solution x in the case of m < n cannot be a natural number, it must
reside in G \ N, the complement of N in G.
We may thus inquire more generally into the circumstances under which
it is possible to extend a semigroup (H, ◦H) to a group (G, ◦G), namely a
group G containing H such that the restriction of ◦G to H coincides with
the operation ◦H. The following deﬁnition of regular semigroup is the key
concept.
Deﬁnition 6.1. A semigroup (H, ◦H) is said to be regular if for all elements
h, x, y ∈H, we have the cancellation laws
h ◦H x = h ◦H y
=⇒
x = y,
x ◦H h = y ◦H h
=⇒
x = y.
Remark 6.2. (i) If the regular semigroup (H, ◦H) is abelian, then we require
only a single cancellation law in Deﬁnition 6.1.
(ii) A group (G, ◦G) is itself a regular semigroup, since applying the in-
verse h−1 to h ◦G x = h ◦G y (h, x, y ∈G) from the left yields
h−1 ◦G h ◦G x = h−1 ◦G h ◦G y
⇐⇒
x = y.
The other implication follows from applying the group operation with h−1
from the right.
Example 6.3. It is easy to show by mathematical induction that the semi-
group (N, +) is regular. Because (N, +) is abelian, it sufﬁces to prove the
implication
h + x = h + y
=⇒
x = y
(h, x, y ∈N).
(8)
To this end, ﬁx x, y ∈N and apply induction on h. For h = 0, the assertion is
obviously correct, which establishes the basis of the induction. As induction
hypothesis, we assume that the implication (8) is true for some h ∈N. We
must then prove the implication
h∗+ x = h∗+ y
=⇒
x = y
for the successor h∗of h. From the equation
(h + x)∗= h∗+ x = h∗+ y = (h + y)∗,

70
II The Integers
we obtain, on account of the injectivity of the successor mapping, that h +
x = h + y, which yields x = y at once by the induction hypothesis. Since
x, y ∈N were arbitrary, we have proved by induction the validity of the
cancellation law in Deﬁnition 6.1 for all h, x, y ∈N.
Exercise 6.4.
(a) Let A be a set with at least two elements. Show that neither of the two
cancellation laws holds in the semigroup (map(A), ◦).
(b) Find other examples of semigroups that are not regular.
Theorem 6.5. For every regular abelian semigroup (H, ◦H) there exists a unique
abelian group (G, ◦G) satisfying the following two conditions:
(i)
H is a subset of G, and the restriction of ◦G to H coincides with the opera-
tion ◦H.
(ii)
If (G′, ◦G′) is another group satisfying property (i), then G is a subgroup
of G′.
Proof. We must prove both existence and uniqueness. We begin with a proof
of uniqueness.
Uniqueness: Let (G1, ◦G1) and (G2, ◦G2) be groups satisfying properties (i)
and (ii). By property (ii), we have in particular that G1 ≤G2, but conversely
also that G2 ≤G1. That is, the two groups are identical. Therefore, the group
in question is determined uniquely (up to isomorphism).
Existence: We begin by deﬁning a relation ∼on the Cartesian product
H × H = {(a, b) | a, b ∈H}
(for simplicity of notation, we shall write ◦instead of ◦H):
(a, b) ∼(c, d)
⇐⇒
a ◦d = b ◦c
(a, b, c, d ∈H).
We can easily show that this is an equivalence relation.
(a) Reﬂexivity: Since the semigroup (H, ◦) is abelian, it follows that a ◦
b = b ◦a for all a, b ∈H. That is, (a, b) ∼(a, b). Therefore, the relation ∼is
reﬂexive.
(b) Symmetry: Let (a, b), (c, d) ∈H × H be such that (a, b) ∼(c, d), that
is, a ◦d = b ◦c. Since (H, ◦) is abelian, we may conclude that c ◦b = d ◦a,
which means precisely that (c, d) ∼(a, b); that is, ∼is symmetric.
(c) Transitivity: Let (a, b), (c, d),(e, f ) ∈H × H be such that (a, b) ∼(c, d)
and (c, d) ∼(e, f ). We have, therefore, the equalities
a ◦d = b ◦c,
c ◦f = d ◦e.
If we apply the group operation to the left-hand and right-hand sides of
these two equations, we obtain, using the associativity and commutativity
of the semigroup (H, ◦), the following equivalent equalities:

6. Construction of Groups from Regular Semigroups
71
(a ◦d) ◦(c ◦f ) = (b ◦c) ◦(d ◦e),
a ◦d ◦c ◦f = b ◦c ◦d ◦e,
(a ◦f ) ◦(d ◦c) = (b ◦e) ◦(d ◦c).
Since the semigroup (H, ◦) is also regular, we can cancel (d ◦c) in the last
equation (from the right), obtaining
a ◦f = b ◦e,
which implies (a, b) ∼(e, f ). The relation ∼is therefore also transitive.
We denote by [a, b] ⊆H × H the equivalence class of the pair (a, b) ∈
H × H, and by G the set of all such equivalence classes. For the sake of
brevity, we write
G := (H × H)/ ∼.
Since the semigroup (H, ◦) is nonempty, so that it contains at least one ele-
ment h, it follows that the set G is also nonempty, since it contains at least the
equivalence class [h, h]. We now deﬁne an operation on the set G of equiv-
alence classes, which for simplicity we shall denote by • instead of ◦G. If
[a, b], [a′, b′] ∈G, then we deﬁne
[a, b] • [a′, b′] := [a ◦a′, b ◦b′].
Since this deﬁnition apparently depends on the choice of representatives a, b
and a′, b′ of the equivalence classes [a, b] and [a′, b′], we must prove that the
operation • is well deﬁned by showing that it is, in fact, independent of this
choice. To this end, let (c, d) and (c′, d′) be arbitrary representatives of [a, b]
and [a′, b′]. We must show that
[a ◦a′, b ◦b′] = [c ◦c′, d ◦d′]
⇐⇒
(a ◦a′, b ◦b′) ∼(c ◦c′, d ◦d′).
Since we have (c, d) ∈[a, b] and (c′, d′) ∈[a′, b′], we must have
a ◦d = b ◦c
and
a′ ◦d′ = b′ ◦c′.
By composing the left- and right-hand sides, we obtain, on the assumption
of the commutativity of H,
(a ◦d) ◦(a′ ◦d′) = (b ◦c) ◦(b′ ◦c′) ⇐⇒(a ◦a′) ◦(d ◦d′) = (b ◦b′) ◦(c ◦c′),
and we have, therefore, as asserted,
(a ◦a′, b ◦b′) ∼(c ◦c′, d ◦d′).
In sum, we now have in (G, •) a nonempty set with a well-deﬁned op-
eration. In the following four steps, we shall show that (G, •) is an abelian
group.

72
II The Integers
(1) We ﬁrst show that • is associative. But this can be shown easily from
the deﬁnition of • and the associativity of ◦with [a, b], [a′, b′], [a′′, b′′] ∈G:
([a, b] • [a′, b′]) • [a′′, b′′] = [a ◦a′, b ◦b′] • [a′′, b′′]
= [(a ◦a′) ◦a′′, (b ◦b′) ◦b′′] = [a ◦(a′ ◦a′′), b ◦(b′ ◦b′′)]
= [a, b] • [a′ ◦a′′, b′ ◦b′′] = [a, b] • ([a′, b′] • [a′′, b′′]).
(2) The commutativity of • follows equally easily from the commutativ-
ity of the operation ◦with [a, b], [a′, b′] ∈G:
[a, b] • [a′, b′] = [a ◦a′, b ◦b′] = [a′ ◦a, b′ ◦b] = [a′, b′] • [a, b].
(3) We now show that G possesses an identity element. To this end, we
choose an arbitrary element h ∈H; we know that such an element exists,
since H is nonempty. Then the equivalence class [h, h] is our candidate for
the identity element in G. Let [a, b] be an arbitrary element of G. By the
commutativity of ◦, we have
(h ◦a) ◦b = (h ◦b) ◦a
⇐⇒
 (h ◦a), (h ◦b)
 ∼(a, b).
Then from the commutativity of •, we obtain
[a, b] • [h, h] = [h, h] • [a, b] = [h ◦a, h ◦b] = [a, b].
That is, [h, h] is indeed the identity element in G.
(4) Finally, we must show that every element [a, b] ∈G has an inverse
[a, b]−1 in G. We assert that the desired inverse is given by [b, a] ∈G. By the
commutativity of ◦and •, we see that
[a, b] • [b, a] = [b, a] • [a, b] = [b ◦a, a ◦b] = [a ◦b, a ◦b].
Now, since the equality (a ◦b) ◦h = (a ◦b) ◦h is equivalent to (a ◦b, a ◦b) ∼
(h, h), we obtain the desired relation
[a, b] • [b, a] = [b, a] • [a, b] = [a ◦b, a ◦b] = [h, h].
To complete the proof, we must show that (G, •) satisﬁes the two condi-
tions (i), (ii) above, namely (i) that H is a subset of G and the restriction of
• to H coincides with the operation ◦, and (ii) that (G, •) is minimal with
respect to property (i).
To verify property (i), it sufﬁces to ﬁnd an injective mapping f : H −→G
satisfying
f (a ◦b) = f (a) • f (b)
(a, b ∈H).
(9)
By then identifying H with its image f (H) ⊆G, we shall obtain, taking into
account (9), the desired result. We deﬁne the mapping f : H −→G by send-
ing each element a ∈H to the element [a ◦h, h] ∈G (the element h was cho-

7. The Integers
73
sen when we deﬁned the identity element [h, h] of G). We now show that f
is injective. Let a, b ∈H be such that
f (a) = f (b)
⇐⇒
[a ◦h, h] = [b ◦h, h]
⇐⇒
(a ◦h, h) ∼(b ◦h, h).
Given the commutativity and regularity of (H, ◦), we see that this is equiv-
alent to
(a ◦h) ◦h = h ◦(b ◦h)
⇐⇒
a ◦h2 = b ◦h2
⇐⇒
a = b,
from which the injectivity of f follows.
To prove (9), we choose two arbitrary elements a, b ∈H and calculate,
taking into account the associativity and commutativity of ◦,
f (a ◦b) = [(a ◦b) ◦h, h] = [a ◦b ◦h, h] = [a ◦b ◦h ◦h, h ◦h]
= [(a ◦h) ◦(b ◦h), h ◦h] = [a ◦h, h] • [b ◦h, h] = f (a) • f (b).
We have thereby demonstrated the structure-preserving property (9) of f,
showing that (G, •) is an abelian group satisfying property (i).
To complete the proof, we show that the group (G, •) that we have con-
structed is minimal. To this end, we show that the group (G, •) cannot be
made any smaller. By identifying, as mentioned above, the semigroup (H, ◦)
with its image in (G, •) under f, we see that by construction, G must con-
tain all elements of the form [a ◦h, h] for a ∈H. Since (G, •) is a group, it
must contain for each such [a ◦h, h] the inverse [h, a ◦h] in G; that is, G also
contains all elements of the form [h, b ◦h] with b ∈H. Because G is closed
under the operation •, it must also contain all elements of the form
[a ◦h, h] • [h, b ◦h] = [a, b]
(a, b ∈H).
But this shows that one cannot omit a single equivalence class from G, show-
ing that (G, •) is minimal.
⊓⊔
Exercise 6.6.
(a) Show that the odd natural numbers under multiplication form a regular
abelian monoid.
(b) Carry out the construction for this monoid described in Theorem 6.5.
7.
The Integers
We would like to investigate more closely the abelian group (G, ◦G) con-
structed in Theorem 6.5 using the example of the regular abelian semigroup
(H, ◦H) = (N, +). In doing so, we shall introduce the set of integers.
We begin by noting that the equivalence relation ∼deﬁned on the Carte-
sian product N × N now assumes the form

74
II The Integers
(a, b) ∼(c, d)
⇐⇒
a + d = b + c
(a, b, c, d ∈N).
The abelian group (G, ◦G) is given, according to the proof of Theorem 6.5,
by the set of all equivalence classes [a, b] associated with pairs (a, b) ∈N × N
and is equipped with the operation
[a, b] ◦G [a′, b′] = [a + a′, b + b′]
([a, b], [a′, b′] ∈G);
the identity element in (G, ◦G) is given by the element [0, 0], where 0 de-
notes the natural number zero. Since we are dealing here with an additive
structure, we shall write the inverse [a, b]−1 in the form −[a, b].
The deﬁnition of the equivalence relation ∼shows in this special case that
every equivalence class can be expressed in the form
[a, b] =
(
[a −b, 0],
if a ≥b,
[0, b −a],
if b > a.
We see, then, that the underlying set G of the group (G, ◦G) is given by the
union
G = {[n, 0] | n ∈N} ∪{[0, n] | n ∈N},
where the intersection {[n, 0] | n ∈N} ∩{[0, n] | n ∈N} consists solely of the
identity element [0, 0]. We see from the proof of Theorem 6.5 that the set of
natural numbers N is in bijection with the set {[n, 0] | n ∈N}. This bijection
is induced by the assignment n 7→[n, 0]. By identifying the set of natural
numbers N with the set {[n, 0] | n ∈N}, that is, we set n = [n, 0], we may
henceforth view N as a subset of G.
Deﬁnition 7.1. For a nonzero natural number n, we now set
−n := [0, n].
Taking into account the identiﬁcation of N with {[n, 0] | n ∈N} and using
the previous deﬁnition, we can realize G in the form
G = {0, 1, 2, 3,...} ∪{−1, −2, −3,...}.
Deﬁnition 7.2. We shall hereinafter denote the group (G, ◦G) by (Z, +) and
call it the (additive) group of integers. As a set, we may represent Z in the form
Z = {..., −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3,...}.
We call the numbers 1, 2, 3,... positive integers, the numbers −1, −2, −3,...
negative integers. Finally, for the integer given by the equivalence class [a, b],
we introduce the usual notation
a −b := [a, b]

7. The Integers
75
and call it the difference of the natural numbers a and b.
Remark 7.3. (i) Deﬁnition 7.2, which deﬁnes the difference of two natural
numbers, is unrestricted and therefore generalizes the notion of difference
given in Deﬁnition 1.24 of Chapter I. Moreover, the general notion of differ-
ence in Deﬁnition 7.2 is compatible with the notion of difference in Deﬁni-
tion 1.24 of Chapter I: if a, b ∈N with a ≥b, then by Deﬁnition 7.2, we have
a −b = [a, b]. Using Deﬁnition 1.24 of Chapter I, this can be transformed into
a −b = [a −b, 0]; the identiﬁcation of N with {[n, 0] | n ∈N} now shows the
asserted compatibility.
(ii) Since we denote the inverse [a, b] = a −b by −[a, b] = −(a −b), which
is in turn given by [b, a] = b −a, we obtain
−(a −b) = b −a.
If we set a = 0, we obtain in particular the formula −(−b) = b (b ∈N).
(iii) Using (ii), we now obtain in general the difference of two integers
a −b = [a, b] and a′ −b′ = [a′, b′] in the form
(a −b) −(a′ −b′) := (a −b) +
  −(a′ −b′)
 = (a −b) + (b′ −a′).
(iv) One should keep in mind in considering the difference a −b that there
is always an equivalence class lurking in the background; for example,
−2 = 1 −3 = 2 −4 = 3 −5 = ··· ;
that is, the pairs of natural numbers (1, 3), (2, 4), (3, 5),... are all represen-
tatives of the integer −2 and of the equivalence class [0, 2].
Deﬁnition 7.4. We extend the relation ≤on the set N of natural numbers
given in Deﬁnition 1.15 of Chapter I to the set Z of integers by declaring that
every negative integer is strictly less than every natural number and that for
two negative integers −m,−n (m, n ∈N; m, n ̸= 0), we set
−m < −n
if m > n,
−m ≤−n
if m ≥n.
We extend the relations > and ≥to the set Z of integers analogously.
In analogy to Remark 1.16 of Chapter I, we have the following.
Remark 7.5. With the relation <, the set of integers Z is an ordered set; that
is, the following conditions are satisﬁed:
(i)
For every two elements m, n ∈Z, we have m < n or n < m or m = n.
(ii)
The three relations m < n, n < m, m = n are mutually exclusive.
(iii) If m < n and n < p, then m < p.

76
II The Integers
Analogous properties hold for >.
Exercise 7.6. Generalize the addition and multiplication rules for the natural
numbers in Remark 1.19 of Chapter I to the set of integers.
Deﬁnition 7.7. Let n ∈Z be an integer. We then set
|n| :=
(
n,
if n ≥0,
−n,
if n < 0.
We call the natural number |n| the absolute value of the integer n.
Example 7.8. The set of integers (Z, +) with the operation of addition that
we have constructed gives us an additional example of an abelian group. If
n ∈N is a nonzero natural number, then the set
nZ = {...,−3n, −2n, −n, 0, n, 2n, 3n,...}
of all integral multiples of n forms a subgroup (nZ, +) of (Z, +). Since
(Z, +) is an abelian group, the subgroup (nZ, +) will automatically be
a normal subgroup of (Z, +), and we can consider the quotient group
(Z/nZ, •).
Furthermore, we may easily verify that the assignment a 7→Rn(a) (a ∈Z)
induces a group homomorphism
f : (Z, +) −→(Rn, ⊕).
This group homomorphism f is obviously surjective, and its kernel is
ker( f ) = nZ.
The corollary to the homomorphism theorem for groups yields for us the
group isomorphism
(Z/nZ, •) ∼= (Rn, ⊕);
here the coset a + nZ ∈Z/nZ is mapped to the element Rn(a) ∈Rn. This
example demonstrates nicely how the complicated structure of the quotient
group (Z/nZ, •) that we have been gradually developing can be identiﬁed
with the simple n-element set Rn, on which we may perform “addition” by
taking remainders.
Exercise 7.9. Verify the assertions of this example in detail.
Remark 7.10. Theorem 6.5 applied to the regular abelian monoid (N \ {0},·)
yields the multiplicative group of fractions (B, ·). We shall not discuss the
group (B, ·) further, since in Section 6 of Chapter III, we shall rediscover
this group as the multiplicative group of positive rational numbers.

B. RSA Encryption: An Application of Number Theory
77
B.
RSA Encryption: An Application of Number Theory
In this ﬁnal section, we shall discuss the ideas behind RSA encryption as an
interesting and current application of the properties of the integers.
B.1
Cryptography
The purpose of cryptography (from the Greek kryptos, hidden, and graphos,
writing) is to maintain secrecy in communication so that unauthorized a-
gents are unable to read or alter a message while it is being transmitted from
sender to receiver. The basic principle is simple. The unencrypted message,
or plaintext, is transformed with the help of a key into a ciphertext that is no
longer comprehensible. Only someone in possession of the key can decrypt
the ciphertext back into the original plaintext, thereby making the message
understandable.
The history of cryptography goes back at least to the second century B.C.,
encrypted texts having been found as inscriptions on tombstones from that
period. We are not, however, going to delve into the history of the subject,
for which we refer the reader to the relevant literature, some of which is of a
popular nature (see, for example, [2, 7]). We shall instead touch on some of
the basic ideas behind encryption algorithms.
In symmetric encryption algorithms, the keys for encryption and decryp-
tion are essentially the same. For example, the key to such an algorithm
might consist in replacing each plaintext letter by a uniquely determined
ciphertext letter.
A well-known example is the Caesar cipher, whereby the letters of the al-
phabet in the top row are displaced cyclically by a certain number of places:
A B C D E F G H I
J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕
E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D
If, for example, that number of places is four, then the plaintext “HAIL CAE-
SAR” would be encrypted as “LEMP GEIWEV,” as can be seen in the fol-
lowing graphic, in which the plaintext letters appear in the outside ring,
and their corresponding ciphertext letters can then be read off on the in-
side ring. This variant of the Caesar cipher is quite simple, but the price of
that simplicity is that it is a very insecure encryption technique, since for an
alphabet of twenty-six letters, there are only twenty-ﬁve different possible
keys, so that without even the use of frequency analysis of the letters, the
ciphertext could be decrypted after at most the twenty-ﬁfth attempt.

78
II The Integers
Z
V
Y
U
X
T
W
S
V
R
U
Q
T
P
S
O
R
N
Q
M
P
L
O
K
N
J
M
I
L
H
K
G
J
F
I
E
H
D
G
C
F
B
E
A
D
Z
C
Y
B
X
A
W
The security of this method rested primarily, in the period when it was used,
on the fact that the method of encryption was kept secret.
In modern cryptography, in contrast, a fundamental principle, called
Kerckhoffs’s principle, after the Dutch linguist and cryptographer Auguste
Kerckhoffs, states that the security of an encryption algorithm should de-
pend only on the security of the key and not on the secrecy of the algorithm.
A polyalphabetic modiﬁcation of the Caesar cipher is the Vigenère cipher,
named for Blaise de Vigenère, which uses an additional keyword to deter-
mine the number of offset letters in the Caesar cipher. A popular convention
for this method is that the letter A in the keyword represents no offset; the
letter B, an offset of 1; the letter C, an offset of 2, and so on. If, for example,
the supplementary keyword is “FANATIC,” then the alphabet for the ﬁrst
letter to be encrypted is offset by 5; for the second letter, by 0; for the third, by
13, and so on, 0, 19, 8, and 2. If the plaintext message is again “HAIL CAE-
SAR,” then the ciphertext will read “MAVL VIGXAR.” While much more
secure than the Caesar cipher, this encryption method is truly secure only
if the supplementary keyword is the same length as the plaintext, which in
general makes for a great deal of overhead.
Another variety of a polyalphabetic encryption algorithm is the basis of
the famous Enigma code, which used a sort of electromechanical typewriter,
making rapid encryption and decryption possible. The plaintext would be
input by keyboard. Then the letters of the plaintext were passed to three ro-
tors, a reﬂector, and again three rotors, with the encrypted ciphertext ﬁnally
displayed on a lamp board. The Enigma code was used by the Germans in
the Second World War, and was considered, incorrectly, to be unbreakable.
With the critical assistance of the mathematician Alan Turing, the British
were able to crack encrypted German radio messages beginning in about
1940. An extensive description of Enigma, including its weaknesses and pos-
sible improvements, can be found, for example, in [2] and in [7]. There are
also several enjoyable ﬁlms on this topic, including the 2014 biopic “The
Imitation Game.”
The reason that mathematics plays such an important role in cryptogra-
phy is that there are many ways of encoding the information to be encrypted
in the form of a number or sequence of numbers. For example, one can en-
code the alphabet using ASCII encoding as follows:

B. RSA Encryption: An Application of Number Theory
79
A B C D E F G H I
J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕
65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90
Thus the text “HAIL CAESAR” corresponds in ASCII to the sequence
72, 65, 73, 76, 67, 65, 69, 83, 65, 82,
or simply to the number 72657376676569836582. Once the plaintext has been
written in the form of a number, encryption becomes a mathematical func-
tion whose uniquely deﬁned inverse is the function for decryption.
If in the ASCII coding above, we replace each number by its remainder
on division by 26, we obtain the following encoding substitutions:
A B C D E F G H I
J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕↕
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
and now “HAIL CAESAR” will be encoded as 20,13,21,24,15,13,17,5,13,4.
If we now employ a Caesar cipher with offset 4, the encryption function de-
scribed above amounts to adding 4 to the corresponding number and sub-
tracting 26 if the resulting number is greater than 25.
The plaintext 20,13,21,24,15,13,17,5,13,4 will therefore be encoded as
24,17,25,2,19,17,9,17,8. Decryption involves simply applying the inverse
function, that is, subtracting the number 4 and then adding 26 if the result-
ing number is negative. It is mathematically more elegant to describe the
encryption function and its inverse in terms of congruences (modulo 26),
which we shall learn about in Section B.2.
In the case of symmetric encryption procedures, it is easy in general to
obtain the decryption function from knowledge of the encryption function,
whence the name “symmetric.” There is, however, a fundamental problem
regarding the security of symmetric encryption algorithms, namely to send
the decryption function to the recipient of the ciphertext over a secure chan-
nel. If an enemy can tap into the transmission and obtain the decryption
function, then the security of the ciphertext will have been compromised.
In 1976, Whitﬁeld Difﬁe und Martin Hellman proposed in the article [4]
that the problem of security might be solved by using two different keys,
a public key for encryption, which is available to everyone, and a private key
for decryption, which must remain secret, known only by the recipient of
the ciphertext. This idea proved decisive for the transition from classical
cryptography to the modern concept of public key cryptography.
To realize this idea mathematically, the encryption function must have the
property that an adversary would ﬁnd it impossible to compute the inverse

80
II The Integers
function from knowledge of the encryption function without additional in-
formation; even if the attacker could theoretically compute the inverse func-
tion, it would take so long that in practice, it could not be done. For the
recipient, however, who is in possession of the private key, computing the
inverse function is easy. Moreover, the encryption function should have the
additional property that it is easy to convert plaintext to ciphertext, say in
polynomial time. Such a function is called a one-way trapdoor function.
The question of the existence of such a one-way trapdoor function re-
mained long unresolved until three computer scientists, Ronald Rivest, Adi
Shamir, and Leonard Adleman, attempted to show that no such function
could exist. But instead of doing so, they in fact discovered such a func-
tion. In 1977, they produced an encryption algorithm known today by the
initials of their three surnames, the RSA algorithm, the ﬁrst published asym-
metric encryption algorithm; see [6]. Independently, similar ideas were de-
veloped four years earlier by mathematicians in the British secret service,
among them Clifford Cocks and James Ellis. Their work, however, was not
published.
Today, the RSA algorithm is a widely used asymmetric procedure, with
applications in telephony, electronic banking, credit-card transactions, and
in the Internet, for example in email encryption and transmission protocols
such as TLS and SSH.
In the following sections, we provide a glimpse into how the RSA algo-
rithm works along with the necessary elementary number theory. In partic-
ular, we discuss congruence arithmetic, for which we shall need the theory
of divisibility and the Euclidean algorithm for the ring (Z, +, ·) from Chap-
ter III.
B.2
Congruence Arithmetic
In this section, we introduce the notion of congruence arithmetic. We begin by
deﬁning a relation on the set Z of integers.
Deﬁnition B.1. Let m ∈N and m > 0. For a,b ∈Z, we deﬁne
a ≡b mod m
⇐⇒
m | (b −a)
and say that a is congruent to b modulo m. The relation ≡is called congruence
modulo m.
Remark B.2. If a ≡c mod m and b ≡d mod m, then we have the following
two rules:
(i)
a + b ≡c + d mod m,
(ii)
a · b ≡c · d mod m.
Rule (ii) shows in particular that if a ≡c mod m, then for every n ∈N, we
have the congruence

B. RSA Encryption: An Application of Number Theory
81
an ≡cn mod m.
Example B.3. Let m = 22. Then, for example, we have 23 ≡1 mod 22, 47 ≡
3 mod 22, and 87 ≡21 mod 22. Using the above rules of calculation, we ob-
tain 23 + 47 ≡1 + 3 ≡4 mod 22 and 47 · 87 ≡3 · 21 ≡19 mod 22, as well as
4717 ≡317 ≡129140163 ≡9 mod 22.
Remark B.4. For larger numbers, one can make use of freely available math-
ematical software such as SAGE (www.sagemath.org). You can calculate
a modulo m with the command mod(a,m) and the exponentiation a to the
power n modulo m with power_mod(a,n,m).
The command power_mod(a,n,m) is implemented in such a way as
to minimize the number of multiplications (square-and-multiply algorithm),
thereby computing exponentials in minimal time. This is of practical im-
portance, since modern cryptosystems often require the rapid calculation of
powers modulo m. You can see the difference by performing a test calcula-
tion on large numbers using power_mod(a,n,m) and mod(an,m).
Remark B.5. For a,b ∈Z, we clearly have the equivalence
a ≡b mod m
⇐⇒
Rm(a) = Rm(b).
Thus a is congruent to b modulo m if and only if a and b have the same
remainder on division by m. The calculational rules given above show that
calculation with congruences is easier than with remainders.
It is easy to show that the relation ≡is an equivalence relation on the set
Z of integers. The equivalence class of a ∈Z is called the residue class of a
modulo m and is denoted by a or a mod m. The residue classes modulo m are
given by the set

0,1,...,m −1
	
,
which stands in natural bijection with the set Rm of remainders on division
by m as shown in Example 7.8.
Theorem B.6. For a given integer a, the congruence
a · x ≡1 mod m
(10)
has a solution for x ∈Z if and only if (a,m) = 1. If that is the case and if x ∈Z is
a solution to the congruence (10), then that congruence can be solved precisely for
all integers x′ ∈Z such that x′ ≡x mod m.
Proof. The solvability of the congruence (10) is equivalent to that of the equa-
tion
a · x + m · y = 1

82
II The Integers
for x ∈Z (and some y ∈Z). If d is a common divisor of a and m, then
we must have the divisibility relationship d | 1, which proves the equality
(a,m) = 1.
We now show that this condition is also sufﬁcient for solving the congru-
ence (10). Since we have (a,m) = 1, there exist, by the extended Euclidean
algorithm (see Remark 7.36 of Chapter III), x,y ∈Z such that
a · x + m · y = 1.
But this means that for x, we have the congruence
a · x ≡1 mod m,
and x is therefore a solution of the congruence (10). If we now have a further
solution x′ ∈Z of the congruence (10), then we have the equivalence
a · x ≡1 ≡a · x′ mod m
⇐⇒
a(x −x′) ≡0 mod m.
Because of the relative primality of a and m, we must have that m divides
the difference x −x′; that is, we have
x′ ≡x mod m.
This proves that the congruence (10) is solved precisely by all numbers x′ ∈
Z such that x′ ≡x mod m.
⊓⊔
Example B.7. Let m = 88464 and a = 43. Since 43 is prime and m is not a
multiple of 43, we have (43,88464) = 1. Using the Euclidean algorithm (see
Theorem 7.35 of Chapter III), we obtain, by repeated division with remain-
der,
88464 = 2057 · 43 + 13,
43 = 3 · 13 + 4,
13 = 3 · 4 + 1,
4 = 4 · 1 + 0,
which veriﬁes that (43,88464) = 1. If we perform this calculation in reverse,
we obtain
1 = 13 −3 · 4,
1 = 13 −3 · (43 −3 · 13) = 10 · 13 −3 · 43,
1 = 10 · (88464 −2057 · 43) −3 · 43 = 10 · 88464 −20573 · 43.
Thus the congruence 43 · x ≡1 mod 88464 is solved by
x ≡−20573 mod 88464.

B. RSA Encryption: An Application of Number Theory
83
Remark B.8. For larger numbers, this calculation can be carried out with the
SAGE command xgcd(a,m). For example, we have
xgcd(43,88464) = (1,−20573,10),
which means that (43,88464) = 1 and that we have the equality
43 · (−20573) + 88464 · 10 = 1.
Finally, if we calculate
mod(−20573,88464) = 67891,
we obtain a solution x such that 0 < x < 88464.
Remark B.9. A solution x of the congruence a · x ≡1 mod m with 0 < x < m
can also be obtained with the SAGE command a.inverse_mod(m). For
example, for a = 43 and m = 88464, we obtain the result
43.inverse_mod(88464) = 67891.
B.3
Theorems of Fermat and Euler
The following theorem is due to the French mathematician Pierre de Fermat.
Theorem B.10 (Fermat’s little theorem). Let p be a prime number. Then for all
integers a, we have the congruence
ap ≡a mod p.
Proof. If a if a multiple of p, then we have a ≡0 mod p and therefore also
ap ≡0 mod p, which proves the asserted congruence in this case.
If, on the other hand, a is not a multiple of p, then a is relatively prime to
p. We now consider the product a · j with j ∈{1,..., p −1}. Since both a and
j are relatively prime to p, division by p with remainder shows that there
exists j′ ∈{1,..., p −1} such that
a · j ≡j′ mod p.
The assignment j 7→j′ clearly induces a mapping of the set {1,..., p −1} to
itself. This map is injective, since the equivalence
a · j1 ≡j′ ≡a · j2 mod p
⇐⇒
p | a(j1 −j2)
and the relative primality of a and p immediately imply j1 = j2. Because the
set {1,..., p −1} is ﬁnite, injectivity implies surjectivity, and so the mapping
under consideration is bijective. Taking products yields the congruence

84
II The Integers
(a · 1)···(a · (p −1)) ≡1···(p −1) mod p,
that is,
ap−1(p −1)! ≡(p −1)! mod p
⇐⇒
(ap−1 −1)(p −1)! ≡0 mod p.
Since (p −1)! is relatively prime to p, it follows from Euclid’s lemma (Lem-
ma 3.3 of Chapter I) that p | (ap−1 −1), which is equivalent to
ap−1 ≡1 mod p.
Multiplying this congruence by a establishes the statement of the theorem
in this second case.
⊓⊔
Remark B.11. Fermat’s little theorem gives us, in particular, a simple primal-
ity test. If, for example, a = 2 and m = 15, then we can calculate am mod m,
obtaining
215 ≡25 · 25 · 25 ≡23 ≡8 mod 15.
Since 8 is not congruent to 2 modulo 15, 15 cannot be prime.
The Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler generalized Fermat’s little the-
orem to a modulus m that is the product of two distinct primes.
Theorem B.12 (Euler’s theorem). Let p and q be two distinct prime numbers,
and set m = p · q. Then for every integer a, we have the congruence
a(p−1)(q−1)+1 ≡a mod m.
Proof. We distinguish four cases.
(i) The integer a is a multiple of both p and q. In this case, we have, for a
suitable choice of b ∈Z, the equality a = b · p · q. This yields a ≡0 mod p · q,
and by the rules for calculating with congruences,
a(p−1)(q−1)+1 ≡0 mod p · q,
which proves the asserted congruence.
(ii) The integer a is a multiple of p, but not of q. In this case, we have
a ≡0 mod p, and therefore also a(p−1)(q−1)+1 ≡0 mod p, which leads to the
congruence
a(p−1)(q−1)+1 ≡a mod p.
(11)
But since a is not a multiple of q, the integer b := ap−1 is relatively prime to
q, and from the second part of the proof of Fermat’s little theorem, we obtain
the congruence bq−1 ≡1 mod q, that is,

B. RSA Encryption: An Application of Number Theory
85
a(p−1)(q−1) ≡1 mod q.
On multiplication by a, we obtain the congruence
a(p−1)(q−1)+1 ≡a mod q.
(12)
Since the prime numbers p and q are distinct, the two congruences (11) and
(12) together yield the asserted congruence
a(p−1)(q−1)+1 ≡a mod p · q.
(iii) (The integer a is a multiple of q, but not of p. This case can be reduced
to the previous case by interchanging the roles of p and q.
(iv) The integer a is a multiple of neither p nor q. As in case (ii), one
proves the congruence
a(p−1)(q−1)+1 ≡a mod q.
(13)
Analogously, one proves the further congruence
a(p−1)(q−1)+1 ≡a mod p.
(14)
Since the two primes p and q are distinct, we obtain from the congruences
(13) and (14) the congruence
a(p−1)(q−1)+1 ≡a mod p · q.
This completes the proof.
⊓⊔
Remark B.13. The theorems of Fermat and Euler presented here are special
cases of a more general result, which derives ultimately from Lagrange’s
theorem (Theorem 4.14). Namely, if (G,◦) is a ﬁnite group with identity ele-
ment e, then every element g ∈G satisﬁes the relation g|G| = e.
We now apply this result. We begin with the set
P(m) :=

a | a ∈{0,...,m −1}, (a,m) = 1
	
.
It is now easy to see that the set P(m) with respect to congruence multipli-
cation is a group with identity element 1, whose order is usually denoted
by ϕ(m), called Euler’s ϕ-function. By the previous result, we have for all
a ∈P(m), the relation
aϕ(m) = 1.
We have, therefore, for all a ∈Z with (a,m) = 1, the congruence

86
II The Integers
aϕ(m) ≡1 mod m,
from which on multiplication by a, we obtain the congruence aϕ(m)+1 ≡
a mod m.
We obtain the connection to the theorems of Euler and Fermat by verify-
ing the formulas
ϕ(p) = p −1
and
ϕ(p · q) = (p −1)(q −1),
for distinct primes p and q.
B.4
The RSA Cryptosystem
In this section, we shall learn about the ideas behind the RSA cryptosystem.
For information on important and interesting questions, in particular secu-
rity, including the choice of suitable prime numbers and the private key, as
well as possible attacks against RSA, we refer the reader to the enormous
literature on the subject. We note here that the examples presented in this
section serve a pedagogical purpose and are not of any practical utility.
To send an encrypted message using the RSA algorithm, sender Alice and
recipient Bob proceed as follows:
1. Before a message can be encoded and sent, Bob does the following: He
chooses two distinct “large” prime numbers p and q, of approximately
three hundred digits, which must be kept secret. Bob then computes the
products
m = p · q,
n = (p −1) · (q −1);
note that with the Euler ϕ-function, we have n = ϕ(m). Now Bob chooses
a natural number k that is relatively prime to n. The numbers m and
k comprise the public key, and recipient Bob sends this information to
sender Alice. Bob keeps the numbers p, q, and n private.
2. Alice now begins by transforming the message she wishes to send into
a number a, using, for example, the ASCII code described earlier, with
the properties
(a,m) = 1
and
0 < a < m.
If it turns out that a ≥m, the message can be split up into several blocks
of suitable size so that in each of them, one has a < m. Alice then encrypts
her message a by calculating the uniquely determined number b such
that

B. RSA Encryption: An Application of Number Theory
87
b ≡ak mod m
and
0 < b < m.
Now Alice sends Bob the encrypted message b over a channel that does
not have to be secure.
3. To decrypt the ciphertext b, Bob now determines the uniquely deter-
mined (by Theorem B.6) integer x such that
k · x ≡1 mod n
and
0 < x < n.
Using the private key x, Bob computes the uniquely determined integer c
such that
c ≡bx mod m
and
0 < c < m.
The ciphertext has now been decoded, since c = a, as the following the-
orem establishes.
Theorem B.14. With the above notation and assumptions, we have the equality
a = c.
Proof. Since 0 < a,c < m, we shall have the asserted equality a = c once the
existence of the congruence c ≡a mod m has been validated. We can see this
as follows: We have the congruences c ≡bx mod m and b ≡ak mod m, and
therefore,
c ≡(ak)x ≡ak·x mod m.
(15)
Here the integer x is uniquely determined by the conditions k · x ≡1 mod n
and 0 < x < n; that is, there exists, in particular, a uniquely determined inte-
ger y with
k · x = 1 + n · y.
From (15), we obtain the congruences
c ≡ak·x ≡a1+n·y ≡a · (an)y mod m.
Since we now have (a,m) = 1, the proof of Euler’s theorem shows that we
have the congruence an ≡1 mod m, which yields, ﬁnally, the congruence
c ≡a · 1y ≡a mod m,
which is what was to be proved.
⊓⊔

88
II The Integers
Remark B.15. It is possible in the second step of the RSA algorithm to do
without the requirement (a,m) = 1 in creating the ciphertext. The correct-
ness of the RSA algorithm was proved essentially in the previous proof.
Remark B.16. The encryption function used in the RSA algorithm is, in fact,
a one-way trapdoor function (see Section B.1). Moreover, the process of en-
cryption, which consists essentially in calculating ak mod m, is simple. The
same holds for calculating bx mod m, provided, of course, that one knows
the trapdoor, that is, the private key x. One can also easily compute the key
x if like the recipient Bob, one knows the integer ϕ(m) = n = (p −1)(q −1).
On the other hand, if one knows the public information m, k, and b, one
could calculate x if one knew the prime decomposition of m, that is, the
prime numbers p and q. If m is not particularly large, then one could ﬁgure
out those prime factors, for example with the SAGE command factor(m).
But if m is very large, then deducing the prime decomposition is for all prac-
tical purposes impossible using currently known algorithms. Furthermore,
if recipient Bob chooses, as is generally done, prime numbers of the same bit
length (balanced RSA algorithm), then it is known that determining the pri-
vate key x with only knowledge of the public information m, k, and b is of
the same level of difﬁculty as the factorization of m. Thus the security of the
RSA cryptosystem rests on the difﬁculty of the factorization problem.
Recipient Bob
Choice of Prime Numbers p, q:
m
=
p · q,
n = (p −1)(q −1),
k with (k, n) = 1
Private Key:
0 < x < n with
k · x ≡1 mod n
Public Key:
m, k
Coding Message
as a Number:
0 < a < m with
(a, m) = 1
Sender Alice
Decoded Ciphertext:
0 < c < m with
c ≡bx mod m
Ciphertext:
0 < b < m with
b ≡ak mod m
Public:
Transmisson of b
The above diagram provides an overview of the RSA algorithm. The red
arrows represent secure communication channels.
Example B.17. To aid in understanding the algorithm, we present here an
example using two small prime numbers.
1. Recipient Bob chooses the prime numbers p = 229 and q = 389. He then
calculates

B. RSA Encryption: An Application of Number Theory
89
m = p · q = 229 · 389 = 89081,
n = (p −1) · (q −1) = 228 · 388 = 88464.
Now Bob chooses, say, k = 43. Since 43 is a prime number and n is not
a multiple of 43, we have that k is relatively prime to n, as desired. Bob
now publishes the numbers
m = 89081
and
k = 43.
2. Sender Alice transcribes the message “PI” using the ASCII encoding to
obtain
a = 8073.
She then calculates the integer b with b ≡807343 mod 89081 and 0 < b <
89081, and transmits the encrypted message
b = 30783.
3. To decode the ciphertext b, Bob computes the private key x such that
k · x ≡1 mod n and 0 < x < n as in Example B.7. He thereby obtains the
solution
x = 67891.
Bob can now decrypt the ciphertext b = 30783 by calculating the uniquely
determined integer c such that c ≡3078367891 mod 89081 and 0 < c <
89081. He obtains
c = 8073,
which is the ASCII code for the message “PI”.
Example B.18. To close, we give a more realistic example with two 100-digit
prime numbers.
1. Recipient Bob chooses the prime numbers
p = 20747222467734852078216952221076085874809964747211
17292752992589912196684750549658310084416732550077,
q = 72126101472954749095445237850434924099693821481867
65460082500085393519556525921455588705423020751421.
With the SAGE commands is_prime(p) and is_prime(q), Bob can
check whether p and q are in fact prime. The function returns True if its
argument is prime. Bob then calculates the numbers m and n, obtaining

90
II The Integers
m = p · q
= 14964162729898105788684569421835754781481603923778
96104167832218033314436822709860751513251318961222
52290737219239160591728298144292465045647829035182
95622360979392187621542015444916226124162051409417
and
n = (p −1) · (q −1)
= 14964162729898105788684569421835754781481603923778
96104167832218033314436822709860751513251318961221
59417413278549559418066108072781455071144042806104
12869525486716881905300738973802327334322298107920.
At this point, the reader may wish to test the SAGE command factor(m).
Now Bob chooses again, for example, k = 43, since k is relatively prime
to n, as desired. One can verify this with the SAGE command gcd(n,k),
which returns the greatest common divisor of n and k. One obtains
gcd(n,k) = 1. Bob now publishes the numbers m and k.
2. Sender Alice transcribes the message
PRIME NUMBERS ARE USEFUL!
using the ASCII encoding as
a = 80827377693278857766698283326582693285836970857633.
The SAGE command map(ord,"PRIME"), for example, encodes the
word “PRIME” in ASCII as [80,82,73,77,69], giving 8082737769. Then
Alice computes the integer b such that b ≡ak mod m and 0 < b < m and
transmits the encrypted message
b = 36057960785874251250398847578656552489665279269698
48103809148617096444525775586803496118061034800457
72014608577306857911068935474951466578892598687245
6073152821301324024745350344439303132600913173384.
The relevant SAGE command is power_mod(a,k,m), which returns the
integer b.
3. To decode the message b, recipient Bob determines the secret key x
such that k · x ≡1 mod n and 0 < x < n. This is accomplished with
the SAGE command k.inverse_mod(n) (see also Remark B.8). Bob ob-
tains thereby the solution

B. RSA Encryption: An Application of Number Theory
91
x = 10440113532487050550245048433838898684754607388682
99607558952710255800769876309205175474361385321782
50756334845499692617255424236824270979867936841467
99676413130267592026954003935210926047201603331107.
Bob now decodes the message b using the SAGE command
power_mod(b,x,m)
to determine the unique integer c such that c ≡bx mod m and 0 < c < m.
Bob thereby obtains the number
c = 80827377693278857766698283326582693285836970857633,
that is, the message “PRIME NUMBERS ARE USEFUL!”
Remark B.19. In applications with limited storage space (chip cards, for ex-
ample), there is an increased use of asymmetric encryption algorithms that
use elliptic curves. Instead of the operations + and · on the integers Z, a spe-
cial operation of addition of points on a given elliptic curve is deﬁned. The
operation ak corresponds to k-fold addition of a point to itself. We shall learn
about addition on elliptic curves in Appendix C. Cryptography that uses el-
liptic curves is called, not surprisingly, elliptic curve cryptography (ECC). For
an elementary introduction to this topic, we refer the reader to [8].
References
[1] M. W. Baldoni, C. Cilberto, G. M. Placentini Cattaneo: Elementary number
theory, cryptography and codes. Translated from the 2006 Italian original by
D. A. Gewurz. Springer, Berlin, 2009.
[2] F. L. Bauer: Decrypted secrets: methods and maxims of cryptology. Springer, Berlin
Heidelberg New York, 4th edition, 2006.
[3] J. Buchmann: Introduction to cryptography. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New
York, 2nd edition, 2004.
[4] W. Difﬁe, M. E. Hellman: New directions in cryptography. IEEE Trans. Informa-
tion Theory IT-22 (1976), 644–654.
[5] D. Kahn: The codebreakers. The comprehensive history of secret communication from
ancient times to the internet. Simon & Schuster, 2nd edition, 1997.
[6] R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, L. Adleman: A method for obtaining digital signatures and
public-key cryptosystems. Comm. ACM 21 (1978), 120–126.
[7] S. Singh: The code book: the science of secrecy from ancient Egypt to quantum cryp-
tography. Random House, 2011.
[8] L. Washington: Elliptic curves: number theory and cryptography. CRC Press, 2nd
edition, 2008.

III
The Rational Numbers
1.
The Integers and Divisibility Theory
In the last section of Chapter II, we introduced the (additive) group of in-
tegers (Z, +), which we constructed with the help of Theorem 6.5 of that
chapter from the (additive) semigroup (N, +) of natural numbers. We now
recall that the natural numbers also have the structure of a monoid with
respect to the multiplication deﬁned in Chapter I. Our ﬁrst task is to gen-
eralize this multiplicative structure to the set of integers. To this end, we
return to the deﬁnition of Z as a set of equivalence classes (see the proof of
Theorem 6.5 of Chapter II); that is,
Z = {[a, b] | (a, b) ∈N × N}.
We now deﬁne the product of two integers [a, b] and [a′, b′] by the formula
[a, b] · [a′, b′] := [aa′ + bb′, ab′ + a′b].
(1)
Here, as in Chapter I, we write aa′ + bb′ and ab′ + a′b as an abbreviated form
for the natural numbers (a · a′) + (b · b′) and (a · b′) + (a′ · b). To establish
that this multiplication operation is well deﬁned, we must prove that the
product (1) is independent of the choice of representatives (a, b) and (a′, b′).
To this end, let (c, d) and (c′, d′) be representatives of the equivalence classes
[a, b] and [a′, b′]; that is, we have
a + d = b + c
and
a′ + d′ = b′ + c′.
(2)
We must demonstrate the equivalence class equality
[aa′ + bb′, ab′ + a′b] = [cc′ + dd′, cd′ + c′d].
We therefore deﬁne the natural number
n := (a′ + b′)(c + d) = a′c + a′d + b′c + b′d.
We then calculate, keeping in mind the equalities (2),
aa′ + bb′ + cd′ + c′d + n = a′(a + d) + b′(b + c) + c(a′ + d′) + d(b′ + c′)
= a′(b + c) + b′(a + d) + c(b′ + c′) + d(a′ + d′)
= ab′ + a′b + cc′ + dd′ + n.
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69429-0_3
J. Kramer and A.-M. von Pippich, From Natural Numbers to Quaternions, 

94
III The Rational Numbers
Since N is regular, we obtain, after canceling n, the equivalence
(aa′ + bb′, ab′ + a′b) ∼(cc′ + dd′, cd′ + c′d),
from which follows the asserted equality of the equivalence classes.
With the notation a −b = [a, b], the deﬁnition (1) takes the familiar form
(a −b) · (a′ −b′) = (aa′ + bb′) −(ab′ + a′b),
and we obtain at once the sign rules (for m, n ∈N)
m · (−n) = −(m · n) = (−m) · n,
(−m) · (−n) = m · n.
For ease of notation, we shall hereinafter write −m · n instead of −(m · n).
As with the multiplication of natural numbers, we shall frequently suppress
the dot indicating multiplication. We leave the proof of the following lemma
to the reader.
Lemma 1.1. The operation of multiplication deﬁned by (1) on the set of integers is
associative and commutative. That is, for all integers a, b, c, we have
a · (b · c) = (a · b) · c
and
a · b = b · a.
Furthermore, for all integers a, b, c, we have the distributive laws
(a + b) · c = a · c + b · c
and
a · (b + c) = a · b + a · c.
⊓⊔
Exercise 1.2. Prove the rules for multiplication of integers given in Lem-
ma 1.1.
Putting everything together, we have the following.
Remark 1.3. The set of integers Z has deﬁned on it two operations, addition
+ and multiplication ·. We express this by writing (Z,+, ·). Both operations
satisfy the associative and commutative laws. Addition and multiplication
are linked by the two distributive laws. The set (Z, +) with addition is an
abelian group with identity element 0; the inverse element to a ∈Z is de-
noted by −a. The set (Z, ·) with multiplication is an abelian monoid with
identity element 1. The elements other than ±1 have no multiplicative in-
verse. That is, the integers ±1 are the only elements of Z possessing a mul-
tiplicative inverse in Z.
We shall now extend the divisibility theory that we developed for the
natural numbers in Section 2 of Chapter I to the integers. In analogy to Def-
inition 2.1 of Chapter I, we note that the integer b ̸= 0 divides the integer a if

1. The Integers and Divisibility Theory
95
there exists an integer c such that a = b · c. The notion of a common divisor of
two integers carries over directly from Deﬁnition 2.1 of Chapter I. The va-
lidity of the divisibility rules from Lemma 2.4 of Chapter I also carries over
directly to the integers. By a simple generalization of Remark 2.6 of Chap-
ter I, we call the divisors 1, −1, a, −a, or ±1, ±a for short, the trivial divisors
of the integer a. Furthermore, we call two integers a, b associates if they differ
by at most a sign, that is, if a = ±b. A prime number p is now characterized
as an integer greater than 1 that has only the trivial divisors ±1 and ±p.
Lemma 2.9 of Chapter I carries over directly to the integers.
In general, one can carry out division with remainder on integers, just as
with the natural numbers.
Theorem 1.4 (Division with remainder, revisited). Let a, b be integers with
b ̸= 0. Then there exist uniquely determined integers q, r with 0 ≤r < |b| such that
a = q · b + r.
(3)
Proof. The proof is a simple modiﬁcation of the proof of Theorem 5.1 of
Chapter I and is left to the reader as an exercise.
⊓⊔
Exercise 1.5. Carry out the proof of Theorem 1.4.
A signiﬁcant difference between the divisibility theory for the natural
numbers and that for the integers is the fact that in the integers, it is pos-
sible to invoke Euclid’s lemma as an aid in proving the fundamental theo-
rem of arithmetic, in contrast to how we proceeded in the case of the natural
numbers, where Euclid’s lemma appeared only as a consequence of the fun-
damental theorem. In this direction, we prove the following lemma.
Lemma 1.6. Let a, b be relatively prime integers, that is, such that a, b have only
the trivial divisors ±1 in common. Then there exist integers x, y such that
x · a + y · b = 1.
Proof. We consider the set of all integer linear combinations of a and b, that
is, the set
a := {x1 · a + y1 · b | x1, y1 ∈Z} ⊆Z.
Since we have either a ∈a ∩N or −a ∈a ∩N, the intersection a ∩N is
nonempty. By the well-ordering principle (Lemma 1.21 of Chapter I), there
exists a least positive element d ∈a ∩N. We must show that in fact, d = 1.
We note ﬁrst that since d ∈a, there exist integers x0 and y0 such that d =
x0 · a + y0 · b. Now let c ∈a be an arbitrary element of the form c = x1 · a +
y1 · b with x1, y1 ∈Z. On dividing c by d with remainder, we obtain q, r ∈Z,
0 ≤r < d, so that we have
c = q · d + r.
(4)

96
III The Rational Numbers
If we now substitute c = x1 · a + y1 · b and d = x0 · a + y0 · b in (4), we obtain
x1 · a + y1 · b = q(x0 · a + y0 · b) + r,
which is equivalent to
r = (x1 −q · x0)a + (y1 −q · y0)b ∈a ∩N.
If we had r ̸= 0, then we would also have 0 < r < d. But that would contradict
the minimality of the choice of d ∈a ∩N. We therefore have r = 0, and so
d | c. From the representation c = x1 · a + y1 · b with the special values x1 = 1,
y1 = 0 and x1 = 0, y1 = 1, we have d | a and d | b; that is, d is a common divisor
of a and b. But the integers a, b have only the trivial common divisors ±1,
and so we must have d = 1. Finally, if we set x := x0 and y := y0, then we
obtain
x · a + y · b = d = 1,
as asserted.
⊓⊔
Lemma 1.7 (Euclid’s lemma, revisited). Let a, b be integers and p a prime
number. If p | a · b, then we must have p | a or p | b.
Proof. We begin with the divisibility relationship p | a · b. If p | a, then we are
done. If, on the other hand, p ∤a, then we must prove p | b. Since p is prime
and p ∤a, we conclude that a and p are relatively prime. By the previous
lemma, there exist, therefore, integers x, y such that
x · a + y · p = 1.
On multiplying this equality by b, we obtain
b = x · ab + yb · p.
(5)
The divisibility rules of Lemma 2.4 of Chapter I (extended to the integers)
now show us that p divides the right-hand side of (5), whence it also divides
the left-hand side. That is, we have p | b, as asserted.
⊓⊔
For the set of integers, the fundamental theorem of arithmetic takes the
following form:
Theorem 1.8 (Fundamental theorem of arithmetic, revisited). Every nonzero
integer a can be represented in the form
a = e · pa1
1 ··· parr ,
which is the product of e ∈{±1} and a product of r (r ∈N) powers of the distinct
prime numbers p1,..., pr with positive natural-number exponents a1,..., ar. This
representation is unique up to the order of the factors.

2. Rings and Subrings
97
Proof. For the absolute value |a| of a, we have
a = e · |a|
with uniquely determined sign e ∈{±1}. The existence and uniqueness of
the prime decomposition of the natural number |a| can be inferred from the
proof of Theorem 3.1 of Chapter I.
As an alternative to the uniqueness proof there, one can in the present
situation complete the proof quickly and elegantly using induction and Eu-
clid’s lemma. We leave this as an exercise for the reader.
⊓⊔
Exercise 1.9. Carry out the uniqueness proof of the fundamental theorem of
arithmetic using Lemma 1.7.
If a, b are integers, then the deﬁnition of the greatest common divisor (a, b)
of a and b can be reduced to Deﬁnition 4.1 of Chapter I of the greatest com-
mon divisor of natural numbers by setting
(a, b) := (|a|, |b|).
Likewise, the deﬁnition of the least common multiple [a, b] of a and b can be re-
duced to Deﬁnition 4.7 of Chapter I of the least common multiple of natural
numbers by setting
[a, b] := [|a|, |b|].
By carrying over the divisibility criterion given in Lemma 3.5 of Chapter I
to the integers, we obtain at once the analogues of Theorems 4.3 and 4.9
of Chapter I for calculating the greatest common divisor and least common
multiple of integers a and b using prime decompositions.
2.
Rings and Subrings
The example presented in the previous section of the integers with the two
operations addition and multiplication that are linked by the distributive
laws is the prototype for the following deﬁnition of a ring.
Deﬁnition 2.1. A nonempty set R with two operations (generally called
addition + and multiplication ·) that satisﬁes the following properties is
called a ring:
(i)
(R, +) is an abelian group.
(ii)
(R, ·) is a semigroup.
(iii) For all a, b, c ∈R, we have the two distributive laws
(a + b) · c = a · c + b · c,
a · (b + c) = a · b + a · c.

98
III The Rational Numbers
Deﬁnition 2.2. A ring (R,+, ·) is said to be commutative if for all a, b ∈R,
we have the equality a · b = b · a.
Remark 2.3. (i) We call the identity element of the additive group (R, +) of
a ring (R,+, ·) the zero element and denote it by 0. We denote the additive
inverse of a ∈R by −a. We deﬁne the difference of elements a, b ∈R by a −
b := a + (−b).
(ii) The ring (R,+, ·) consisting solely of the zero element 0 is called the
zero ring or null ring and is denoted by ({0},+, ·).
(iii) If the multiplicative semigroup (R, ·) in a ring (R,+, ·) that is not the
zero ring is a monoid, we call its identity element the unit element and denote
it by 1. The unit element is uniquely determined and necessarily satisﬁes the
inequality 1 ̸= 0, since we have R ̸= {0}.
(iv) To simplify notation, we will, as usual, agree that multiplication takes
precedence over addition (and therefore, a · b + c means (a · b) + c).
Example 2.4.
(i) (Z,+, ·) is a commutative ring with unit element.
(ii) (Rn,⊕, ⊙) is a commutative ring with unit element.
(iii) (2 · Z,+, ·) is a commutative ring, but it does not have a unit element,
since 1 /∈2 · Z.
(iv) The following example is well known from linear algebra. We con-
sider the set of 2 × 2 matrices with integer entries, that is, the set
M2(Z) :=

A =
a b
c d
  a, b, c, d ∈Z

.
Two matrices A =
  a b
c d

and A′ =
  a′ b′
c′ d′

are added and multiplied as fol-
lows:
A + A′ =
a b
c d

+
a′ b′
c′ d′

:=
a + a′ b + b′
c + c′ d + d′

and
A · A′ =
a b
c d

·
a′ b′
c′ d′

:=
aa′ + bc′ ab′ + bd′
ca′ + dc′ cb′ + dd′

,
where the addition and multiplication of the individual entries are the usual
operations on integers. We leave it to the reader as an exercise to show
that (M2(Z),+, ·) is a ring with unit element. The zero and unit elements
of M2(Z) are given by the matrices
0 0
0 0

and
1 0
0 1

;
the additive inverse of the matrix A is

2. Rings and Subrings
99
−A :=
−a −b
−c −d

.
We note that this ring is not commutative.
(v) Let (R,+, ·) be a ring. We deﬁne the polynomial ring (R[X],+, ·) in the
variable X with coefﬁcients in R as the set
R[X] :=

∑
j∈N
aj · Xj
 aj ∈R, aj = 0 for all but ﬁnitely many j ∈N

with the operations

∑
j∈N
aj · Xj

+

∑
j∈N
bj · Xj

:= ∑
j∈N
(aj + bj) · Xj,

∑
j∈N
aj · Xj

·

∑
j∈N
bj · Xj

:= ∑
j∈N

∑
k,ℓ∈N
k+ℓ=j
(ak · bℓ)

· Xj.
We leave it as an exercise to the reader to show that (R[X],+, ·) is a ring.
We remark that we have denoted the formal variable in the elements of a
polynomial ring by the capital letter X to distinguish between the polyno-
mial p(X) ∈R[X] and its value p(x) ∈R at the element x ∈R.
Exercise 2.5. Prove that the polynomial ring (R[X],+, ·) from Example 2.4 (v)
is a ring and that it is commutative if and only if (R,+, ·) is commutative.
Exercise 2.6. Let A be a nonempty set and (R,+R, ·R) a ring. Prove that the
set map(A, R) of all mappings from A to R is a ring when it is equipped
with the two operations
( f, g) 7→f + g, with ( f + g)(a) := f (a) +R g(a) ( f, g ∈map(A, R), a ∈A),
( f, g) 7→f · g, with ( f · g)(a) := f (a) ·R g(a) ( f, g ∈map(A, R), a ∈A).
Exercise 2.7. Determine which of the ring properties from Deﬁnition 2.1 are
satisﬁed by the set N with the operations “max” as the addition and + as
the multiplication.
Lemma 2.8. Let (R,+, ·) be a ring. Then for a, b, c ∈R, we have the following:
(i)
a · 0 = 0 · a = 0.
(ii)
a · (−b) = (−a) · b = −a · b.
(iii) (−a) · (−b) = a · b.
(iv) (a −b) · c = a · c −b · c.
(v)
a · (b −c) = a · b −a · c.

100
III The Rational Numbers
Proof. (i) By the distributive law, we have a · a = a · (a + 0) = a · a + a · 0, and
it therefore follows by adding −a · a to both sides that a · 0 = 0. The equality
0 · a = 0 follows analogously.
(ii) Using (i) and the distributive law, we obtain the equality
a · b + a · (−b) = a
 b + (−b)
 = a · 0 = 0,
from which the asserted equality a · (−b) = −a · b follows by addition of
−a · b to both sides. The second equality, (−a) · b = −a · b, follows analo-
gously.
(iii) Using (ii), we compute
(−a) · (−b) = a ·
  −(−b)
 = a · b.
(iv) Using the distributive law and (ii), we calculate
(a −b) · c =
 a + (−b)
 · c = a · c + (−b) · c = a · c −b · c.
(v) The proof of (v) is analogous to that of (iv).
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition 2.9. An element a ̸= 0 of a ring (R,+, ·) is called a left zero divisor
if there exists b ∈R, b ̸= 0, such that a · b = 0. One deﬁnes right zero divi-
sors analogously. If the ring is commutative, we may speak simply of zero
divisors.
A ring (R,+, ·) is called a domain if it has no (left or right) zero divisors. A
nonnull commutative ring (R,+, ·) without zero divisors is called an integral
domain.
Example 2.10.
(i) The ring (Z,+, ·) is an integral domain.
(ii) The rings (Rn,⊕, ⊙) are in general not integral domains, since as a
rule, they possess zero divisors. For example, the element 2 ∈R6 is a zero
divisor, since we have 2 ⊙3 = 0.
(iii) The noncommutative matrix ring M2(Z) also has zero divisors. The
matrix A =
  0 1
0 0

, for example, is both a left and right zero divisor, since
0 1
0 0

·
0 1
0 0

=
0 0
0 0

.
Exercise 2.11. Generalize Example 2.10 (ii) as follows: if n > 1 is not prime,
then (Rn,⊕, ⊙) has zero divisors.
Exercise 2.12. Show that if (R,+, ·) is an integral domain, then so is the poly-
nomial ring (R[X],+, ·).
Exercise 2.13. Does the ring (map(A, R),+, ·) from Exercise 2.6 have zero
divisors?

2. Rings and Subrings
101
Lemma 2.14. Let (R,+, ·) be a domain with unit element 1. If there exists a pos-
itive natural number n such that
n · 1 := 1 + ··· + 1
|
{z
}
n times
= 0,
and n is the minimal positive number with this property, then n is prime.
Proof. We proceed with a proof by contradiction. Assume, then, that the
number n is not prime. Then there exist natural numbers k, ℓ∈N with
1 < k, ℓ< n such that n = k · ℓ. We thereby obtain
n · 1 = (k · ℓ) · 1 = (k · 1) · (ℓ· 1) = 0.
Since (R,+, ·) is without zero divisors, it follows that
k · 1 = 0 or ℓ· 1 = 0.
But this contradicts the minimality of n.
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition 2.15. Let (R,+, ·) be a domain with unit element 1 and suppose
that there exists a positive natural number p, which we take to be minimal,
with the property p · 1 = 0. Then by the above lemma, p must be prime, and
we call p the characteristic of the ring R; we write char(R) = p.
If there is no positive natural number n such that n · 1 = 0, we say that R
has characteristic zero.
Example 2.16.
(i) The ring of integers (Z,+, ·) has characteristic zero,
since there is no positive natural number n such that n · 1 = 0.
(ii) If p is a prime, then the ring (Rp,⊕, ⊙) is an integral domain. Its
characteristic can easily be seen to be
char(Rp) = p,
since for all k ∈{1,..., p −1}, we have k · 1 ̸= 0, but p · 1 = 0 in Rp.
Deﬁnition 2.17. Let (R,+, ·) be a ring with unit element 1 and let a ∈R be
an arbitrary element. An element b ∈R is called a left inverse of a if b · a = 1.
Similarly, an element c ∈R is a right inverse of a if a · c = 1.
An element d ∈R is called a (multiplicative) inverse of a if it is both a left
and right inverse, that is, if a · d = d · a = 1. If a ∈R has a multiplicative
inverse, we denote it by a−1 or 1
a or sometimes 1/a.
An element a ∈R that has a multiplicative inverse in R is called a unit.
Example 2.18. In the ring (Z,+, ·), the elements a ̸= ±1 do not have a mul-
tiplicative inverse. The units of (Z,+, ·) are +1 and −1.

102
III The Rational Numbers
Exercise 2.19. What are the units of the polynomial ring (Z[X],+, ·)?
Exercise 2.20. Show that the units of a ring (R,+, ·) with unit element 1 form
a group with respect to the ring operation of multiplication.
Exercise 2.21. Determine the group of units for each of the rings (Rn,⊕, ⊙),
n = 5, 8, 10, 12. Which of these groups of units are isomorphic?
Deﬁnition 2.22. Let (R,+, ·) be a ring. A subset S ⊆R is called a subring of
R if the restriction of the operations +, · to S (which for simplicity we again
denote by +, ·) deﬁne a ring structure on S, that is, if (S,+, ·) is itself a ring.
We express this relationship by writing S ≤R.
Lemma 2.23 (Subring criterion). Let (R,+, ·) be a ring, and S ⊆R a nonempty
subset. Then we have the equivalence
S ≤R
⇐⇒
a −b ∈S, a · b ∈S
∀a, b ∈S.
Proof. (i) If S is a subring of R, then clearly the difference a −b and the prod-
uct a · b must be in S for all a, b ∈S.
(ii) Conversely, suppose that a −b ∈S, a · b ∈S for all a, b ∈S. Since S
is nonempty, we have from the subgroup criterion, namely Lemma 2.25 of
Chapter II, that (S, +) is an abelian subgroup of the additive group (R, +).
Since we also have a · b ∈S for all a, b ∈S, it follows that S is closed under
multiplication. Furthermore, S inherits the associative law with respect to
multiplication and the distributive laws from R. Therefore, (S,+, ·) is a ring,
and thus the proof is complete.
⊓⊔
Example 2.24. The ring (2Z,+, ·) of even integers is a subring of the ring
(Z,+, ·) of integers.
Exercise 2.25. Find additional examples of subrings of the ring (Z,+, ·) of
integers.
Exercise 2.26. Let (R,+, ·) be a ring. Is (R,+, ·) a subring of the ring of poly-
nomials (R[X],+, ·)?
3.
Ring Homomorphisms, Ideals, and Quotient Rings
In the previous section, we deﬁned for rings the subsidiary object of a sub-
ring in analogy to the deﬁnition of a subgroup of a group, introduced in
Chapter II. In pursuit of further structural analysis of groups, we also in-
troduced in Chapter II the notions of group homomorphism, normal sub-
group, and quotient group. Continuing in that vein in our discussion of

3. Ring Homomorphisms, Ideals, and Quotient Rings
103
rings, we shall now introduce analogous deﬁnitions adapted to the more
complex structure of a ring. We begin with the concept of a ring homomor-
phism.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Let (R,+R, ·R) and (S,+S, ·S) be rings. A mapping
f : (R,+R, ·R) −→(S,+S, ·S)
is called a ring homomorphism if for all r1, r2 ∈R, we have the equalities
f (r1 +R r2) = f (r1) +S f (r2),
f (r1 ·R r2) = f (r1) ·S f (r2).
For two rings to be related by a ring homomorphism thus means that the
images under f of the sum and product of r1 and r2 in R are equal to the
corresponding sum and product of the images of r1 and r2 in S. One says
that the mapping f preserves the ring structure.
A bijective (that is, injective and surjective) ring homomorphism is called
a ring isomorphism. If f : (R,+R, ·R) −→(S,+S, ·S) is a ring isomorphism, we
say that the rings R and S are isomorphic and write R ∼= S.
Exercise 3.2. Determine which of the following mappings are ring homo-
morphisms. Let (R,+, ·) be a nonnull ring, and A a nonempty set:
(a) f1 : R[X] −→R, where f1

∑j∈N aj · Xj
:= a0.
(b) f2 : R[X] −→R, where f2

∑j∈N aj · Xj
:= a1.
(c) f3 : map(A, R) −→R, where f3(g) := r (g ∈map(A, R)) for a ﬁxed r ∈R.
(d) f4 : map(A, R) −→R, where f4(g) := g(a) (g ∈map(A, R)) for a ﬁxed
a ∈A.
(e) f5 : R[X] −→R, where f5

∑j∈N aj · Xj
:= ∑j∈N aj · rj for a ﬁxed r ∈R.
In analogy to group homomorphisms introduced in Chapter II, we deﬁne
the kernel and image of a ring homomorphism.
Deﬁnition 3.3. Let (R,+R, ·R) be a ring with zero element 0R, and let
(S,+S, ·S) be a ring with zero element 0S. Furthermore, let f : (R,+R, ·R) −→
(S,+S, ·S) be a ring homomorphism. Then
ker( f ) := {r ∈R | f (r) = 0S}
is called the kernel of f, and

104
III The Rational Numbers
im( f ) := {s ∈S | ∃r ∈R : s = f (r)}
is called the image of f.
Lemma 3.4. Let f : (R,+R, ·R) −→(S,+S, ·S) be a ring homomorphism. Then
ker( f ) is a subring of R, and im( f ) is a subring of S.
Proof. The proof proceeds along the same lines as that of Lemma 3.10 of
Chapter II and can therefore be left to the reader as an exercise.
⊓⊔
Exercise 3.5. Prove Lemma 3.4.
Exercise 3.6. Determine the kernel and image of those mappings in Exer-
cise 3.2 that are ring homomorphisms.
Remark 3.7. For ease of notation, we shall usually omit the subscripts on the
operations +R and ·R and on the zero element 0R.
Example 3.8. We build here on Example 7.8 of Chapter II, in which we intro-
duced the group homomorphism f : (Z, +) −→(Rn, ⊕) via the assignment
a 7→Rn (a). It is easily veriﬁed that this mapping induces a surjective ring
homomorphism
f : (Z,+, ·) −→(Rn,⊕, ⊙).
For the kernel, we have, as in Example 7.8 of Chapter II,
ker( f ) = nZ.
Remark 3.9. The kernel ker( f ) of a ring homomorphism f : (R,+, ·) −→
(S,+, ·) is, by Lemma 3.4, a subring of R. We also note that the products
r · a and a · r are in the kernel of f not only for all a, r ∈ker( f ), but for all
a ∈ker( f ) and r ∈R, since we have
f (r · a) = f (r) · f (a) = f (r) · 0 = 0,
f (a · r) = f (a) · f (r) = 0 · f (r) = 0.
This observation leads to the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 3.10. Let (R,+, ·) be a ring. A subgroup (a, +) of the additive
group (R, +) is called an ideal of R if the products
r · a
and
a · r
are in a for all a ∈a and all r ∈R, that is, if we have the inclusions
R · a := {r · a | r ∈R, a ∈a} ⊆a,
a · R := {a · r | r ∈R, a ∈a} ⊆a.

3. Ring Homomorphisms, Ideals, and Quotient Rings
105
Remark 3.11. An ideal a of a ring (R,+, ·) is automatically also a subring
of R. The converse of this statement is, however, not in general true.
Example 3.12.
(i) Let (R,+, ·) be a ring. The subgroup (a, +) = ({0}, +)
is clearly an ideal of R. We call it the zero ideal of R and denote it by (0).
(ii) Again, let (R,+, ·) be a ring. The additive group (a, +) = (R, +) is an
ideal of R. If R has a unit element 1, then this ideal is also called the unit ideal
of R and is denoted by (1).
(iii) Let (R,+, ·) be a commutative ring. For a ﬁxed a ∈R, we consider
the set
a := {a · r | r ∈R}.
We can see that a is an ideal of R. Since 0 ∈a, it follows that a is not empty.
If in addition, we have a · r1, a · r2 ∈a, then we also have that the difference
a · r1 −a · r2 = a · (r1 −r2)
is in a. By the subgroup criterion, Lemma 2.25 of Chapter II, it follows that
(a, +) is a subgroup of the additive group (R, +). Finally, if we have a · r ∈a
and s ∈R, then by the associativity and commutativity of multiplication, we
have
s · (a · r) = a · (r · s) ∈a;
that is, we have R · a ⊆a, and by commutativity, a · R ⊆a. Therefore, a is an
ideal of R. We call it the principal ideal generated by a and denote it by (a).
Exercise 3.13. Let (R,+, ·) be a ring with unit element 1, and let a ⊆R be an
ideal of R with 1 ∈a. Show that we must have a = R.
Exercise 3.14. Is there a subring of (Z,+, ·) that is not an ideal of Z?
Exercise 3.15. Find a subring of the polynomial ring (Z[X],+, ·) that is not
an ideal of Z[X].
Exercise 3.16. Give examples of ideals in the polynomial ring (Z[X],+, ·).
Are there any ideals in this ring that are not principal ideals?
Lemma 3.17. Let f : (R,+, ·) −→(S,+, ·) be a ring homomorphism. Then ker( f )
is an ideal of R.
Proof. From Lemma 3.10 of Chapter II, we see that
 ker( f ), +

is an additive
subgroup of (R, +). From Remark 3.9, we derive the inclusions
R · ker( f ) ⊆ker( f )
and
ker( f ) · R ⊆ker( f ),
which prove that ker( f ) is an ideal as claimed.
⊓⊔

106
III The Rational Numbers
Exercise 3.18. Which of the kernels of the ring homomorphisms in Exer-
cise 3.2 are principal ideals?
Lemma 3.19. In the ring (Z,+, ·), all the ideals are principal, that is, for each
ideal a, there exists an integer a such that a = (a).
Proof. If a is the zero ideal, then we have a = (0), and we are done. Other-
wise, since a is not the zero ideal, there exists a nonzero integer b ∈a. Multi-
plying b by −1 if necessary, we have a nonzero element in the set a ∩N. By
the well-ordering principle, there exists a least positive integer a ∈a.
By the deﬁnition of an ideal, we see at once that we must have
(a) ⊆a.
We now prove the reverse inclusion. To this end, let c ∈a be an arbitrary
element. On dividing c by a with remainder (see Theorem 1.4), we obtain
uniquely determined integers q, r with 0 ≤r < a such that
c = q · a + r.
Since we have a, c ∈a, it follows from the fact that a is an ideal that we must
also have r = c −q · a as an element of a. If we had r ̸= 0, then r would be
a nonzero element of a ∩N that is smaller than a. But that would contradict
the minimality of a. We must therefore have r = 0, and we have c = q · a,
that is, we have c ∈(a). This completes the proof of the inclusion a ⊆(a).
We have thus completed the proof that a = (a), which is what was to be
shown.
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition 3.20. Let (R,+, ·) be a ring, and a an ideal of R. Since the addi-
tive group (R, +) is abelian by deﬁnition, the additive subgroup (a, +) of
the ideal is automatically a normal subgroup of (R, +). We may therefore
consider the quotient group (R/a, ⊕). The elements of R/a are given by
cosets of the form r + a (r ∈R). The sum of two cosets r1 + a and r2 + a is
given by
(r1 + a) ⊕(r2 + a) = (r1 + r2) + a
(see Deﬁnition 5.1 of Chapter II). We note that in contrast to Deﬁnition 5.1
of Chapter II, where we denoted the operation in the quotient group by •,
here we have chosen the notation ⊕to account for the additive nature of this
construction. Incidentally, the reader will have no difﬁculty in distinguish-
ing the notation ⊕used here from the same notation used in the example of
(Rn,⊕, ⊙).
We deﬁne a multiplicative operation ⊙on the quotient group (R/a, ⊕)
by setting, for two cosets r1 + a and r2 + a (in this case as well, there should
be no confusion with (Rn,⊕, ⊙)),
(r1 + a) ⊙(r2 + a) := (r1 · r2) + a.
(6)

3. Ring Homomorphisms, Ideals, and Quotient Rings
107
This deﬁnition appears to depend on the choice of representatives r1 and
r2 for the cosets r1 + a and r2 + a. In the following theorem, we prove in
particular that the multiplicative operation ⊙is, in fact, well deﬁned.
Theorem 3.21. Let (R,+, ·) be a ring, and a an ideal of R. Then the set of cosets
R/a together with the two operations
(r1 + a) ⊕(r2 + a) = (r1 + r2) + a,
(r1 + a) ⊙(r2 + a) = (r1 · r2) + a,
forms a ring.
Proof. (i) First, we see from Deﬁnition 3.20 that (R/a, ⊕) is an abelian group
with identity element (zero element) a.
(ii) We now show that the multiplicative operation ⊙is well deﬁned. To
this end, let r1, r′
1 and r2, r′
2 be representatives of the respective cosets r1 + a
and r2 + a. To prove that multiplication ⊙is well deﬁned, we must prove
the equality
(r1 · r2) + a = (r′
1 · r′
2) + a.
(7)
We have the equalities
r′
1 = r1 + a1
(a1 ∈a),
r′
2 = r2 + a2
(a2 ∈a),
connecting the representatives r1, r′
1 and r2, r′
2. From these, we calculate
r′
1 · r′
2 = (r1 + a1) · (r2 + a2) = r1 · r2 + r1 · a2 + a1 · r2 + a1 · a2.
Because a is an ideal, we see that
r1 · a2 + a1 · r2 + a1 · a2 ∈a.
Therefore, the product r′
1 · r′
2 is also a representative of the coset (r1 · r2) + a;
that is, we have indeed the asserted equality (7). This proves that the multi-
plication ⊙is well deﬁned.
(iii) The associativity of the multiplication ⊙is shown, using deﬁnition (6)
and the associativity of the multiplication operation · , as follows:
(r1 + a) ⊙
 (r2 + a) ⊙(r3 + a)
 = (r1 + a) ⊙
 (r2 · r3) + a

=
 r1 · (r2 · r3)
 + a =
 (r1 · r2) · r3
 + a
=
 (r1 · r2) + a
 ⊙(r3 + a) =
 (r1 + a) ⊙(r2 + a)
 ⊙(r3 + a).
(iv) The proof of the distributive laws also derives from deﬁnition (6) and
the distributive laws in the ring (R,+, ·); for example, we have

108
III The Rational Numbers
(r1 + a) ⊙
 (r2 + a) ⊕(r3 + a)
 = (r1 + a) ⊙
 (r2 + r3) + a

=
 r1 · (r2 + r3)
 + a =
 (r1 · r2) + (r1 · r3)
 + a
=
 (r1 · r2) + a
 ⊕
 (r1 · r3) + a

= (r1 + a) ⊙(r2 + a) ⊕(r1 + a) ⊙(r3 + a).
We have proved that (R/a,⊕, ⊙) is a ring.
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition 3.22. Let (R,+, ·) be a ring, and a an ideal of R. Then the ring
(R/a,⊕, ⊙) is called the quotient ring of R by the ideal a.
Remark 3.23. Let f : (R,+, ·) −→(S,+, ·) be a ring homomorphism. Then,
Lemma 3.17 tells us that ker( f ) is an ideal of R; by Theorem 3.21, we may
consider the quotient ring (R/ker( f ),⊕, ⊙). We recognize the canonical
group homomorphism
π : (R, +) −→(R/ker( f ), ⊕)
from Remark 5.6 of Chapter II, deﬁned by the assignment r 7→r + ker( f ), as
a ring homomorphism, since we have
π(r1 · r2) = (r1 · r2) + ker( f )
=
 r1 + ker( f )
 ⊙
 r2 + ker( f )

= π(r1) ⊙π(r2).
We call this the canonical ring homomorphism.
Theorem 3.24 (Homomorphism theorem for rings). Let f : (R,+, ·) −→
(S,+, ·) be a ring homomorphism. Then f induces a uniquely determined injec-
tive ring homomorphism
¯f : (R/ker( f ),⊕, ⊙) −→(S,+, ·)
such that ¯f
 r + ker( f )
 = f (r) for all r ∈R. This result can be illustrated schemat-
ically by saying that the following diagram is commutative:
(R,+, ·)
π

f
'
(R/ker( f ),⊕, ⊙)
∃! ¯f
/ (S,+, ·)
Commutativity of the diagram means that the same result is obtained by executing
the mapping f directly or by ﬁrst executing π and then the mapping ¯f.
Proof. According the homomorphism theorem for groups, Theorem 5.7 of
Chapter II, there exists a uniquely determined injective group homomor-

3. Ring Homomorphisms, Ideals, and Quotient Rings
109
phism
¯f : (R/ker( f ), ⊕) −→(S, +)
such that ¯f
 r + ker( f )
 = f (r) for all r ∈R. It thus remains to show that
¯f respects the multiplicative structure as well. Using the deﬁnition of the
operation ⊙, the deﬁnition of ¯f, and the ring homomorphism f, we compute
the image under ¯f of the product of the two cosets r1 + ker( f ) and r2 +
ker( f ) as
¯f
  r1 + ker( f )
 ⊙
 r2 + ker( f )
 = ¯f
 (r1 · r2) + ker( f )
 = f (r1 · r2)
= f (r1) · f (r2) = ¯f
 r1 + ker( f )
 · ¯f
 r2 + ker( f )

.
We have thus shown that ¯f is a ring homomorphism, which completes the
proof of the homomorphism theorem for rings.
⊓⊔
Corollary 3.25. Let f : (R,+, ·) −→(S,+, ·) be a surjective ring homomorphism.
Then f determines a uniquely determined ring isomorphism
¯f : (R/ker( f ),⊕, ⊙) ∼= (S,+, ·)
such that ¯f
 r + ker( f )
 = f (r) for all r ∈R.
⊓⊔
Example 3.26.
(i) We continue Example 3.8, in which we saw that there
arises a surjective ring homomorphism
f : (Z,+, ·) −→(Rn,⊕, ⊙)
with ker( f ) = nZ. By Corollary 3.25 to the homomorphism theorem for
rings, we have the ring isomorphism
(Z/nZ,⊕, ⊙) ∼= (Rn,⊕, ⊙),
given by the assignment a + nZ 7→Rn(a).
(ii) Let (R,+, ·) = (Z,+, ·), and let (S,+, ·) be a domain with unit ele-
ment 1. The assignment
n 7→







n · 1 = 1 + ··· + 1
|
{z
}
n times
,
if n ∈Z, n ≥0,
−
 (−n) · 1

,
if n ∈Z, n < 0,
deﬁnes a ring homomorphism f : (Z,+, ·) −→(S,+, ·). The kernel of f is
equal to the ideal
ker( f ) = {n ∈Z | n · 1 = 0}.
We distinguish two cases:

110
III The Rational Numbers
(a) char(S) = 0: In this case, we have by deﬁnition that n · 1 ̸= 0 for all
n ∈Z \ {0}; that is, ker( f ) = {0}, which implies the injectivity of f. Thus
every ring of characteristic zero contains a subring isomorphic to the ring of
integers (Z,+, ·); in the sequel, we will identify this subring with the inte-
gers (Z,+, ·).
(b) char(S) = p: In this case, we have by deﬁnition that for the prime num-
ber p, we have p · 1 = 0; that is, ker( f ) = pZ. By the homomorphism theorem
for rings, we thus obtain an injective ring homomorphism ¯f : Z/pZ −→S.
Therefore every ring of characteristic p contains (an isomorphic copy of) the
quotient ring (Z/pZ,⊕, ⊙) ∼= (Rp,⊕, ⊙) as a subring.
Exercise 3.27. Find a ring homomorphism f : (Z[X],+, ·) −→(Z,+, ·) such
that for some a ∈Z, there exists, as described in Corollary 3.25, a ring iso-
morphism
(Z[X]/(X −a),⊕, ⊙) ∼= (Z,+, ·).
Exercise 3.28. Formulate and prove an analogue for rings of the group iso-
morphism from Exercise 5.11 of Chapter II.
4.
Fields and Skew Fields
The motivation to extend the deﬁnition of a ring to deﬁne ﬁelds and skew
ﬁelds is again based on the desire to remove restrictions on the solutions to
linear equations. If (R,+, ·) is a commutative ring with unit element 1, then
the equation
a · x = b
(a, b ∈R)
(8)
is solvable in R if a has an inverse in R, in which case the solution is x =
a−1 · b. A ﬁeld is a commutative ring with unit element 1 such that each of
its nonzero elements has a multiplicative inverse in R, with the result that
(8) always has a solution in R except for the case a = 0 and b ̸= 0.
Deﬁnition 4.1. Let (R,+, ·) be a ring with unit element 1. Then we denote
the set of units of R by R×; that is,
R× = {a ∈R | a has a (multiplicative) inverse in R}.
A ring (R,+, ·) with unit element 1 is called a skew ﬁeld if
R× = R \ {0}.
A commutative skew ﬁeld is called a ﬁeld.

4. Fields and Skew Fields
111
Remark 4.2. (i) Let (R,+, ·) be a ring with unit element 1. Then (R×, ·) is a
group with identity element 1. We call it the multiplicative group of the ring
(R,+, ·).
(ii) If (R,+, ·) is a skew ﬁeld, then every a ∈R, a ̸= 0, has a multiplica-
tive inverse a−1 = 1
a = 1/a ∈R. The multiplicative group of the skew ﬁeld
(R,+, ·) is equal to (R \ {0}, ·).
(iii) If (R,+, ·) is a ﬁeld and a, b ∈R with b ̸= 0, then we use the notation
a · b−1 = a
b = a/b.
Example 4.3. Let p be a prime number. Then the ring (Rp,⊕,⊙) is a skew
ﬁeld; it is, in fact, a ﬁeld. The situation is especially simple for the case p = 2,
for which have the ﬁeld comprising the two elements 0, 1.
Exercise 4.4. Try to ﬁnd a skew ﬁeld with ﬁnitely many elements that is not
a ﬁeld.
Remark 4.5. In Chapter VI, we shall discuss an example of a skew ﬁeld that
is not a ﬁeld, namely the Hamiltonian quaternions.
Lemma 4.6. Let (K,+, ·) be a ﬁeld. Then for a, b, c, d ∈K, we have the following
calculational rules:
(i)
If b, c ̸= 0, then
a
b = a · c
b · c.
(ii)
If b, d ̸= 0, then
a
b ± c
d = a · d ± b · c
b · d
.
(iii) If b, d ̸= 0, then
a
b · c
d = a · c
b · d.
Proof. (i) For b, c ̸= 0, we compute
a
b = a · b−1 = a · c · c−1 · b−1 = (a · c) · (b · c)−1 = a · c
b · c.
(ii) Using the commutativity of multiplication and the distributive laws,
we can calculate, for b, d ̸= 0,
a
b ± c
d = a · b−1 ± c · d−1
= (a · d) · (b · d)−1 ± (b · c) · (b · d)−1
= (a · d ± b · c) · (b · d)−1
= a · d ± b · c
b · d
.

112
III The Rational Numbers
(iii) Using the commutativity of multiplication, we can calculate, for b,d ̸= 0,
a
b · c
d = (a · b−1) · (c · d−1) = (a · c) · (b · d)−1 = a · c
b · d.
This completes the proof of the lemma.
⊓⊔
5.
Construction of Fields from Integral Domains
In analogy to how we proceeded in Theorem 6.5 of Chapter II, in which we
extended regular abelian semigroups to abelian groups, we would like in
this section to embed integral domains in ﬁelds.
Remark 5.1. We recall from Deﬁnition 2.9 that an integral domain (R,+, ·) is
a nonnull commutative ring without zero divisors. This means in particular
that nonzero elements a, b ∈R satisfy a · b ̸= 0.
Furthermore, we observe that for an integral domain (R,+, ·), we have
that (R \ {0}, ·) is a regular abelian semigroup. (Note that since R ̸= {0}, it
follows that R \ {0} is nonempty.) Since there are no zero divisors, it follows
that R \ {0} is closed with respect to multiplication. The commutativity of
multiplication is obvious. If for a, b, c ∈R \ {0}, we have the equality a · c =
b · c, we can transform this in (R,+, ·) to
(a −b) · c = 0.
Since c ̸= 0, it follows that a −b = 0, which means that we must have a = b.
That is, we can “cancel” the c. This proves the regularity of the semigroup
(R \ {0}, ·).
Theorem 5.2. For every integral domain (R,+, ·), there exists a uniquely deter-
mined ﬁeld (K,⊕, ⊙) satisfying the following properties:
(i)
R is a subset of K, and the restrictions of ⊕and ⊙to R agree with the opera-
tions + and · .
(ii)
If (K′,⊕′, ⊙′) is another ﬁeld satisfying (i), then K is a subﬁeld of K′.
Proof. We must prove existence and uniqueness. We begin with the latter.
Uniqueness: The proof of uniqueness of the ﬁeld (K,⊕, ⊙) to be con-
structed proceeds analogously to the proof of uniqueness in Theorem 6.5
of Chapter II using property (ii).
Existence: To prove the existence of the ﬁeld in question, we consider the
set
M := R × (R \ {0}) = {(a, b) | a ∈R, b ∈R \ {0}}
with the relation ∼deﬁned as follows:
(a, b) ∼(c, d)
⇐⇒
a · d = b · c
(a, c ∈R; b, d ∈R \ {0}).

5. Construction of Fields from Integral Domains
113
Although the initial situation here is similar to that in the proof of Theo-
rem 6.5 of Chapter II, there is a subtle difference to be considered, namely
that the Cartesian product M has an asymmetry due to the fact that the two
factors are unequal.
We ﬁrst observe that as in Theorem 6.5 of Chapter II, the relation ∼is an
equivalence relation.
(a) Reﬂexivity: Since the multiplication is commutative, we have for all
a ∈R, b ∈R \ {0} the equality a · b = b · a. That is, (a, b) ∼(a, b). The relation
∼is therefore reﬂexive.
(b) Symmetry: Let (a, b), (c, d) ∈M have the property (a, b) ∼(c, d). That
is, a · d = b · c. Since the multiplication is commutative, we conclude that
c · b = d · a, which means precisely that (c, d) ∼(a, b). That is, ∼is symmetric.
(c) Transitivity: Let (a, b), (c, d), (e, f ) ∈M be such that (a, b) ∼(c, d) and
(c, d) ∼(e, f ). We then have the equalities
a · d = b · c,
c · f = d · e.
(9)
If we multiply the left-hand and right-hand sides of the two equalities to-
gether, we obtain, taking into account the associativity and commutativity
of multiplication, the following equivalent equalities:
(a · d) · (c · f ) = (b · c) · (d · e),
a · d · c · f = b · c · d · e,
(a · f ) · (d · c) = (b · e) · (d · c).
If c ̸= 0, then since d ̸= 0, we have also d · c ̸= 0, on account of the absence of
zero divisors in (R,+, ·), and we can cancel (d · c) in the last equality from
the right and obtain
a · f = b · e,
which implies that (a, b) ∼(e, f ). If, on the other hand, we have c = 0, then
we obtain from (9) that a = e = 0, which implies (a, b) = (0, b) ∼(0, f ) =
(e, f ). Therefore, the relation ∼is transitive.
We denote by [a, b] ⊆M the equivalence class of the pair (a, b) ∈M, and
by K the set of all such equivalence classes. For brevity, we write
K := M/ ∼.
Since the ring (R,+, ·) contains at least the zero element 0 and an addi-
tional element h ̸= 0, it follows that the set M contains at least the two dis-
tinct equivalence classes [0, h] and [h, h]. We now deﬁne two operations on
the set K of equivalence classes, which we denote by ⊕and ⊙. If we have
[a, b], [a′, b′] ∈K, then we deﬁne

114
III The Rational Numbers
[a, b] ⊕[a′, b′] := [a · b′ + a′ · b, b · b′],
[a, b] ⊙[a′, b′] := [a · a′, b · b′].
Since these deﬁnitions apparently depend on the choice of representatives
a, b and a′, b′ of the equivalence classes [a, b] and [a′, b′], we must prove that
these operations ⊕and ⊙are well deﬁned by showing that they are, in fact,
independent of this choice. To this end, let (c, d) and (c′, d′) be arbitrary
representatives of [a, b] and [a′, b′]. We then must show that
[a · b′ + a′ · b, b · b′] = [c · d′ + c′ · d, d · d′],
[a · a′, b · b′] = [c · c′, d · d′].
(d) Proof that ⊕is well deﬁned: Since (c, d) ∈[a, b] and (c′, d′) ∈[a′, b′],
we have
a · d = b · c
and
a′ · d′ = b′ · c′.
We therefore compute, using the associativity, commutativity, and distribu-
tivity in R,
(a · b′ + a′ · b) · (d · d′) = (a · d) · (b′ · d′) + (a′ · d′) · (b · d)
= (b · c) · (b′ · d′) + (b′ · c′) · (b · d) = (b · b′) · (c · d′ + c′ · d),
from which follows the asserted equivalence
(a · b′ + a′ · b, b · b′) ∼(c · d′ + c′ · d, d · d′).
(e) Proof that ⊙is well deﬁned: Again, since (c, d) ∈[a, b] and (c′, d′) ∈
[a′, b′], we have
a · d = b · c
and
a′ · d′ = b′ · c′.
Multiplying these two equations together yields, with the help of the asso-
ciativity and commutativity of R,
(a · d) · (a′ · d′) = (b · c) · (b′ · c′)
⇐⇒
(a · a′) · (d · d′) = (b · b′) · (c · c′),
from which follows the asserted equivalence
(a · a′, b · b′) ∼(c · c′, d · d′).
In sum, in (K,⊕, ⊙), we have a set containing at least the two distinct
elements [0, h], [h, h] and possessing two operations. In the following three
steps, we shall show that (K,⊕, ⊙) is a ﬁeld. We begin with the proof that
(K, ⊕) is an abelian group with identity element [0, h].
(1) As we have seen, the set K is nonempty. We leave it to the reader t
o prove that the operation ⊕is associative. The commutativity of ⊕can be
seen from the calculation, with [a, b], [a′, b′] ∈K,

5. Construction of Fields from Integral Domains
115
[a, b] ⊕[a′, b′] = [a · b′ + a′ · b, b · b′] = [a′ · b + a · b′, b′ · b] = [a′, b′] ⊕[a, b],
where we have used the commutativity of + and · .
Since h ̸= 0, we have the equivalent equalities
a · b = b · a
⇐⇒
(a · b) · h = (b · a) · h
⇐⇒
(a · h) · b = (b · h) · a.
That is, (a · h, b · h) ∼(a, b). We see, then, that [0, h] is the identity element of
(K, ⊕), since we have, for all [a, b] ∈K,
[a, b] ⊕[0, h] = [a · h + 0 · b, b · h] = [a · h, b · h] = [a, b].
The additive inverse of the element [a, b] ∈K is given by [−a, b] ∈K, since
we have
[a, b] ⊕[−a, b] = [a · b −a · b, b · b] = [0, b · b] = [0, h],
where we have used the equivalence (0, b · b) ∼(0, h). We have therefore
proved that (K, ⊕) is an abelian group with identity element [0, h].
(2) Our second step is to show that (K \ {[0, h]}, ⊙) is an abelian group
with identity element [h, h].
As already mentioned, we have [h, h] ̸= [0, h]. That is, [h, h] ∈K \ {[0, h]},
from which we see that K \ {[0, h]} is nonempty. The associativity of the
operation ⊙follows at once from the associativity of · , namely
[a, b] ⊙([a′, b′] ⊙[a′′, b′′]) = [a, b] ⊙[a′ · a′′, b′ · b′′]
= [a · (a′ · a′′), b · (b′ · b′′)]
= [(a · a′) · a′′, (b · b′) · b′′]
= [a · a′, b · b′] ⊙[a′′, b′′]
= ([a, b] ⊙[a′, b′]) ⊙[a′′, b′′].
The proof that ⊙is commutative follows just as easily, using the commuta-
tivity of · . Using again the equality of equivalence classes [a · h, b · h] = [a, b],
we further compute
[a, b] ⊙[h, h] = [a · h, b · h] = [a, b].
We see, then, that [h, h] is an identity element for K \ {[0, h]}. Finally, to
determine the multiplicative inverse of an element [a, b] ∈K \ {[0, h]}, we
observe that on account of (a, b) ≁(0, h), we have also a ̸= 0, whence we
also have (b, a) ∈M. We now claim that the multiplicative inverse of [a, b] ∈
K \ {[0, h]} is given by the element [b, a], which, by what we have just noted,
again lies in K \ {[0, h]}. In fact, we have
[a, b] ⊙[b, a] = [a · b, b · a] = [h, h],

116
III The Rational Numbers
since (a · b) · h = (b · a) · h. We have thereby proved that (K \ {[0, h]}, ⊙) is
an abelian group with identity element [h, h].
(3) To complete the proof of the ﬁeld properties of (K,⊕, ⊙), we must
verify the distributive laws. As an example, we carry out the proof for the
validity of one of the two laws. For [a, b], [a′, b′], [a′′, b′′] ∈K, we calculate
[a, b] ⊙([a′, b′] ⊕[a′′, b′′]) = [a, b] ⊙[a′ · b′′ + a′′ · b′, b′ · b′′]
= [a · (a′ · b′′ + a′′ · b′), b · (b′ · b′′)]
= [a · a′ · b′′ + a · a′′ · b′, b · b′ · b′′]
= [(a · a′) · (b · b′′) + (a · a′′) · (b · b′), (b · b′) · (b · b′′)]
= [a · a′, b · b′] ⊕[a · a′′, b · b′′]
= [a, b] ⊙[a′, b′] ⊕[a, b] ⊙[a′′, b′′].
Altogether, we have proved that (K,⊕, ⊙) is a ﬁeld with zero element
[0, h] and unit element [h, h]. To complete the proof, we must show that
(K,⊕, ⊙) satisﬁes the two asserted properties (i), (ii), that is, (i) that R is a
subset of K and the restrictions of ⊕and ⊙to R coincide with the operations
+ and ·, and (ii) that (K,⊕, ⊙) is minimal with respect to property (i).
To prove property (i), it sufﬁces to ﬁnd an injective mapping f : R −→K
satisfying
f (a + b) = f (a) ⊕f (b)
(a, b ∈R),
(10)
f (a · b) = f (a) ⊙f (b)
(a, b ∈R).
(11)
If we then identify R with its image f (R) ⊆K, we obtain the desired result
using (10) and (11). We deﬁne the mapping f : R −→K by sending the el-
ement a ∈R to the element [a · h, h] ∈K (the element h was selected in the
construction of the unit element [h, h] of K). We now show, to begin with,
that f is injective. To this end, let a, b ∈R be such that
f (a) = f (b)
⇐⇒
[a · h, h] = [b · h, h]
⇐⇒
(a · h, h) ∼(b · h, h).
But in consideration of the properties of the integral domain (R,+, ·), this is
equivalent to
(a · h) · h = h · (b · h)
⇐⇒
a · h2 = b · h2
⇐⇒
a = b,
from which follows the injectivity of f.
To prove (10), we choose two arbitrary elements a, b ∈R and calculate,
taking into account the distributivity in (R,+, ·),
f (a + b) = [(a + b) · h, h] = [a · h + b · h, h] = [(a · h) · h + (b · h) · h, h · h]
= [a · h, h] ⊕[b · h, h] = f (a) ⊕f (b).

6. The Rational Numbers
117
To prove (11), we choose two arbitrary elements a, b ∈R and calculate,
taking into account the associativity and commutativity of · ,
f (a · b) = [(a · b) · h, h] = [a · b · h, h] = [a · b · h · h, h · h]
= [(a · h) · (b · h), h · h] = [a · h, h] ⊙[b · h, h] = f (a) ⊙f (b).
We have thus proved the structure-preserving properties of f asserted in
(10) and (11), and so we see that (K,⊕, ⊙) is indeed a ﬁeld that satisﬁes
property (i).
To ﬁnish the proof, we show, ﬁnally, that the ﬁeld (K,⊕, ⊙) that we have
constructed is minimal. To do so, we begin with the end of the proof of
Theorem 6.5 of Chapter II and show that if [a · h, h] ∈K for a ∈R, a ̸= 0,
then we have also [h, a · h] ∈K, and K as a ﬁeld must necessarily contain
all elements of the form [a, b] for a ∈R and b ∈R \ {0}, which proves the
minimality of K.
⊓⊔
Exercise 5.3. Complete the proof of Theorem 5.2 by proving the associativity
of ⊕, the commutativity of ⊙, and the second distributive law.
Deﬁnition 5.4. Let (R,+, ·) be an integral domain. The ﬁeld (K,⊕, ⊙) con-
structed in Theorem 5.2 is called the ﬁeld of fractions of R and is denoted by
Quot(R). The elements [a, b] ∈K are usually represented in the form a · b−1
or a
b or a/b.
Exercise 5.5. Show that if (K,+, ·) is a ﬁeld, then the construction of the ﬁeld
of fractions produces nothing new; that is, there exists a ring isomorphism
(Quot(K),⊕, ⊙) ∼= (K,+, ·).
6.
The Rational Numbers
We would like now to consider in greater depth the ﬁeld (K,⊕, ⊙) con-
structed in Theorem 5.2 from the integral domain (R,+, ·) = (Z,+, ·). This
will lead us to the ﬁeld of rational numbers.
We note ﬁrst that the equivalence relation ∼deﬁned on the Cartesian
product Z × (Z \ {0}) now takes the form
(a, b) ∼(c, d)
⇐⇒
a · d = b · c
(a, b ∈Z;b, d ∈Z \ {0}).
The ﬁeld (K,⊕, ⊙) is given, by the proof of Theorem 5.2, by the set of all
equivalence classes a
b = [a, b] of pairs (a, b) ∈Z × (Z \ {0}) with the opera-
tions
a
b ⊕a′
b′ = a · b′ + a′ · b
b · b′
and
a
b ⊙a′
b′ = a · a′
b · b′ ,

118
III The Rational Numbers
for a
b, a′
b′ ∈K. The zero element of (K,⊕, ⊙) is given by 0
1 and the unit element
by 1
1, where 0 and 1 denote the respective integers zero and one.
We see from the proof of Theorem 5.2 that the set of integers Z stands in
bijection to the set { a
1 | a ∈Z}. This bijection is induced by the assignment
a 7→[a · 1, 1] = a
1. Once we have identiﬁed the set of integers Z with the
set { a
1 | a ∈Z}, that is, once we set a = a
1, we may then consider Z to be a
subset of K.
Deﬁnition 6.1. We shall hereinafter denote the set (K,⊕, ⊙) by (Q,+, ·),
and we shall call it the ﬁeld of rational numbers. We may represent Q as a set
in the form
Q =
 a
b
 a ∈Z, b ∈Z \ {0}

.
We call the rational number a
b a fraction or the quotient of the integers a and b.
Remark 6.2. (i) For fractions a
b and a′
b′ , we can rediscover the well-known
operations of addition, subtraction, and multiplication, namely
a
b ± a′
b′ = a · b′ ± a′ · b
b · b′
and
a
b · a′
b′ = a · a′
b · b′ .
If a
b ̸= 0, then we have the familiar rule
 a
b
−1
= b
a .
(ii) The zero element 0 and unit element 1 of the integers Z are also, by
the identiﬁcation made above, equal to the zero and unit elements of the
rational numbers Q.
(iii) In considering the quotient a
b, one should always keep in mind the
underlying equivalence class, namely
3
5 = 6
10 = 9
15 = ··· .
That is, each of the pairs (3, 5), (6, 10), (9, 15),... is a representative of the
rational number 3
5.
Of course, behind this is lurking the fact that by construction, we have
a
b = c
d
⇐⇒
a · d = b · c.
Exercise 6.3. Show that every rational number r has exactly one represen-
tation (a, b) ∈Z × (Z \ {0}) such that a and b are relatively prime and
b ∈N \ {0}.

7. Unique Factorization Domains, Principal Ideal Domains, and Euclidean Domains 119
Exercise 6.4. Prove that the set Q of rational numbers is countable; that is,
show that there is a bijection between Q and N as sets.
Deﬁnition 6.5. We extend to the set Q of rational numbers the relations
< and ≤on the set Z of integers from Deﬁnition 7.4 of Chapter II: for two
rational numbers a
b, a′
b′ , we set
a
b < a′
b′
⇐⇒



a · b′ < a′ · b,
if b > 0, b′ > 0 or b < 0, b′ < 0,
a · b′ > a′ · b,
if b > 0, b′ < 0 or b < 0, b′ > 0,
and
a
b ≤a′
b′
⇐⇒



a · b′ ≤a′ · b,
if b > 0, b′ > 0 or b < 0, b′ < 0,
a · b′ ≥a′ · b,
if b > 0, b′ < 0 or b < 0, b′ > 0.
We extend the relations > and ≥to Q analogously.
Remark 6.6. With the relation <, the set Q of rational numbers becomes an
ordered set; that is, the following three conditions are satisﬁed:
(i)
For elements a
b, a′
b′ ∈Q, we have a
b < a′
b′ or a′
b′ < a
b or a
b = a′
b′ .
(ii)
The three relations a
b < a′
b′ , a′
b′ < a
b, a
b = a′
b′ are mutually exclusive.
(iii) If a
b < a′
b′ and a′
b′ < a′′
b′′ , then a
b < a′′
b′′ .
Analogous conditions hold for >.
Exercise 6.7. Determine how the rules for addition and multiplication from
Remark 1.19 of Chapter I can be extended to the rational numbers and prove
their validity.
Deﬁnition 6.8. Let a
b ∈Q be a rational number. We set

a
b
 :=
(
a · b−1,
if a · b−1 ≥0,
−a · b−1,
if a · b−1 < 0.
We call the rational number | a
b| the absolute value of the rational number a
b.
7.
Unique Factorization Domains, Principal Ideal Domains, and
Euclidean Domains
To conclude this chapter, we would like to investigate how we might carry
over the theory of divisibility in the ring (Z,+, ·), which we learned about

120
III The Rational Numbers
in Chapter II, to integral domains (R,+, ·) with unit 1. We shall place par-
ticular emphasis on the notion of greatest common divisor. Throughout this
section, we shall let (R,+, ·) be an integral domain with unit element 1.
We begin with a generalization of the notion of divisibility from Deﬁni-
tion 2.1 of Chapter I.
Deﬁnition 7.1. An element b ∈R, b ̸= 0, divides an element a ∈R, denoted
by b | a, if there exists an element c ∈R such that a = b · c. We say also that b
is a divisor of a. Furthermore, b ∈R is a common divisor of a1, a2 ∈R if there
exist c1, c2 ∈R such that aj = b · cj for j = 1, 2.
We next extend the notions of greatest common divisor and least common
multiple from Deﬁnitions 4.1 and 4.7 of Chapter I to integral domains with
unit element 1.
Deﬁnition 7.2. Let a, b be elements of R not both equal to the zero ele-
ment 0. An element d ∈R satisfying the following two properties is called a
greatest common divisor of a and b:
(i)
d | a and d | b, that is, d is a common divisor of a, b;
(ii)
for all x ∈R with x | a and x | b, we have x | d, that is, every common
divisor of a, b divides d.
Deﬁnition 7.3. Let a, b be nonzero elements of R. An element m ∈R satisfy-
ing the following two properties is called a least common multiple of a and b:
(i)
a | m and b | m, that is, m is a common multiple of a, b;
(ii)
for all y ∈R with a | y and b | y, we have m | y, that is, every common
multiple of a, b is a multiple of m.
Exercise 7.4. Determine a greatest common divisor and least common mul-
tiple of the polynomials 20X and 10X2 + 4X −6 in the polynomial ring Z[X].
Remark 7.5. Once we leave the familiar territory of the ring of integers, it
is no longer clear whether a greatest common divisor of two ring elements
even exists. If there is a greatest common divisor d, we know that all of the
associates of d, that is, all products e · d with e ∈R×, also satisfy the prop-
erties of a greatest common divisor. That is, there is, in general, no sense in
speaking about the greatest common divisor. An analogous comment holds
for the notion of least common multiple.
Finally, we carry over the notion of prime number to integral domains
with unit element 1.
Deﬁnition 7.6. An element p ∈R \ R×, p ̸= 0, is said to be irreducible if it is
divisible only by the units of R and its own associates.
An element a ∈R \ R×, a ̸= 0, that is not irreducible is said to be reducible.

7. Unique Factorization Domains, Principal Ideal Domains, and Euclidean Domains 121
An element p ∈R \ R×, p ̸= 0, is said to be prime if p | a · b for a,b ∈R
implies p | a or p | b.
Remark 7.7. We note without proof that prime elements are always irre-
ducible. We remark, however, that the converse of this statement is in gen-
eral false.
Example 7.8. In the integral domain Z, the units are ±1; the irreducible ele-
ments are the integers ±p with p a prime. By Euclid’s lemma (Lemma 1.7),
the irreducible elements are also prime.
Exercise 7.9. Give some examples of irreducible elements in the polynomial
rings Z[X] and Q[X]. Are these irreducible elements also prime?
Remark 7.10. Recalling the discussion in Chapter I, we may see that the ex-
istence of a greatest common divisor is an immediate consequence of the
fundamental theorem of arithmetic. As for the question of the existence of
greatest common divisors in integral domains, one is led to the question
of existence and uniqueness of factorization (up to order of the factors and
multiplication by units) of reducible elements in such rings into irreducible
factors. As a negative result in this direction, we remark here that later on,
we shall see examples of integral domains in which there is no suitable ana-
logue of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic. With this in mind, we shall
see that it is useful to extend the notion of divisibility to ideals.
Deﬁnition 7.11. Let a and b be ideals of R. The ideal b divides the ideal a,
denoted by b | a, if the two ideals satisfy the inclusion b ⊇a.
The relationship between divisibility of elements and divisibility of ideals
is clariﬁed in the following lemma.
Lemma 7.12. Let a = (a) and b = (b) be principal ideals of R. Then one has the
equivalence
b | a
⇐⇒
b | a.
Proof. (i) If b | a, then there exists c ∈R such that a = b · c, from which follows
a = (a) = a · R = (b · c) · R ⊆b · R = (b) = b.
This shows that b ⊇a; that is, b | a.
(ii) Suppose now that b | a, that is, by the above deﬁnition, that
(b) = b ⊇a = (a).
Since now we have a ∈(a), we have also a ∈(b), and so there must exist
c ∈R with a = b · c. This shows that b | a.
⊓⊔

122
III The Rational Numbers
Deﬁnition 7.13. Let a and b be ideals of R. Then we call the set
a + b := {a + b | a ∈a, b ∈b}
the sum of the ideals a and b.
Lemma 7.14. Let a and b be ideals of R. Then we have the following:
(i)
The sum a + b of the ideals a and b is an ideal of R. It is the smallest ideal of
R containing a and b.
(ii)
The intersection a ∩b of the ideals a and b is an ideal of R. It is the largest
ideal of R that is contained in the ideals a and b.
Proof. (i) Using the subgroup criterion, Lemma 2.25 of Chapter II, it is easy
to verify that (a + b, +) is a subgroup of (R, +). For r ∈R and a + b ∈a + b,
we obtain
r(a + b) = r · a + r · b ∈a + b.
This proves that a + b is an ideal of R. Since an ideal is a group under ad-
dition, it must contain all sums of its elements, and so an ideal containing
both a and b must contain all sums of the form a + b (with a ∈a and b ∈b).
This shows that a + b is the smallest ideal containing both a and b.
(ii) We leave this part of the proof as an exercise for the reader.
⊓⊔
Exercise 7.15. Carry out part (ii) of the proof of Lemma 7.14.
Remark 7.16. We point out here that the union of two ideals is not, in gen-
eral, an ideal. For example, the union of the ideals a = 2Z and b = 3Z is not
even closed under addition, since we have 2 + 3 = 5 /∈2Z ∪3Z.
Lemma 7.14 together with Deﬁnition 7.11 motivates the following deﬁni-
tion.
Deﬁnition 7.17. Let a and b be ideals of R. Then the ideal a + b, the sum of
those ideals, is the greatest common divisor of the ideals a and b, for which we
write (a, b).
The intersection ideal a ∩b is called the least common multiple of the ideals
a and b, for which we write [a, b].
We now consider three types of integral domain (R,+, ·) with unit ele-
ment 1 for which the greatest common divisor of two elements exists. In
each case, we will show how to calculate the greatest common divisor. We
shall denote the greatest common divisor of a, b ∈R by (a, b), as usual. We
must keep in mind, however, that (a, b) is deﬁned only up to multiplication
by a unit in R. In contrast, the principal ideal
 (a, b)

generated by (a, b) in
R is uniquely determined.

7. Unique Factorization Domains, Principal Ideal Domains, and Euclidean Domains 123
7.1
Unique Factorization Domains
Deﬁnition 7.18. An integral domain (R,+, ·) with unit element 1 is called a
unique factorization domain (that is, a ring with unique prime decomposition)
if every nonzero, nonunit element (that is, every a in R \ R×, a ̸= 0) can
be represented uniquely (up to order and multiplication by a unit) as the
product of powers of irreducible elements. Unique factorization domains
are also sometimes called factorial rings.
Example 7.19.
(i) The ring (Z,+, ·) is a unique factorization domain by
Theorem 1.8.
(ii) The set Q[X] of polynomials in the variable X with rational coefﬁ-
cients and with the usual addition and multiplication of polynomials, that
is, (Q[X],+, ·), is an integral domain with unit element 1. It can be shown
that (Q[X],+, ·) is a unique factorization domain.
Lemma 7.20. Let (R,+, ·) be a unique factorization domain. Furthermore, let a, b
be elements of R not both equal to the zero element 0 with the unique (up to order
and multiplication by units) prime-power decompositions
a =
∏
p∈R
p irreducible
pap,
b =
∏
p∈R
p irreducible
pbp
into irreducible elements. Then a greatest common divisor (a, b) of a and b is
(a, b) =
∏
p∈R
p irreducible
pdp ,
where dp := min(ap, bp).
Proof. The proof is completely analogous to the proof of Theorem 4.3 of
Chapter I.
⊓⊔
Remark 7.21. Later, we shall see examples of rings that are not unique fac-
torization domains. The following theorem, which we give without proof,
suggests why it is not so easy to ﬁnd integral domains that are not unique
factorization domains.
Theorem 7.22 (Gauss’s theorem). If (R,+, ·) is a unique factorization domain,
then the polynomial ring (R[X],+, ·) is also a unique factorization domain.
⊓⊔

124
III The Rational Numbers
7.2
Principal Ideal Domains
Deﬁnition 7.23. An integral domain (R,+, ·) with unit element 1 is called
a principal ideal domain if every ideal of R is a principal ideal, that is, if every
ideal a of R is generated by some a ∈R, that is, a = (a).
Example 7.24.
(i) The ring (Z,+, ·) is a principal ideal domain by Lem-
ma 3.19.
(ii) It can be shown that the polynomial ring (Q[X],+, ·) is also a princi-
pal ideal domain. See Example 7.34 below.
Exercise 7.25. We have already seen that (Z[X],+, ·) is not a principal ideal
domain. Try to ﬁnd other such examples.
The following theorem shows the relationship between unique factoriza-
tion domains and principal ideal domains. We present it without proof.
Theorem 7.26. Every principal ideal domain is a unique factorization domain.
⊓⊔
Remark 7.27. The converse is false: (Z[X],+, ·) is a unique factorization do-
main by Gauss’s theorem, but it is not a principal ideal domain.
On the other hand, it can be shown that in principal ideal domains, ev-
ery irreducible element is also a prime element. Thus in a principal ideal
domain, the notions of primality and irreducibility are equivalent.
Lemma 7.28. Let (R,+, ·) be a principal ideal domain. Furthermore, let a, b be
elements of R, not both equal to the zero element 0. Then the ideal (a) + (b) is a
principal ideal. That is, there exists d ∈R such that
(a) + (b) = (d).
Then d is a greatest common divisor of a and b. That is, d = (a, b).
Proof. We must show that d satisﬁes the following two properties:
(i)
d | a and d | b,
(ii)
for all x ∈R with x | a and x | b, we have x | d.
Proof of (i): Since by construction, (a) ⊆(a) + (b) = (d) and (b) ⊆(a) +
(b) = (d), we obtain at once using Lemma 7.12 that d | a and d | b.
Proof of (ii): Let x ∈R be a common divisor of a and b. Then Lemma 7.12
implies that
(a) ⊆(x)
and
(b) ⊆(x).
But then the ideal (d) = (a) + (b) is contained in the principal ideal (x); that
is, (d) ⊆(x). Another application of Lemma 7.12 shows that x | d.
⊓⊔

7. Unique Factorization Domains, Principal Ideal Domains, and Euclidean Domains 125
Lemma 7.29. Let (R,+, ·) be a principal ideal domain. Furthermore, let a, b be
elements of R, not both equal to the zero element 0. Then there exist x, y ∈R such
that a greatest common divisor (a, b) of a, b is given by
(a, b) = x · a + y · b.
Proof. By Lemma 7.28, a greatest common divisor d = (a, b) of a, b is deter-
mined by the equation of ideals
(d) = (a) + (b).
That is, we have in particular that d ∈(a) + (b). Since now the elements of
the ideal (a) + (b) are given by
(a) + (b) = {a′ + b′ | a′ ∈(a), b′ ∈(b)} = {r · a + s · b | r, s ∈R},
we have that d is of the form
d = x · a + y · b,
with x, y ∈R.
⊓⊔
7.3
Euclidean Domains
Deﬁnition 7.30. An integral domain (R,+, ·) with unit element 1 is called
a Euclidean domain if there exists a valuation function w : R \ {0} −→Q sat-
isfying the following two properties:
(i)
(Division with remainder). If a, b ∈R, b ̸= 0, then there exist q, r ∈R such
that a = q · b + r with w(r) < w(b) or r = 0.
(ii)
For every s ∈Q, the set
W(s) :=

w(a) | a ∈R \ {0}, w(a) < s
	
is ﬁnite.
Example 7.31. The ring of integers (Z,+, ·) is a Euclidean domain with the
valuation function w : Z \ {0} −→Q given by the absolute value w(a) := |a|
(a ∈Z \ {0}). The validity of property (i) in Deﬁnition 7.30 is an immediate
consequence of Theorem 1.4, on division with remainder of integers. Prop-
erty (ii) is satisﬁed because for a given rational number s, at most ﬁnitely
many integers have absolute value less than s.
Theorem 7.32. Every Euclidean domain (R,+, ·) is a principal ideal domain.
Proof. Let (R,+, ·) be a Euclidean domain with valuation function w : R \{0}
−→Q. We must show that every ideal a ⊆R is principal. If a is the zero

126
III The Rational Numbers
ideal, then a = (0), and we are done. We may therefore assume that a ̸= (0).
Therefore, a has at least one element a0 ̸= 0. Let w0 := w(a0) ∈Q be the value
of a0 under w. From property (ii) of Deﬁnition 7.30, we have that the set

w(a) | a ∈a \ {0}, w(a) < w0
	
is ﬁnite. There exists, therefore, a ∈a, a ̸= 0, with minimal value w(a). Let
now b ∈a be arbitrary. Using property (i), we divide b by a with remainder,
that is, we determine q, r ∈R such that
b = q · a + r
with r = 0 or w(r) < w(a). If we had r ̸= 0, then r = b −q · a would be a
nonzero element of a with a value w(r) that was strictly less than the value
w(a) of a. This contradicts the choice of a, and so we must have r = 0. We
therefore have b = q · a, whence a = (a).
⊓⊔
Remark 7.33. We note that in Deﬁnition 7.30, we did not need to require
the existence of a unit element 1, since the existence is a consequence of the
other requirements. Namely, since (R,+, ·) is an integral domain, the ideal
a = R is nontrivial. That is, there exists a ∈R, a ̸= 0, with minimal value
w(a) ∈Q. If we now divide a with remainder by itself, we obtain, as in the
proof above, a = e · a for some e ∈R. Canceling the a yields the desired unit
element e = 1.
Example 7.34. We show that (Q[X],+, ·) is a Euclidean domain. First of all,
(Q[X],+, ·) is an integral domain. If P ∈Q[X] is a nonzero polynomial, we
may map P to its degree deg(P), given as the largest natural number ap-
pearing as an exponent in P. We thereby obtain the mapping
deg : Q[X] \ {0} −→N ⊆Q.
Division with remainder of polynomials shows that property (i) in Deﬁni-
tion 7.30 is satisﬁed. The validity of property (ii) can be seen from the fact
that there are only ﬁnitely many possibilities for the degree of a polynomial
to be less than a given rational number.
In the previous subsection, we saw in Lemma 7.29 that in principal ideal
domains (R,+, ·), one can represent a greatest common divisor d of two
elements a, b ∈R as a linear combination d = x · a + y · b. However, beyond
the existence of x, y ∈R, we could say nothing about how to determine those
elements. The following theorem clariﬁes the issue.
Theorem 7.35 (Euclidean algorithm). Let (R,+, ·) be a Euclidean domain. We
consider, for a, b ∈R with b ̸= 0, an extended division with remainder that leads to
the following:

7. Unique Factorization Domains, Principal Ideal Domains, and Euclidean Domains 127
a = q1 · b + r1,
0 < w(r1) < w(b) or r1 = 0;
b = q2 · r1 + r2,
0 < w(r2) < w(r1) or r2 = 0;
r1 = q3 · r2 + r3,
0 < w(r3) < w(r2) or r3 = 0;
···
rn−2 = qn · rn−1 + rn,
0 < w(rn) < w(rn−1) or rn = 0;
rn−1 = qn+1 · rn + rn+1,
0 < w(rn+1) < w(rn) or rn+1 = 0;
···
This process ends after ﬁnitely many steps; that is, there exists n ∈N such that
rn+1 = 0. Moreover, the last nonvanishing remainder rn is a greatest common divi-
sor of a and b.
Proof. Since (R,+, ·) is a Euclidean domain, the set of values
W
 w(b)

:=

w(a)
 a ∈R \ {0}, w(a) < w(b)
	
is ﬁnite. This has the consequence that the extended division with remainder
must end after ﬁnitely many steps, that is, that there exists n ∈N such that
rn+1 = 0. In what follows, rn will denote the last nonvanishing remainder.
We now show that rn = (a, b). For rn, we have to verify the two properties
of a greatest common divisor from Deﬁnition 7.2.
(i) We show ﬁrst that rn is a common divisor of a and b. If we look at the
last line in the display above, we see that rn | rn−1. From the penultimate
line, rn−2 = qn · rn−1 + rn, we conclude that rn | rn−2. Working our way up-
ward through successive rows, we obtain rn | b and ﬁnally rn | a, and so rn is
indeed a common divisor of a and b.
(ii) We show now that rn divides every common divisor x of a and b.
From the ﬁrst row of the above display, we obtain x | r1. We conclude from
the second row that x | r2. Continuing in this way, we see that x must divide
all the successive remainders, that is, we obtain in particular that x | rn, as
asserted.
⊓⊔
Remark 7.36 (Extended Euclidean algorithm). Let (R,+, ·) be a Euclidean do-
main, and a, b ∈R with b ̸= 0. An analysis of Theorem 7.35 shows that from
the data of the extended division with remainder, we can determine explicit
elements x, y ∈R such that
(a, b) = x · a + y · b.
From the penultimate row of the display given in Theorem 7.35, we can
read off that rn = rn−2 −qn · rn−1. Using the third row from the end, that is,
rn−3 = qn−1 · rn−2 + rn−1, we obtain

128
III The Rational Numbers
rn = rn−2 −qn · rn−1
= rn−2 −qn · (rn−3 −qn−1 · rn−2)
= (−qn) · rn−3 + (1 + qn · qn−1) · rn−2.
We see, then, that by working our way up the display, we can represent rn as
a linear combination of two successive remainders rj, rj+1 (j = n −2,..., 1).
After n −2 steps, we obtain
rn = x1 · r1 + x2 · r2
with suitable x1, x2 ∈R. If in this equation we replace r2 by b −q2 · r1 and
then r1 by a −q1 · b, we obtain the desired x, y ∈R.
To close the main part of this chapter, we would like to illustrate some of
the concepts presented by means of an example.
Example 7.37. Consider the Euclidean domain (Z,+, ·) of integers. We wish
to compute the greatest common divisor (a, b) for a = 113 and b = 29 and
represent it as a linear combination of integers. Repeated division with re-
mainder yields
113 = 3 · 29 + 26,
29 = 1 · 26 + 3,
26 = 8 · 3 + 2,
3 = 1 · 2 + 1,
2 = 2 · 1 + 0,
whence we have (113, 29) = 1. To obtain the desired integer linear combi-
nation representing the greatest common divisor, we proceed through the
display above from bottom to top. We obtain
1 = 3 −1 · 2,
= 3 −1 · (26 −8 · 3) = 9 · 3 −1 · 26,
= 9 · (29 −1 · 26) −1 · 26 = 9 · 29 −10 · 26,
= 9 · 29 −10 · (113 −3 · 29) = −10 · 113 + 39 · 29,
and we have
(113, 29) = 1 = −10 · 113 + 39 · 29.
Exercise 7.38. Carry out the Euclidean algorithm to determine the greatest
common divisor (a, b) of a, b in the following two cases:
(a) a = 123456789, b = 555555555 in the ring (Z,+, ·).
(b) a = X4 + 2X3 + 2X2 + 2X + 1, b = X3 + X2 −X −1 in the polynomial
ring (Q[X],+, ·).

C. Rational Solutions of Equations: A First Glimpse
129
C.
Rational Solutions of Equations: A First Glimpse
We conclude this chapter with a ﬁrst look at the solution of polynomial
equations in rational numbers, which were introduced in Section 6 of this
chapter. This will lead us to some classical questions, which in part were
resolved only relatively recently and some of which are topics of active re-
search in number theory today.
C.1
The General Problem
In generalizing linear algebra, where one looks for common solutions to sev-
eral linear equations in several variables X1,...,Xn in a ﬁeld K (such as the
ﬁeld of rational numbers Q, the ﬁeld of real numbers R, and the ﬁeld of com-
plex numbers C, which will be constructed in the following chapters), in the
ﬁeld of complex algebraic geometry one is interested in understanding the
manifold of all common solutions of equations of the form
Pj(X1,...,Xn) = 0
(j = 1,...,r),
where Pj = Pj(X1,...,Xn) are polynomials of arbitrary degree with coefﬁ-
cients in C; that is, P1,...,Pr are elements of the polynomial ring C[X1,...,Xn].
In arithmetic algebraic geometry, one is interested in the analogous ques-
tion about the ﬁeld Q of rational numbers. In particular, one is interested in
the following two fundamental questions:
(A) Is there an n-tuple (x1,...,xn) of rational numbers such that
Pj(x1,...,xn) = 0
for j = 1,...,r?
(B) If the answer to (A) is afﬁrmative, is the number of such n-tuples ﬁnite
or inﬁnite?
In what follows, we shall assume that question (A) has been answered in
the afﬁrmative, and we shall investigate question (B) for the case of two
variables X = X1,Y = X2 and r = 1, that is, the case of a polynomial P =
P1 ∈Q[X,Y].
Let, therefore, P = P(X,Y) be a polynomial in the two variables X,Y with
rational coefﬁcients. To answer the two questions posed above, we may as-
sume without loss of generality that the coefﬁcients of P are in fact integers.
That is, we may assume that P is an element of the polynomial ring Z[X,Y].
In regard to question (A), we are interested in whether there exist rational
numbers x,y such that P(x,y) = 0. This question can be formulated geomet-
rically as follows. The equation
P(X,Y) = 0

130
III The Rational Numbers
deﬁnes an algebraic curve C in the X,Y-plane. The question of rational solu-
tions x,y of the polynomial equation P(X,Y) = 0 is thereby reduced to the
question of points on the curve C that have rational coordinates. To study
question (A), we write
C(Q) := {(x,y) ∈Q2 | P(x,y) = 0}
and call this the set of rational points on C. For example, for the unit circle
with center at the origin, deﬁned by the equation X2 + Y2 −1 = 0, we see
that (3/5,4/5) is a rational point.
Beginning with the algebraic curve C deﬁned by the equation P(X,Y) = 0,
we may reformulate questions (A) and (B) as follows:
(A) Is the set C(Q) nonempty?
(B) If the answer to (A) is afﬁrmative, is C(Q) ﬁnite or inﬁnite?
In the following, we shall give a rough answer to question (B), and we shall
proceed by studying the polynomial P for increasing values of its degree d.
C.2
Rational Points on Lines and Quadrics
Degree d = 1: Without loss of generality, we may assume that
P(X,Y) = aX + bY + c
with a,b,c ∈Z and a ̸= 0. Since the curve C deﬁned by P(X,Y) = 0 is in this
case a straight line with rational slope, we see easily that
C(Q) =

(x,y) ∈Q2
 x = −bt + c
a
, y = t : t ∈Q

,
from which we conclude at once that the set C(Q) is always inﬁnite. In par-
ticular, it is never empty.
Degree d = 2: Without loss of generality, we may assume that P(X,Y) =
aX2 + bXY + cY2 + d with a,b,c,d ∈Z and a ̸= 0. The curve C deﬁned by
P(X,Y) = 0 is a conic section, also called a quadric.
X
Y

C. Rational Solutions of Equations: A First Glimpse
131
As the example P(X,Y) = X2 −2 shows, a quadric deﬁned over the rational
numbers need not have any rational points. That the curve in this example
has no rational points is equivalent to the fact that
√
2 is irrational.
We now assume that the curve C has at least one rational point P ∈C(Q).
If we draw a line from the point P on C to a rational point Q on a line L with
rational slope, that connecting line will also have rational slope, and it will
intersect C in an additional point R. The X-coordinate of this point satisﬁes a
quadratic equation one of whose solutions (the X-coordinate of the point P)
is rational. Viète’s formula tells us that the X-coordinate of the intersection
point R, and therefore also its Y-coordinate, must also be rational. As can be
seen in the ﬁgure below,
L
C
P
Q1
Q2
Q3
R1
R2
R3
we obtain by this method inﬁnitely many rational points on the quadric C,
since L(Q) is inﬁnite. We see, then, that the existence of one rational point
on a quadric C implies that C(Q) is inﬁnite.
Remark C.1. The qualitative result on the inﬁnitude of rational points on a
quadric that we have just proved can be used quantitatively, as shown in the
following example. Let the quadric C be the unit circle X2 + Y2 −1 = 0, and
choose the rational point to be P = (−1,0) and the line L with rational slope
to be the Y-axis.
X
Y
(0,t)
(−1,0)

1−t2
1+t2 ,
2t
1+t2


132
III The Rational Numbers
If we join the point P = (−1,0) to the rational point Q = (0,t) on the Y-axis,
we obtain a point R on the unit circle with the rational coordinates
x = 1 −t2
1 + t2 ,
y =
2t
1 + t2 .
Setting t = n/m (m,n ∈N, m > n > 0), we obtain as a lovely auxiliary result
the fact that there are inﬁnitely many triples of natural numbers (a,b,c) such
that a2 + b2 = c2. They are given by
a = m2 −n2,
b = 2mn,
c = m2 + n2.
Such triples are called Pythagorean triples.
C.3
Rational Points on Elliptic Curves
Now let P = P(X,Y) be a polynomial of degree d = 3, and C the curve de-
ﬁned by P(X,Y) = 0. As in the case of quadrics, the set C(Q) can be empty.
We assume in what follows that the curve C has at least one rational point.
If we take this point to be the point at inﬁnity on C, we can express the curve
C without loss of generality in the form
Y2 = X3 + aX2 + bX + c
(12)
with a,b,c ∈Z. If we also assume that the cubic polynomial on the right-
hand side of this equation has no multiple roots, that is, that its discriminant
∆does not vanish, then C is called an elliptic curve. For more on the theory
of elliptic curves, we refer the reader to the textbooks [8] and [14]. We shall
here investigate the question whether the set of rational points on an elliptic
curve is ﬁnite or inﬁnite.
X
Y
Y2 = X3 −X + 1

C. Rational Solutions of Equations: A First Glimpse
133
We note ﬁrst that the set C(Q) of rational points of C has the structure of
an abelian group, with the group operation deﬁned as follows. The sum
P + Q of two rational points P,Q ∈C(Q) is given by the following rational
point: Join points P and Q by a straight line L. This line has rational slope
and therefore intersects the cubic C in some rational point R. We deﬁne the
reﬂection of R in the X-axis, which is a rational point of C, to be the sum
P + Q ∈C(Q).
X
Y
Y2 = X3 −X + 1
P
Q
R
P + Q
This construction shows at once that the operation of addition thus deﬁned
is commutative. It is not so easy, however, to show that addition is associa-
tive. The point at inﬁnity is the identity element of the abelian group C(Q).
In 1922, the English mathematician Louis Mordell determined the struc-
ture of the abelian group C(Q).
Theorem C.2 (Mordell [13]). If C is an elliptic curve deﬁned over the rational
numbers, then the abelian group C(Q) is ﬁnitely generated. Thus the group has the
direct sum decomposition
C(Q) = C(Q)free ⊕C(Q)tors ,
where C(Q)free is the free part, and C(Q)tors the ﬁnite part, called the torsion sub-
group, of the abelian group C(Q).
⊓⊔
The set C(Q)tors is a ﬁnite abelian group; that is, C(Q)tors consists of the
rational points of C of ﬁnite order.
Theorem C.3 (Mazur [12]). If C is an elliptic curve deﬁned over the rational
numbers, then the torsion subgroup C(Q)tors is isomorphic to one of the following
15 groups:
Z/NZ
(N = 1,...,10,12),
Z/2Z ⊕Z/2NZ
(N = 1,...,4).
⊓⊔

134
III The Rational Numbers
For the free part, one has the isomorphism
C(Q)free ∼= ZrC = Z ⊕··· ⊕Z
|
{z
}
rC times
.
The number rC is called the rank of C(Q). If rC = 0, then C(Q) has only
ﬁnitely many rational points. If, on the other hand, we have rC > 0, then
C(Q) has rational points of inﬁnite order and therefore inﬁnitely many ra-
tional points. In sum, we have
rC = 0
⇐⇒
#C(Q) < ∞,
rC > 0
⇐⇒
#C(Q) = ∞.
The problem of describing the group C(Q) of elliptic curves C consists,
therefore, essentially in determining its rank rC.
C.4
The Conjecture of Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer
As before, let C be an elliptic curve deﬁned by an equation of the form (12).
The conjecture of Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer provides an analytic tool to
decide whether rC = 0 or rC > 0. To formulate the conjecture, we now con-
sider (12) as a congruence modulo an arbitrary prime number p ∈P and
deﬁne the quantity
Np := #

x,y ∈{0,..., p −1} | y2 ≡x3 + ax2 + bx + c mod p
	 + 1.
In [2], Bryan Birch and Peter Swinnerton-Dyer gave experimental evidence
for the equivalence
rC > 0
⇐⇒
∏
p∈P
p≤x
Np
p −−−→
x→∞∞.
(13)
Using the L-series LC(s) of the elliptic curve C, which for s ∈C with Re(s) >
3/2 is deﬁned by the convergent Euler product
LC(s) := ∏
p∈P
p∤2∆
1
1 −(p + 1 −Np)p−s + p1−2s ,
one can rewrite (13), at least formally, as the equivalence
rC > 0
⇐⇒
LC(1) = 0.

C. Rational Solutions of Equations: A First Glimpse
135
After these preliminaries, we are in a position to formulate the conjecture of
Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer.
Conjecture (Birch–Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture [2]). Let C be an elliptic
curve deﬁned by (12). Then we have the following:
(i)
The L-series LC(s) of C can be analytically continued to an entire function of
the complex plane C. In particular LC(s) is deﬁned at the point s = 1.
(ii)
For the order ords=1LC(s) of vanishing of LC(s) at the point s = 1, one has
the equality rC = ords=1LC(s). Moreover, there is an explicit formula that
relates the ﬁrst nonvanishing coefﬁcient of the Taylor development of LC(s) at
s = 1 to the arithmetic of the curve C.
Aside from a few special cases, this conjecture has been proved essen-
tially only for elliptic curves of ranks 0 and 1. More precisely, the following
results are known. In 1977, John Coates and Andrew Wiles proved in [4] the
ﬁniteness of C(Q) for elliptic curves C/Q with complex multiplication and
LC(1) ̸= 0. In 1986, Benedict Gross and Don Zagier proved in [7] that (mod-
ular) elliptic curves C/Q with LC(1) = 0 but L′
C(1) ̸= 0 have inﬁnitely many
rational points. Using this result and some new ideas, Victor Alexandrovich
Kolyvagin proved in 1989, in [9], that LC(1) ̸= 0 implies rC = 0, and that
LC(1) = 0, L′
C(1) ̸= 0 implies rC = 1. His proof required an analytic assump-
tion that was shortly afterward proved by Daniel Bump, Solomon Friedberg,
and Jeffrey Hoffstein in [3]. We refer the reader to the survey article [17] by
Andrew Wiles.
The most current results on the Birch–Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture can
be found in the fundamental works of Manjul Bhargava, for which he was
awarded the Fields Medal in 2014, the highest honor that can be bestowed
on a mathematician. Together with Christopher Skinner and Wei Zhang, he
proved in [1] that more than 66% of elliptic curves deﬁned over Q satisfy the
Birch–Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture.
The search for rational points on elliptic curves is related to the classical
congruent number problem, which can be formulated simply as follows: Let
F be a positive natural number. Is there a right triangle with rational side
lengths a,b,c and area F? That is, do there exist positive rational numbers
a,b,c that satisfy the equations
a2 + b2 = c2,
a · b
2
= F?
The Pythagorean triple (3,4,5) shows, for example, that for F = 6, there ex-
ists such a triangle, in fact, one with not merely rational, but integral, side
lengths. If there exists such a rational right triangle for a given positive nat-
ural number F, then we call F a congruent number. The congruent number
problem is to determine whether a given number F is a congruent number.
The congruent number problem is related to the search for rational points
on elliptic curves as follows. We associate the positive natural number F

136
III The Rational Numbers
with the elliptic curve
CF : Y2 = X3 −F2X = X(X −F)(X + F).
It can be shown that F is a congruent number if and only if the rank rCF of CF
is positive, which by the Birch–Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture is equivalent to
the vanishing of LCF(1). If rCF > 0, then there exists a rational point (x,y) ∈
CF(Q) with y ̸= 0 (since (x,0) would be a 2-torsion point on CF). We note,
however, that conversely, if (x,y) ∈CF(Q) is a rational point with y ̸= 0, then
(x,y) has inﬁnite order, since all rational points of ﬁnite order on CF can
be shown to be 2-torsion points and hence satisfy y = 0. We may therefore
assume without loss of generality that x < 0 and y > 0, and we obtain the
side lengths of the desired right triangle with area F in the form
a = F2 −x2
y
,
b = −2xF
y ,
c = F2 + x2
y
.
Example C.4. For F = 5, the rational point (−5/9,100/27) ∈CF(Q) has inﬁ-
nite order. We therefore obtain the right triangle with side lengths a = 20/3,
b = 3/2, c = 41/6 and area F = 5.
For F = 6, we obtain for (−3,9) ∈CF(Q) the familiar right triangle with
sides of length a = 3, b = 4, c = 5.
For F = 1,2,3, it can be shown that rCF = 0, and so 1,2,3 are not congruent
numbers. Since F = 1 is not a congruent number, it follows that there is no
right triangle with rational side lengths and area equal to the square of an
integer.
Some known results: If F satisﬁes one of the congruences F ≡5,6,7 mod 8,
then, as shown in [7], F is a congruent number if L′
CF(1) ̸= 0. This condition
is satisﬁed, for instance, if F is a prime number with F ≡5,7 mod 8 (in the
latter case, 2F is also a congruent number). The most current result as this
book goes to press is that of Ye Tian, who showed in [16] that for every
positive natural number k, there exist inﬁnitely many square-free congruent
numbers F with exactly k distinct prime factors in each of the residue classes
F ≡5,6,7 mod 8.
If, on the other hand, we have F ≡1,2,3 mod 8, it is conjectured that F is
not a congruent number. This conjecture has been proved in the case that F
is prime with F ≡3 mod 8 and in a number of additional cases, thanks to
the latest work of Ye Tian, Xinyi Yuan, and Shouwu Zhang.
C.5
Rational Points on Curves of Degree d > 3: Fermat’s Conjecture
We devote the last section of our tour d’horizon to answering our question (B)
for algebraic curves C deﬁned by a polynomial P ∈Z[X,Y] of degree d > 3.

C. Rational Solutions of Equations: A First Glimpse
137
To simplify the presentation, we assume that the curve C is nonsingular, that
is, that there exist no points (x,y) ∈C such that
∂P
∂X (x,y) = 0
and
∂P
∂Y (x,y) = 0
hold simultaneously. If we furthermore add the points at inﬁnity to C and
assume that the curve is nonsingular at those points as well, we obtain a
smooth plane projective curve of degree d > 3, which we again denote by
C. Louis Mordell conjectured in his work [13] mentioned above that in this
case, C(Q) is ﬁnite. In 1983, a good sixty years later, Gerd Faltings published
a proof of this conjecture that earned him a Fields Medal.
Theorem C.5 (Faltings’s theorem [6]). For a smooth plane projective curve C
of degree d > 3 deﬁned over the rational numbers, the set of rational points is ﬁnite.
⊓⊔
Remark C.6. Faltings’s theorem applies not only to plane algebraic curves.
To formulate the theorem in its general form, we recall that associated with
every smooth projective curve C is a natural number gC called the genus of
the curve. In the case of a smooth plane projective curve C of degree d, the
genus gC is given by the formula
gC = (d −1)(d −2)
2
.
The general form of Faltings’s theorem states that for a smooth projective
curve C of genus gC > 1 deﬁned over the rational numbers Q or over any al-
gebraic number ﬁeld K, the set of Q-rational, respectively K-rational, points
is ﬁnite.
Example C.7. A well-known example is the curve Cd deﬁned by
P(X,Y) = Xd + Yd −1
with d > 3. Faltings’s theorem states that each curve Cd has only ﬁnitely
many rational points.
Fermat’s famous conjecture from the seventeenth century tightens Falt-
ings’s ﬁniteness result for this example, since it states that
Cd(Q) =
(
{(1,0),(0,1)},
for d odd,
{(±1,0),(0,±1)},
for d even.
A complete proof of Fermat’s conjecture, however, was given only in 1995,
by Andrew Wiles.

138
III The Rational Numbers
Theorem C.8 (Wiles’s theorem [18]). For d > 2, the equation
Xd + Yd = Zd
has no integer solutions x,y,z with xyz ̸= 0.
⊓⊔
For an overview of Wiles’s proof of Fermat’s last theorem and signiﬁcant
contributions by other mathematicians, see the articles [10] and [11]. A more
advanced treatment can be found in [5].
This completes our brief look at answers to question (B) in the search for
rational solutions to polynomial equations in two variables, which has pro-
vided a glimpse at the very rich arithmetic results that such a search yields.
We also have seen that many questions on this topic remain unanswered.
The search for answers to questions (A) and (B) in the general case of
arbitrary systems of polynomials in several variables is a topic of current
research. In this case as well, one hopes that the answers will provide inter-
esting arithmetic insights.
References
[1] M. Bhargava, C. Skinner, W. Zhang: A majority of elliptic curves over Q satisfy the
Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture. Preprint, July 17, 2014. Available online at
arXiv:1407.1826.
[2] B. Birch, H. P. F. Swinnerton-Dyer: Notes on elliptic curves I, II. J. Reine Angew.
Math. 212 (1963), 7–25; 218 (1965), 79–108.
[3] D. Bump, S. Friedberg, J. Hoffstein: Non-vanishing theorems for L-functions of
modular forms and their derivatives. Invent. Math. 102 (1990), 543–618.
[4] J. Coates, A. Wiles: On the conjecture of Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer. Invent. Math.
39 (1977), 223–251.
[5] G. Cornell, J. H. Silverman, G. Stevens (eds.): Modular forms and Fermat’s last
theorem. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1997.
[6] G. Faltings: Endlichkeitssätze für abelsche Varietäten. Invent. Math. 73 (1983), 349–
366.
[7] B. Gross, D. Zagier: Heegner points and derivatives of L-series. Invent. Math. 84
(1986), 225–320.
[8] A.W. Knapp: Elliptic curves. Math. Notes 40, Princeton University Press, Prince-
ton, New Jersey, 1992.
[9] V. A. Kolyvagin: On the Mordell–Weil and Shafarevich–Tate groups for elliptic Weil
curves. Math. USSR, Izv. 33 (1989), 473–499.
[10] J. Kramer: Über den Beweis der Fermat-Vermutung I, II. Elem. Math. 50 (1995),
12–25; 53 (1998), 45–60.
[11] J. Kramer: Fermat’s last theorem – the solution of a 300 year old problem. In:
M. Aigner, E. Behrends (eds.), Mathematics Everywhere, 175–183. American
Mathematical Society, Providence, Rhode Island, 2010.
[12] B. Mazur: Modular curves and the Eisenstein ideal. Publ. Math. IHES 47 (1977),
33–186.

C. Rational Solutions of Equations: A First Glimpse
139
[13] L. J. Mordell: On the rational solutions of the indeterminate equations of the third and
fourth degrees. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 21 (1922), 179–192.
[14] J. H. Silverman, J. Tate: Rational points on elliptic curves. Springer, Cham, 2nd
edition, 2015.
[15] I. Stewart, D. Tall: Algebraic number theory and Fermat’s last theorem. Chapman
and Hall/CRC, 4th edition, 2015.
[16] Y. Tian: Congruent numbers and Heegner points. Cambridge J. Math. 2 (2014),
117–161.
[17] A. Wiles: The Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture. Available online at
www.claymath.org/sites/default/files/birchswin.pdf.
[18] A. Wiles: Modular elliptic curves and Fermat’s last theorem. Ann. Math. 141 (1995),
443–551.

IV
The Real Numbers
1.
Decimal Representation of Rational Numbers
Let a be a nonzero natural number. At the end of Chapter I, we used repeated
division with remainder to represent a in the form
a =
ℓ
∑
j=0
qj · 10j,
(1)
with natural numbers 0 ≤qj ≤9 (j = 0,..., ℓ) and qℓ̸= 0. For the sum (1),
we introduced the decimal representation
a = qℓqℓ−1 ...q1q0.
This decimal notation can be carried over easily to the integers. Namely, if
the integer a is negative, then a = −|a|. Thus the decimal representation of
the natural number |a| gives us the decimal representation of a in the form
a = −qℓqℓ−1 ...q1q0,
again with natural numbers 0 ≤qj ≤9 (j = 0,..., ℓ) and qℓ̸= 0.
We wish now to extend decimal representation to the rational numbers.
To this end, let a
b represent a rational number; that is, a, b ∈Z and b ̸= 0.
Without loss of generality, we may assume that b > 0. Using division with
remainder for integers, we ﬁnd for a, b integers q, r with 0 ≤r < b such that
a = q · b + r
⇐⇒
a
b = q + r
b.
For the integers q, we have the decimal representation
q = ±
ℓ
∑
j=0
qj · 10j = ±qℓqℓ−1 ...q1q0.
We now consider the decimal representation of the rational number 0 ≤r
b <
1. We assume even that 0 < r
b < 1. We rewrite this as
r
b = 1
10 · 10 · r
b
(2)
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69429-0_4
J. Kramer and A.-M. von Pippich, From Natural Numbers to Quaternions, 

142
IV The Real Numbers
and divide 10 · r with remainder by b. We thereby obtain natural numbers
q−1, r−1 with 0 ≤r−1 < b such that
10 · r = q−1 · b + r−1
⇐⇒
10 · r
b
= q−1 + r−1
b .
(3)
From the inequality r
b < 1, we estimate
0 ≤q−1 = 10 · r
b
−r−1
b
< 10 · r
b
< 10,
that is, 0 ≤q−1 ≤9. Substituting (3) into (2) leads to
r
b = 1
10 · 10 · r
b
= 1
10

q−1 + r−1
b

= q−1
10 + 1
10 · r−1
b
= q−1
10 + 1
102 · 10 · r−1
b
.
If r−1 ̸= 0, we divide 10 · r−1 with remainder by b and obtain natural num-
bers q−2, r−2 with 0 ≤r−2 < b such that
10 · r−1 = q−2 · b + r−2
⇐⇒
10 · r−1
b
= q−2 + r−2
b .
As before, we estimate 0 ≤q−2 ≤9 and putting everything together, obtain
r
b = q−1
10 + 1
102 · 10 · r−1
b
= q−1
10 + 1
102

q−2 + r−2
b

= q−1
10 + q−2
102 + 1
103 · 10 · r−2
b
.
Proceeding, we obtain natural numbers q−3,r−3 with 0 ≤q−3 ≤9 and 0 ≤
r−3 < b such that
r
b = q−1
10 + q−2
102 + q−3
103 + 1
104 · 10 · r−3
b
.
After k steps, we obtain natural numbers q−k,r−k with 0 ≤q−k ≤9 and 0 ≤
r−k < b such that
r
b =
k
∑
j=1
q−j
10j +
1
10k+1 · 10 · r−k
b
.
With this procedure there are two possibilities: either there exists k ∈N, k >
0, such that r−k = 0, or the remainders r−j are nonzero for all j = 1, 2, 3,....
Deﬁnition 1.1. With notation as above, we deﬁne the following for a, b ∈Z
and b ̸= 0:
(i)
If r = 0 or there exists k ∈N, k > 0, with r−k = 0, we set

1. Decimal Representation of Rational Numbers
143
±qℓ...q0.q−1 ...q−k := ±
k
∑
j=−ℓ
q−j
10j
and call ±qℓ...q0.q−1 ...q−k the decimal representation or decimal expan-
sion of the rational number a
b.
(ii)
If all the r−j are nonzero, we set, formally,
±qℓ...q0.q−1 ...q−k ... := ±
∞
∑
j=−ℓ
q−j
10j
and call ±qℓ...q0.q−1 ...q−k ... the decimal representation or decimal ex-
pansion of the rational number a
b.
Remark 1.2. We note that the inﬁnite sum (series) in Deﬁnition 1.1 (ii),
±
∞
∑
j=−ℓ
q−j
10j = ±

qℓ· 10ℓ+ ··· + q0 + q−1
10 + q−2
102 + ···

,
makes no sense at the present moment. It is merely a symbolic notation. In
contrast, the ﬁnite sum in Deﬁnition 1.1 (i),
±
k
∑
j=−ℓ
q−j
10j = ±

qℓ· 10ℓ+ ··· + q0 + q−1
10 + ··· + q−k
10k

,
has a concrete signiﬁcance and takes on the value a
b; that is, we have by
construction that
a
b = ±qℓ...q0.q−1 ...q−k.
Deﬁnition 1.3. We call a nonterminating decimal expansion
±qℓ...q0.q−1 ...q−k ...
periodic if there exist natural numbers v ≥0 and p > 0 such that q−(v+j) =
q−(v+j+p) = q−(v+j+2p) = ··· for j = 1,..., p. For brevity, we write this as
follows:
±qℓ...q0.q−1 ...q−v q−(v+1) ...q−(v+p) .
If v = 0, the decimal expansion is said to be purely periodic. The smallest nat-
ural number p as deﬁned above is called the period of the decimal expansion
of the rational number a
b.
Proposition 1.4. Let a, b ∈Z, b ̸= 0. If the decimal expansion of a
b does not ter-
minate, then it is periodic.
Proof. Suppose the number a
b has a nonterminating decimal expansion. Look-
ing at the construction of the decimal expansion of a
b, we see that the inﬁ-

144
IV The Real Numbers
nite collection of remainders r0 := r, r−1, r−2, r−3,... is actually a subset of
{0,..., b −1}. Therefore, there must be at least two remainders r−j1, r−j2 that
are identical. We may assume without loss of generality that j2 > j1 ≥0 and
for ﬁxed j1, choose the difference p := j2 −j1 to be minimal. The algorithm
for obtaining the decimal expansion of a
b then shows that
r−j1 = r−(j1+p) = r−(j1+2p) = ··· ,
r−(j1+1) = r−(j1+1+p) = r−(j1+1+2p) = ··· ,
···
r−(j1+p−1) = r−(j1+2p−1) = r−(j1+3p−1) = ··· .
If we now choose j1 to be minimal and set v := j1 ≥0, we obtain the assertion
of the theorem.
⊓⊔
Remark 1.5. The following questions arise:
(i) Is there a set of numbers in which the formal inﬁnite sum
±
∞
∑
j=−ℓ
q−j
10j
can be given a precise meaning?
(ii) Is there a set of numbers in which arbitrary inﬁnite decimal expan-
sions, that is, those that are not necessarily periodic, have a well-deﬁned
meaning, that is, in which inﬁnite sums like
±
∞
∑
j=−ℓ
q−j
10j
represent well-deﬁned numbers?
Exercise 1.6.
(a) Determine the decimal expansions of 1
5, 1
3, 1
16, 1
11, and 1
7.
(b) Formulate a criterion for when a fraction a
b (a, b ∈Z; b ̸= 0) possesses a
terminating decimal expansion.
(c) Find a bound on the maximal period length of the decimal expansion of
a rational number as a function of its denominator. Give examples for
which the period is maximal (with respect to this bound).
(d) Describe a process for obtaining the fraction a
b from its periodic decimal
expansion. Use this process on the periodic decimal fraction 0.123.

2. Construction of the Real Numbers
145
2.
Construction of the Real Numbers
In Chapter I, we constructed the set N of natural numbers on the basis of
the Peano axioms, and we deﬁned on that set the operations of addition and
multiplication, which satisfy the commutative, associative, and distributive
laws. In particular, we obtained (N, +) as a regular abelian semigroup,
which we then, in Chapter II, extended to the abelian group (Z, +) of in-
tegers. By carrying over the multiplicative structure of the natural numbers
to the integers, we obtained, at the beginning of Chapter III, the integral do-
main (Z,+, ·) of integers. We extended this at the end of Chapter III to the
ﬁeld (Q,+, ·) of rational numbers. In the previous section, we have seen that
the decimal expansion of a rational number either terminates or is periodic,
and that led us to wonder whether there exists a set of numbers containing
numbers with inﬁnite aperiodic decimal expansions. We shall now answer
that question in the afﬁrmative. In doing so, we will be led to the construc-
tion of the real numbers. We begin with the deﬁnition of a Cauchy sequence.
But ﬁrst let us specify a few notational conventions. In what follows,
we shall use Latin letters to denote rational numbers, which will be dis-
tinguished from the real numbers, which we have yet to introduce, which
will be denoted by Greek letters. The one exception will be the Greek letter
epsilon, which in the set of rational numbers will be denoted by ϵ, and in
the set of real numbers, by ε.
Deﬁnition 2.1. A sequence (an) = (an)n≥0 with an ∈Q for all n ∈N is called
a rational Cauchy sequence if for every ϵ ∈Q, ϵ > 0, there exists N(ϵ) ∈N such
that for all m, n ∈N with m, n > N(ϵ), we have the inequality
|am −an| < ϵ.
A sequence (an) = (an)n≥0 with an ∈Q for all n ∈N is called a rational
null sequence if for every ϵ ∈Q, ϵ > 0, there exists N(ϵ) ∈N such that for all
n ∈N with n > N(ϵ), we have the inequality
|an| < ϵ.
Exercise 2.2.
(a) Prove that the sequences

1
n+1

n≥0 and
  n
2n

n≥0 are rational null se-
quences.
(b) Give further examples of rational null sequences.
Remark 2.3. (i) A rational null sequence (an) is, in particular, a rational
Cauchy sequence. Namely, given ϵ/2 ∈Q, ϵ > 0, there exists N(ϵ/2) ∈N
such that for all m, n ∈N with m, n > N(ϵ/2), we have the inequality
|an| < ϵ
2.

146
IV The Real Numbers
Using the triangle inequality, we thereby obtain for m, n > N(ϵ/2) that
|am −an| ≤|am| + |an| < ϵ
2 + ϵ
2 = ϵ.
Thus (an) is a rational Cauchy sequence.
(ii) Every rational Cauchy sequence (an) is bounded, since for ϵ = 1 and
the associated N(1) ∈N, which exists by the deﬁnition of a Cauchy se-
quence, we have for all m, n ∈N with m, n > N(1), the inequality
|am −an| < 1.
From this, we obtain with m1 = N(1) + 1 and n > N(1) the bound
|an| = |an −am1 + am1| ≤|am1 −an| + |am1| < 1 + |am1|.
We have, therefore, for all n ∈N, the inequality
|an| ≤max{|a0|,..., |aN(1)|, 1 + |am1|}.
This proves the boundedness of the rational Cauchy sequence (an).
We consider now the set M of all rational Cauchy sequences, that is,
M =
(an)
(an) is a rational Cauchy sequence
	
.
We deﬁne on the set M operations of addition and multiplication, which we
denote by + and ·, as follows. For two rational Cauchy sequences (an), (bn),
we set
(an) + (bn) := (an + bn)
and
(an) · (bn) := (an · bn).
We must, of course, convince ourselves that the sum and product of two
rational Cauchy sequences are again rational Cauchy sequences. This will
be proved in the following lemma.
Lemma 2.4. Let (an), (bn) ∈M. Then we have
(an) + (bn) ∈M
and
(an) · (bn) ∈M.
Proof. (i) We ﬁrst prove that the sum (an) + (bn) of the two rational Cauchy
sequences (an), (bn) is again a rational Cauchy sequence. To this end, we
observe that the sums an + bn are rational for all n ∈N. We now choose an
arbitrary ϵ ∈Q, ϵ > 0, and note that there exist natural numbers N1(ϵ/2)
and N2(ϵ/2) such that for all m, n > N := max{N1(ϵ/2), N2(ϵ/2)}, we have
the inequalities
|am −an| < ϵ
2
and
|bm −bn| < ϵ
2.

2. Construction of the Real Numbers
147
It now follows from the bound
|(am + bm) −(an + bn)| ≤|am −an| + |bm −bn| < ϵ
2 + ϵ
2 = ϵ,
for m, n > N, that (an + bn) is a rational Cauchy sequence, and so, therefore,
is the sum (an) + (bn).
(ii) We prove now that the product (an) · (bn) of the two rational Cauchy
sequences (an), (bn) is also a rational Cauchy sequence. We note ﬁrst that the
products an · bn are rational for all n ∈N. Remark 2.3, on the boundedness
of rational Cauchy sequences, allows us to ﬁnd c ∈Q such that for all n ∈N,
we have the inequalities
|an| ≤c
and
|bn| ≤c.
Now choose an arbitrary ϵ ∈Q, ϵ > 0, and observe that there exist nat-
ural numbers N1
 ϵ/(2c)

and N2
 ϵ/(2c)

such that for all m, n > N :=
max{N1
 ϵ/(2c)

, N2
 ϵ/(2c)
}, we have the inequalities
|am −an| < ϵ
2c
and
|bm −bn| < ϵ
2c.
We thereby obtain, for all m, n > N, the bound
|am · bm −an · bn| = |am · bm −am · bn + am · bn −an · bn|
= |am · (bm −bn) + bn · (am −an)|
≤|am · (bm −bn)| + |bn · (am −an)|
= |am| · |bm −bn| + |bn| · |am −an|
≤c · ϵ
2c + c · ϵ
2c = ϵ.
Therefore, (an · bn) is a rational Cauchy sequence, which proves that the
product (an) · (bn) is a rational Cauchy sequence.
⊓⊔
Lemma 2.5. The set of rational Cauchy sequences M together with the additive
and multiplicative operations + and ·, that is, (M,+, ·), is a commutative ring
with unit element.
Proof. (i) We show ﬁrst that (M, +) is an abelian group. We observe ﬁrst that
M is not empty, since it contains the rational Cauchy sequence (0), consist-
ing solely of zeros. The associativity of addition follows at once from the
associativity of addition of rational numbers. Namely, if we have (an),(bn),
(cn) ∈M, then we have also

148
IV The Real Numbers
 (an) + (bn)
 + (cn) = (an + bn) + (cn) =
 (an + bn) + cn

=
 an + (bn + cn)
 = (an) + (bn + cn)
= (an) +
 (bn) + (cn)

.
The commutativity of addition also follows at once from that of addition
of rational numbers. The rational Cauchy sequence (0) mentioned above,
consisting solely of zeros, is clearly the additive identity element, since for
(an) ∈M, we have
(0) + (an) = (0 + an) = (an) = (an + 0) = (an) + (0).
If (an) ∈M, then we assert that the rational Cauchy sequence (−an) is the
additive inverse of (an). Indeed, we have
(−an) + (an) = (−an + an) = (0) = (an −an) = (an) + (−an).
We have thus shown that (M, +) is an abelian group.
(ii) We now show that (M, ·) is an abelian monoid. We begin by noting
that M is nonempty, since it contains the rational Cauchy sequence (1), con-
sisting solely of ones. The associativity of multiplication of sequences fol-
lows at once from the associativity of multiplication of rational numbers.
Namely, if (an), (bn), (cn) ∈M, then we have
 (an) · (bn)
 · (cn) = (an · bn) · (cn) =
 (an · bn) · cn
 =
 an · (bn · cn)

=
 an) · (bn · cn
 = (an) ·
 (bn) · (cn)

.
The commutativity of multiplication of sequences follows easily from that of
multiplication of rational numbers. The rational Cauchy sequence (1) men-
tioned above, consisting solely of ones, is clearly the multiplicative identity
element in (M, ·), since for (an) ∈M, we have
(1) · (an) = (1 · an) = (an) = (an · 1) = (an) · (1).
We have thus proved that (M, ·) is an abelian monoid.
(iii) The validity of the distributive laws for M follows easily from the
distributive laws for the rational numbers. For example, for (an), (bn), (cn) ∈
M, we have
(an) ·
 (bn) + (cn)
 = (an) · (bn + cn) =
 an · (bn + cn)

= (an · bn + an · cn) = (an) · (bn) + (an) · (cn).
The proof of the lemma is thus complete.
⊓⊔
Remark 2.6. If we associate with a rational number r the rational Cauchy
sequence (r), the sequence consisting solely of r’s, we obtain a mapping

2. Construction of the Real Numbers
149
f : Q −→M. One may easily check that f is a ring homomorphism
f : (Q,+, ·) −→(M,+, ·).
Since clearly, ker( f ) = {0}, the ring homomorphism f is injective.
Deﬁnition 2.7. We set
n :=
(an) ∈M
(an) is a rational null sequence
	
and call this set the ideal of rational null sequences. This name is justiﬁed by
the following lemma.
Lemma 2.8. The ideal n of rational null sequences is an ideal in the commutative
ring (M,+, ·).
Proof. (i) We must ﬁrst convince ourselves that (n, +) is a subgroup of
(M, +). Since the rational Cauchy sequence (0), consisting solely of zeros,
is a rational null sequence, it follows that n is not empty. Invoking the sub-
group criterion, Lemma 2.25 of Chapter II, we see that it sufﬁces to show
that for (an), (bn) ∈n, the difference (an) −(bn) is also in n. Since (an) and
(bn) are rational null sequences, there exist for ϵ ∈Q, ϵ > 0, natural num-
bers Na(ϵ/2) and Nb(ϵ/2) such that for all n > Na(ϵ/2) and n > Nb(ϵ/2),
we have the inequalities
|an| < ϵ
2
and
|bn| < ϵ
2.
It follows then from the triangle inequality that we have
|an −bn| < ϵ
2 + ϵ
2 = ϵ
for n > max{Na(ϵ/2), Nb(ϵ/2)}. That is, (an) −(bn) is a rational null se-
quence. Therefore, (n, +) is a subgroup of (M, +).
(ii) Our second task is to show that the product of a rational null se-
quence (bn) ∈n and a rational Cauchy sequence (an) ∈M is again a rational
null sequence. Since the rational Cauchy sequence (an) is bounded, by Re-
mark 2.3 (ii), there exists c ∈Q, c > 0, such that for all n ∈N, we have the
inequality |an| ≤c. For an arbitrary ϵ ∈Q, ϵ > 0, there then exists N(ϵ/c) ∈N
such that for all n > N(ϵ/c), we have the inequality
|an · bn| = |an| · |bn| ≤c · ϵ
c = ϵ.
Therefore, (an) · (bn) is in fact a rational null sequence, and that completes
the proof that n is an ideal of (M,+, ·).
⊓⊔

150
IV The Real Numbers
Remark 2.9. We may now apply Theorem 3.21 of Chapter III to the commu-
tative ring (M,+, ·) of rational Cauchy sequences and the ideal n of rational
null sequences and obtain the commutative quotient ring (M/n,+, ·). The
elements of M/n are cosets of the form
α = (an) + n,
where (an) is a rational Cauchy sequence. The elements of each coset are
rational Cauchy sequences, and the difference of each pair of elements in
the coset is a rational null sequence.
Deﬁnition 2.10. Let (an) be a rational sequence, and 0 ≤n0 < n1 < n2 <
··· < nk < ··· an increasing sequence of natural numbers. The sequence (ank)
is called a subsequence of the sequence (an).
Lemma 2.11. Let (an) be a rational Cauchy sequence, and (ank) a subsequence of
(an). Then we have
(ak) −(ank) = (ak −ank) ∈n.
Proof. Let ϵ ∈Q, ϵ > 0. Since (an) is a rational Cauchy sequence and nk ≥k,
there exists a natural number N(ϵ) such that for all k > N(ϵ), we have the
inequality
|ak −ank| < ϵ.
This shows that the sequence (ak −ank) is a rational null sequence, which
completes the proof.
⊓⊔
Theorem 2.12. The quotient ring (M/n,+, ·) is a ﬁeld.
Proof. By construction, the zero and unit elements of M/n are given by
(0) + n
and
(1) + n,
where (0) and (1) denote the rational Cauchy sequences that consist solely
of zeros and ones respectively.
Since we have already established that (M/n,+, ·) is a commutative ring
with unit element (1) + n, it remains only to show that every coset (an) + n
other than the zero element of M/n, that is, for which we have
(an) + n ̸= (0) + n
⇐⇒
(an) /∈n,
has a multiplicative inverse. Since (an) /∈n, there exist ϵ0 ∈Q, ϵ0 > 0, and
N(ϵ0) ∈N such that for all n > N(ϵ0), we have the inequality
|an| > ϵ0,
or equivalently,
an ̸= 0.
(4)
We therefore deﬁne the rational sequence (bn) by

2. Construction of the Real Numbers
151
bn :=



0,
0 ≤n ≤N(ϵ0),
1
an
,
n > N(ϵ0).
We show ﬁrst that (bn) is a rational Cauchy sequence and then that one can
construct a multiplicative inverse to (an) + n.
For m, n > N(ϵ0), we obtain, using (4),
|bm −bn| =

1
am
−1
an
 = |am −an|
|am · an| < |am −an|
ϵ2
0
.
Since (an) is a rational Cauchy sequence, there exists for ϵ ∈Q, ϵ > 0, a
number N(ϵ2
0 · ϵ) such that for all m, n > N(ϵ2
0 · ϵ), we have
|am −an| < ϵ2
0 · ϵ.
We thereby obtain at once, for all m, n > max{N(ϵ0), N(ϵ2
0 · ϵ)} the inequal-
ity
|bm −bn| < ϵ;
that is, we indeed have (bn) ∈M.
Finally, we claim that the element (bn) + n is the multiplicative inverse of
(an) + n. To prove this, we have only to show that
 (an) + n
 ·
 (bn) + n
 = (1) + n,
that is, that (an) · (bn) −(1) ∈n. For n > N(ϵ0), we have by construction that
an · bn = 1;
that is, the rational Cauchy sequence (an) · (bn) −(1) consists solely of zeros
after the ﬁrst N(ϵ0) terms, and it is therefore a rational null sequence.
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition 2.13. We call the ﬁeld (M/n,+, ·) the ﬁeld of real numbers and
denote it by R. In what follows, we shall denote the elements of R by Greek
letters. For example, we have
α ∈R
⇐⇒
α = (an) + n,
for some (an) ∈M.
Lemma 2.14. The mapping that assigns to every rational number r the real num-
ber (r) + n, where (r) is the rational Cauchy sequence each term of which is equal
to r, induces an injective ring homomorphism
F : (Q,+, ·) −→(R,+, ·).
Proof. For r1, r2 ∈Q, we verify at once that

152
IV The Real Numbers
F(r1 + r2) = (r1 + r2) + n = (r1 + n) + (r2 + n) = F(r1) + F(r2),
F(r1 · r2) = (r1 · r2) + n = (r1 + n) · (r2 + n) = F(r1) · F(r2);
that is, F is a ring homomorphism. To prove the injectivity of F, we observe
that ker(F) is an ideal of Q. But since (Q,+, ·) is a ﬁeld, the only ideals of Q
are the zero ideal and the unit ideal (i.e., the entire ﬁeld). But it is impossible
that ker(F) is the unit ideal, since if it were, every nonzero rational number
r would be mapped to the zero element of R, which would imply that the
rational Cauchy sequence (r) was a rational null sequence, which is not the
case. Therefore, ker(F) must be the zero ideal, and so F is injective.
⊓⊔
Remark 2.15. From the previous lemma, we may identify the ﬁeld of rational
numbers Q with its image im(F) in the ﬁeld R of real numbers; that is, we
may set r := (r) + n (r ∈Q).
Deﬁnition 2.16. We extend the relations < and ≤on the set Q of rational
numbers from Deﬁnition 6.5 of Chapter III to the set R of real numbers by
saying that for two real numbers α = (an) + n and β = (bn) + n, we have
α < β
⇐⇒
∃q ∈Q, q > 0, N(q) ∈N : bn −an > q ∀n ∈N, n > N(q)
and
α ≤β
⇐⇒
α = β or α < β.
We extend the deﬁnitions of > and ≥similarly to the set R of real numbers.
Lemma 2.17. The relation < in Deﬁnition 2.16 is well deﬁned, that is, it is inde-
pendent of the choice of rational Cauchy sequences (an) and (bn) representing the
real numbers α and β.
Proof. We leave the proof as an exercise for the reader.
⊓⊔
Exercise 2.18. Prove Lemma 2.17.
Remark 2.19. With the relation <, the set R of real numbers becomes an
ordered set; that is, it satisﬁes the following three conditions:
(i)
For every pair of elements α, β ∈R, one has α < β or β < α or α = β.
(ii)
The three relations α < β, β < α, α = β, are mutually exclusive.
(iii) If α < β and β < γ, then α < γ.
Analogous statements hold for the relation >.
Deﬁnition 2.20. Let α = (an) + n ∈R be a real number. We set
|α| :=
(
α,
if α ≥0,
−α,
if α < 0.

2. Construction of the Real Numbers
153
We call the real number |α| the absolute value of the real number α .
Lemma 2.21. The absolute value on the real numbers satisﬁes the following prop-
erties:
(i)
|α · β| = |α| · |β| for all α, β ∈R.
(ii)
|α + β| ≤|α| + |β| for all α, β ∈R.
Proof. We leave the proof as an exercise for the reader.
⊓⊔
Exercise 2.22. Prove Lemma 2.21.
We carry over the notion of a rational Cauchy sequence to the ﬁeld
(R,+, ·) of real numbers.
Deﬁnition 2.23. A sequence (αn) = (αn)n≥0 such that αn ∈R for all n ∈N
is called a real Cauchy sequence if for every ε ∈R, ε > 0, there exists N(ε) ∈N
such that for all m, n ∈N with m, n > N(ε), we have the inequality
|αm −αn| < ε.
Remark 2.24. Let (αn) be a real Cauchy sequence. The nth term of the se-
quence, αn, is then given by αn = (an,k) + n, where (an,k) is a rational Cauchy
sequence. Moreover, ε ∈R, ε > 0, is of the form ε = (ϵk) + n with the ratio-
nal Cauchy sequence (ϵk). Using Deﬁnition 2.16 with the relation <, Def-
inition 2.23 now takes the form that for m, n ∈N with m, n > N(ε), there
exists a natural number M(m, n) such that for all k > M(m, n), we have the
inequality
|am,k −an,k| < ϵk.
Exercise 2.25. Give examples of real null sequences whose terms are all ir-
rational (that is, not rational) numbers.
Deﬁnition 2.26. A real sequence (αn) has a limit α ∈R , or equivalently, the
sequence converges to α ∈R, if for every ε ∈R, ε > 0, there exists a natural
number N(ε) such that for all n ∈N with n > N(ε), we have the inequality
|αn −α| < ε.
In this case, we write
α = lim
n→∞αn.
Theorem 2.27. In the ﬁeld (R,+, ·) of real numbers, every real Cauchy sequence
(αn) has a limit α ∈R.
Proof. By Remark 2.24, we have αn = (an,k) + n with the rational Cauchy
sequence (an,k). We shall show that

154
IV The Real Numbers
(i)
the rational sequence (an,n) is a Cauchy sequence;
(ii)
we have limn→∞αn = α, where α := (an,n) + n.
(i) Let ε ∈R, ε > 0; without loss of generality, we may choose ε to be
rational; that is, we may have ε = (ϵ) with ϵ ∈Q. By Remark 2.24, there exists
for all m, n > N(ϵ), a natural number M(m, n) such that for all k > M(m, n),
we have the inequality
|am,k −an,k| < ϵ.
We now show that there exists a natural number N0(ϵ) such that the in-
equality
|am,k −an,k| < ϵ
holds for all m, n > N0(ϵ) and all k ∈N. To this end, we observe ﬁrst of all
that the rational Cauchy sequence (an,k) representing αn can be altered by
passage to a subsequence, which for simplicity we again denote by (an,k), in
such a way that
|an,k −an,n| < 1
n
(5)
for all k ∈N. It then follows by the triangle inequality that for arbitrary k, k′ ∈
N, we have
|an,k −an,k′| ≤|an,k −an,n| + |an,n −an,k′| < 2
n.
We thereby obtain for all m, n > N(ϵ/2), k ∈N, and k′ > M(m, n) the bound
|am,k −an,k| ≤|am,k −am,k′| + |am,k′ −an,k′| + |an,k′ −an,k|
< 2
m + ϵ
2 + 2
n.
If we now set N0(ϵ) := max

N( ϵ
2), [ 8
ϵ]
	
, we obtain, as desired, for all m, n >
N0(ϵ) and all k ∈N, the bound
|am,k −an,k| < ϵ.
(6)
If we now choose m, n > N0(ϵ) and set k = m in the inequalities (6) and (5),
we obtain
|am,m −an,n| ≤|am,m −an,m| + |an,m −an,n|
< ϵ + 1
n < ϵ + ϵ
8 < 2ϵ.
We have thus shown that (an,n) is a rational Cauchy sequence by which we
deﬁne the real number α; that is, we have α := (an,n) + n.
(ii) It remains to show that limn→∞αn = α. Again let ϵ ∈Q, ϵ > 0. We must
show that for sufﬁciently large n,k, we have the inequality

3. The Decimal Expansion of a Real Number
155
|an,k −ak,k| < ϵ.
(7)
Setting m = k into (6) and then choosing n, k > N0(ϵ), we obtain the desired
inequality (7), that is,
|αn −α| < ϵ
for all n > N0(ϵ). This proves the assertion.
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition 2.28. Because of the fact proved in the previous theorem that
every real Cauchy sequence in the ﬁeld (R,+, ·) has a limit that itself is in
R, we say that the real numbers are complete.
Remark 2.29. Let α = (an) + n ∈R be a real number. The rational Cauchy
sequence (an) is in particular also a real Cauchy sequence, which we may
also denote by (an) because we have identiﬁed Q with a subset of the real
numbers R. The proof of Theorem 2.27 shows that
α = lim
n→∞an;
that is, every real number is the limit of a rational Cauchy sequence.
Exercise 2.30. Find a rational Cauchy sequence with limit
√
2.
3.
The Decimal Expansion of a Real Number
Deﬁnition 3.1. Let q−j be natural numbers with 0 ≤q−j ≤9 for
j = −ℓ,..., 0, 1, 2,...
and ℓ∈N. Then we call the formal sum
±qℓ...q0.q−1q−2 ... := ±
∞
∑
j=−ℓ
q−j · 10−j
an (inﬁnite) decimal. We set
D′ := {±qℓ...q0.q−1q−2 ... | ±qℓ...q0.q−1q−2 ... is a decimal}.
The decimal ±qℓ...q0.q−1q−2 ... is said to be terminating if there exists an
index k ≥0 such that q−j = 0 for j > k. The notion of periodicity of a decimal
expansion and the associated notions from Deﬁnition 1.3 can be carried over
to decimals without further ado.
Remark 3.2. On the basis of our previous considerations, terminating and
periodic decimals can be identiﬁed with rational numbers. The remain-
ing decimals have no clear meaning at this point. However, the following

156
IV The Real Numbers
lemma will allow us to identify them with real numbers. To this end, we
make an association between the set D′ of decimals and the set R of real
numbers.
Lemma 3.3. Let ±qℓ...q0.q−1q−2 ... be a decimal and (an) the rational sequence
given by
an := ±qℓ...q0.q−1 ...q−n.
With the assignment
±qℓ...q0.q−1q−2 ... 7→(an) + n,
we obtain a surjective mapping of sets
ϕ : D′ −→R.
Proof. (i) We must ﬁrst demonstrate that the mapping ϕ is well deﬁned, that
is, that the sequence (an) is a rational Cauchy sequence. To this end, let ϵ ∈
Q, ϵ > 0, and N ∈N be such that 10−N < ϵ. Then by construction, we have
that for all m, n > N with m > n,
|am −an| < 0.0...0q−(n+1) ...q−m < 10−N < ϵ,
which proves the Cauchy sequence property.
(ii) We now prove the surjectivity of ϕ. It sufﬁces to show that ϕ yields a
surjective mapping of the set of all nonnegative decimals
qℓ...q0.q−1q−2 ... ∈D′
to the set of nonnegative real numbers. To construct a decimal expansion of
a given real number, we shall try to imitate the procedure given in Section 1
for obtaining the decimal expansion of a rational number. However, we do
not have, in general, division with remainder at our disposal. As a substi-
tute, we shall use the fact that we can decompose a real number into its
integer part and fractional part, the latter being nonnegative and less than 1.
Suppose, then, that we have α ∈R with α ≥0. There then exist q ∈N and
ρ ∈R with 0 ≤ρ < 1 such that
α = q + ρ.
For the natural number q, we have the decimal representation
q =
ℓ
∑
j=0
qj · 10j = qℓqℓ−1 ...q1q0.
We write
ρ = 1
10 · 10 · ρ

3. The Decimal Expansion of a Real Number
157
and decompose 10 · ρ as before in the form
10 · ρ = q−1 + ρ−1
with q−1 ∈N and ρ−1 ∈R with 0 ≤ρ−1 < 1; since we have ρ < 1, it follows
that 0 ≤q−1 ≤9. We thereby obtain
ρ = 1
10
 q−1 + ρ−1
 = q−1
10 + ρ−1
10 .
We again write
10 · ρ−1 = q−2 + ρ−2,
where q−2 ∈N with 0 ≤q−2 ≤9 and ρ−2 ∈R with 0 ≤ρ−2 < 1. This yields
ρ = q−1
10 + 1
102
 q−2 + ρ−2
 = q−1
10 + q−2
102 + ρ−2
102 .
Proceeding in this way, we obtain the decimal expansion
qℓ...q0.q−1q−2 ... ∈D′.
The partial sums
an = qℓ...q0.q−1 ...q−n
of this decimal expansion form a rational Cauchy sequence, which by con-
struction, converges in R to α. We thereby see that
ϕ(qℓ...q0.q−1q−2 ...) = α.
This proves the surjectivity of ϕ.
⊓⊔
Remark 3.4. The proof of the preceding Lemma 3.3 shows that the decimal
±qℓ...q0.q−1q−2 ... corresponds to the real number
α = ± lim
n→∞
n
∑
j=−ℓ
q−j · 10−j = ±
∞
∑
j=−ℓ
q−j · 10−j
via the mapping ϕ. We have thus answered in the afﬁrmative the question
raised in Section 1 of this chapter about the possible meaning of such series.
Remark 3.5. We now investigate the mapping ϕ : D′ −→R from Lemma 3.3
with respect to injectivity. We shall see that ϕ is not injective. It will therefore
be our goal to measure the defect in injectivity. In what follows, we may
again restrict our attention to the set of nonnegative decimals.
Lemma 3.6. Let
qℓ...q0.q−1q−2 ...
and
q′
ℓ′ ...q′
0.q′
−1q′
−2 ...

158
IV The Real Numbers
be nonnegative decimals such that
ϕ(qℓ...q0.q−1q−2 ...) = ϕ(q′
ℓ′ ...q′
0.q′
−1q′
−2 ...),
(8)
where ϕ is the set mapping from D′ to R deﬁned in Lemma 3.3. Then either the two
decimals are identical, or one of the two terminates and the other consists solely of
9’s from some point in its decimal expansion onward.
Proof. We may, without loss of generality, assume ℓ′ ≥ℓ. By Remark 3.4, we
obtain from (8) the equality
q′
ℓ′ · 10ℓ′ + ··· + q′
ℓ+1 · 10ℓ+1 =
∞
∑
j=−ℓ
(q−j −q′
−j) · 10−j.
If we divide this equation by 10ℓ+1, we shall see that without loss of gener-
ality, we may assume that ℓ= −1. We thus obtain
q′
ℓ′ · 10ℓ′ + ··· + q′
0 =
∞
∑
j=1
(q−j −q′
−j) · 10−j.
(9)
Since 0 ≤qj, q′
j ≤9, we may estimate the right-hand side of (9), obtaining
0 ≤

∞
∑
j=1
(q−j −q′
−j) · 10−j
 ≤
∞
∑
j=1
|q−j −q′
−j| · 10−j ≤9 ·
∞
∑
j=1
10−j
= 9
 ∞
∑
j=0
10−j −1

= 9

1
1 −1
10
−1

= 9
10
9 −1

= 1.
We therefore obtain
0 ≤
 q′
ℓ′ · 10ℓ′ + ··· + q′
0
 ≤1
for the left-hand side of (9); that is, we have ℓ′ = 0 and q′
0 = 1 or ℓ′ = −1,
whence q′
0 = 0. Since the ﬁrst case obtains precisely when equality holds in
the previous inequality for all j = 1, 2,..., we see that this case obtains only
if for j = 1, 2,..., we have the equality
|q−j −q′
−j| = 9.
Since this is all taking place with nonnegative numbers, this means that
q−j = 9
and
q′
−j = 0
(j = 1, 2,...).
If the latter case obtains, then we proceed from the equality q0 = q′
0 and look
for an index −k such that q−k = q′
−k, yet q−k−1 ̸= q′
−k−1. Either there is no
such index, in which case the two decimals are identical, or there indeed

4. Equivalent Characterizations of Completeness
159
exists such an index −k; if we then argue as above, we see that the decimal
0, q−1q−2 ... consists solely of 9’s from the (k + 1)st decimal place onward.
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition 3.7. We now deﬁne D ⊂D′ as the subset containing no decimals
containing only 9’s from some point on. We shall call the elements of D
genuine decimals.
Theorem 3.8. There is a bijection between the set D of genuine decimals and the
set R of real numbers.
Proof. The theorem follows directly from Lemmas 3.3 and 3.6.
⊓⊔
Remark 3.9. Using Theorem 3.8, we may henceforward speak of the decimal
representation or decimal expansion of real numbers.
Moreover, with the help of the bijection between D and R from Theo-
rem 3.8, we may carry over addition and multiplication of real numbers to
the set of genuine decimals. We thereby obtain the ﬁeld (D,+, ·) of genuine
decimals.
Remark 3.10. Using the decimal representation of real numbers, it can be
shown that the set R is uncountable. We are not going to discuss this further,
and we refer the reader to the relevant literature. Since the set Q of rational
numbers is countable, the set difference R \ Q is not empty. This fact leads
to the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 3.11. A real number α ∈R \ Q is said to be irrational.
Exercise 3.12.
(a) Think about why the number 0.101001000100001... (that is, the num-
ber of zeros between ones is successively 1,2,3,...) is irrational. Give
further examples of irrational decimals.
(b) Compute the ﬁrst ten decimal places of
√
2 precisely.
4.
Equivalent Characterizations of Completeness
In this section, we shall present some equivalent characterizations of the
completeness of the real numbers. This will lead us to the notions of supre-
mum and inﬁmum.
Deﬁnition 4.1. A real sequence (αn) is said to be monotonically increasing if
for all n ∈N, we have the inequality αn+1 ≥αn, and it is said to be strictly
monotonically increasing if we have αn+1 > αn.

160
IV The Real Numbers
A real sequence (αn) is said to be monotonically decreasing if for all n ∈N,
we have the inequality αn+1 ≤αn, and it is said to be strictly monotonically
decreasing if we have αn+1 < αn.
Exercise 4.2. Determine which of the following sequences are (strictly) mo-
notonically increasing or (strictly) monotonically decreasing:

12
1
n+1

n≥0 ,
n3 −2
n2 −2

n≥0
,
n2 + 2
2n

n≥0
,
n3 + 3
3n

n≥0
,

n
1
n+1

n≥0 .
Deﬁnition 4.3. A nonempty set M ⊆R is said to be bounded from above if
there exists γ ∈R such that for all µ ∈M, we have µ ≤γ. The real number
γ is called an upper bound for the set M.
A nonempty set M ⊆R is said to be bounded from below if there exists
γ ∈R such that for all µ ∈M, we have µ ≥γ. The real number γ is called a
lower bound for the set M.
A nonempty set M ⊆R is said to be bounded if it is bounded both from
above and from below.
Theorem 4.4. If a nonempty set M ⊆R is bounded from above, then the set M
has a least upper bound σ ∈R.
Proof. We choose α0 ∈R such that α0 is not an upper bound for M but such
that β0 := α0 + 1 is such an upper bound. Then α0 + 1
2 is either an upper
bound for M or it is not. In the ﬁrst case, we deﬁne
α1 := α0
and
β1 := α0 + 1
2,
while in the second case, we deﬁne
α1 := α0 + 1
2
and
β1 := β0.
Proceeding in this fashion, we construct inductively two real sequences (αn)
and (βn) that satisfy the following three properties:
(1) The sequence (αn) is monotonically increasing.
(2) The sequence (βn) is monotonically decreasing.
(3) For all m, n ∈N, we have the inequality αn ≤βm.
Choose now ε ∈R, ε > 0, and m ∈N such that 2−m < ε. Then for all n ∈N
with n > m, we have by the nature of our construction that
|αm −αn| = αn −αm ≤βm −αm ≤1
2m < ε.
We see, then, that (αn) is a real Cauchy sequence. Analogously, we see that
(βn) is also a real Cauchy sequence. We set

4. Equivalent Characterizations of Completeness
161
α := lim
n→∞αn,
β := lim
n→∞βn.
Since
lim
n→∞(βn −αn) = 0,
we conclude that α = β.
We now claim that α is the desired least upper bound for the set M. Since
the real numbers βn are by construction upper bounds for M for all n ∈N,
we have for all µ ∈M and n ∈N the inequality
µ ≤βn,
that is,
µ ≤β = α.
Thus α is an upper bound for M.
Now let ε ∈R, ε > 0, be such that α′ := α −ε is a smaller upper bound
for M. By the monotonicity of the sequence (αn), we can ﬁnd N(ε) ∈N such
that for all n > N(ε), we have the inequality
αn ≥α −ε = α′ .
But since αn by construction cannot be an upper bound for M for all n ∈N,
there must exist µn ∈M such that µn > αn. If we now choose n > N(ε), we
obtain the contradiction µn > α′. Therefore, α is the least upper bound for
M, and the theorem is proved.
⊓⊔
One can prove analogously the following theorem.
Theorem 4.5. If a nonempty set M ⊆R is bounded from below, then the set M
has a greatest lower bound σ ∈R.
⊓⊔
Exercise 4.6. Give an example showing that there is no valid analogue of
Theorem 4.5 for the set of rational numbers.
Exercise 4.7. Find the greatest lower bound and the least upper bound for
the set { x√x | x ∈Q, x ≥0}.
Deﬁnition 4.8. The least upper bound for a nonempty set M that is bounded
above, as described above in Theorem 4.4, is called the supremum of M and
is denoted by sup(M).
The greatest lower bound for a nonempty set M that is bounded below is
called the inﬁmum of M and is denoted by inf(M).
Deﬁnition 4.9. A sequence of closed intervals
[αn, βn] := {δ ∈R | αn ≤δ ≤βn} ⊆R
(n ∈N)

162
IV The Real Numbers
is called a sequence of nested intervals if the real sequences (αn) and (βn)
satisfy the following three properties:
(1) The sequence (αn) is monotonically increasing.
(2) The sequence (βn) is monotonically decreasing.
(3) We have the limit limn→∞(βn −αn) = 0.
Theorem 4.10. If the intervals [αn, βn] ⊆R for n ∈N form a sequence of nested
intervals, then we have
∞
\
n=0
[αn, βn] = {α}
for some real number α.
Proof. We begin by showing that the intersection
∞
\
n=0
[αn, βn]
is nonempty. To this end, we consider the nonempty set
A := {αn | n ∈N} ⊆R
and
B := {βn | n ∈N} ⊆R.
By deﬁnition, the set A is bounded from above, namely by the elements of
B. Similarly, the set B is bounded from below. By Theorems 4.4 and 4.5, we
may consider the supremum of A and the inﬁmum of B, that is,
α := sup(A) ∈R
and
β := inf(B) ∈R.
By property (3) in Deﬁnition 4.9, we must have α = β. Since αn ≤α = β ≤βn
for all n ∈N, we have found with α an element that belongs to every interval
[αn, βn] (n ∈N).
We now show that α is the only element in the intersection under discus-
sion. To this end, let γ ∈T∞
n=0[αn, βn] be arbitrary. Since αn ≤γ ≤βn for all
n ∈N, we have
α = lim
n→∞αn ≤γ ≤lim
n→∞βn = β,
which shows that α = γ.
⊓⊔
Remark 4.11. We may paraphrase the result of Theorem 4.10 by saying that
the nested intervals principle holds in R. We have seen that the completeness
of the real numbers, called the completeness principle, has as a consequence
the existence of a supremum (supremum principle) and an inﬁmum (inﬁmum
principle), which in turn implies the nested intervals principle. We close this
circle by showing that the nested intervals principle implies completeness.
In sum, in the set of real numbers, the following are equivalent:
– the completeness principle,

4. Equivalent Characterizations of Completeness
163
– the supremum and inﬁmum principles,
– the nested intervals principle.
Theorem 4.12. Consider the set (R,+, ·) of real numbers with its order relation
< and assume the validity of the nested intervals principle. Then every real Cauchy
sequence (αn) has a limit in R; that is, the nested intervals principle implies the
completeness principle.
Proof. Let ε ∈R, ε > 0. Then there exists N(ε) ∈N such that for all natural
numbers m, n > N(ε), we have the inequality
|αm −αn| < ε.
If n0 := N(ε) + 1, then for all natural numbers n ≥n0, we have
|αn −αn0| < ε,
that is,
|αn| < |αn0| + ε.
Setting
µ := max{|α0|,..., |αn0−1|, |αn0| + ε},
we see that M := {αn | n ∈N} ⊆R is a bounded set; that is, there exist real
numbers µ0, ν0 such that for all n ∈N, we have the inequalities
µ0 ≤αn ≤ν0.
By repeated halving of the closed interval [µ0, ν0], we obtain a sequence of
nested intervals [µk, νk] (k ∈N) such that inﬁnitely many terms of the se-
quence lie in each of the intervals; that is, for inﬁnitely many indices n, we
have
µk ≤αn ≤νk.
The assumed validity of the nested intervals principle implies the existence
of a real number α that is determined by
∞
\
k=0
[µk, νk] = {α}.
There exists, therefore, a natural number K(ε) such that for all natural num-
bers k > K(ε), we have the inequalities
α −ε < µk < νk < α + ε;
that is, for inﬁnitely many indices m, we have the inequalities
α −ε < αm < α + ε
⇐⇒
|αm −α| < ε.

164
IV The Real Numbers
Increasing N(ε) if necessary, we may choose one of the inﬁnitely many in-
dices m = n0 and obtain
|αn0 −α| < ε.
It therefore follows that for all natural numbers n > N(ε), we have
|αn −α| ≤|αn −αn0| + |αn0 −α| < 2ε.
This proves the convergence of the real Cauchy sequence (αn) and that the
equality
lim
n→∞αn = α
holds.
⊓⊔
5.
The Real Numbers and the Real Number Line
In this section, we shall construct a bijection between the elements of the set
of real numbers and the points on a straight line. This will lead us to the no-
tion of the real number line. To do so, we shall require the classical axioms of
plane Euclidean geometry. We shall use in particular that the plane consists
of points, that through every two points in the plane there passes exactly one
straight line and this line determines a unique line segment (connecting the
two points), and that two distinct lines in the plane have exactly one point
of intersection unless they are parallel. We shall also require the fact that we
can mark off segments on a line using a compass. We shall also assume the
validity of the important similarity theorems. We shall see, however, that
the classical axioms do not sufﬁce for carrying out our desired identiﬁcation
of the set of real numbers with a straight line. We shall need an additional
axiom, which we shall call the axiom of geometric completeness.
We begin with the set R of real numbers and a horizontal straight line G
in the plane. Our goal is to produce a bijection from the set R of real numbers
to the line G. We begin by choosing a point P0 on the line G, which we call
the zero point. We choose the point P0 ∈G as the image of the zero element
0 ∈R.
G

P0
After marking off an arbitrary but ﬁxed unit distance on the line, we can
mark equidistant points on the line G, beginning from the zero point P0 and
moving to the right, a unit distance apart, which we consider the images of
the natural numbers 1, 2, 3,.... We denote these points by P1, P2, P3,.... By
reﬂecting in the zero point P0, we obtain the images of the negative integers
−1, −2, −3,... on G, which we denote by P−1, P−2, P−3,....

5. The Real Numbers and the Real Number Line
165
G

P0

P3

P2

P1

P−1

P−2

P−3
If we deﬁne the length ℓ(P0P1) of the unit line segment P0P1 to be 1, then the
length of the segment PaPb (a, b ∈Z, a ≤b) will be
ℓ(PaPb) = b −a.
We now imagine two intersecting lines in the plane on which the integer
points have been marked and that intersect at the zero point P0. On one line,
we mark the points Pa and Pb corresponding to the natural numbers a and b
(a, b ̸= 0), and on the other line, we mark the point P1, corresponding to the
natural number 1. If we now construct the segment joining points Pb and P1
and then construct the line parallel to this segment through the point Pa, we
obtain as the intersection point of this parallel line with the other straight
line a point P. By the intercept theorem, we have the following relationship
between the segments P0Pb, P0Pa, P0P1, and P0P:
P0Pb : P0Pa = P0P1 : P0P.
If we denote the length of the segment P0P by x, we have the following
proportion between the lengths of the segments under consideration:
b : a = 1 : x
⇐⇒
a = b · x
⇐⇒
x = a
b.
We may therefore consider the point P to be the image of the positive ratio-
nal number a
b, and we denote it by Pa/b .

P0

P1
1
Pb

Pa/b
1
Pa
By carrying out this construction for all positive rational numbers, we obtain
for every rational number r an image point Pr ∈G. Again, by reﬂection in
the zero point, we obtain as well the negative rational numbers as points on
G. In sum, we have obtained an injective mapping ψ : Q −→G through the
assignment r 7→Pr .
Before we extend the mapping ψ to the set of real numbers, let us note
some important properties of ψ that result from how it was constructed.

166
IV The Real Numbers
First, ψ preserves the order relation < on Q in the sense that for rational
numbers r, s with r < s, the image point Pr lies to the left of the image point
Ps. Moreover, the mapping ψ respects the addition and multiplication of
rational numbers. For example, for two positive rational numbers r, s, we
obtain the image point Pr+s of the sum r + s as the point of G obtained as the
concatenation of the segments P0Pr and P0Ps. The difference of two rational
numbers is interpreted similarly. The point Pr·s corresponding to the product
r · s of two (positive) rational numbers r, s can be constructed by a suitable
application of the intercept theorem to the segments P0Pr, P0Ps.
We are ready now to extend the mapping ψ : Q −→G to the set R of
real numbers. For simplicity of notation, we shall continue to denote this
extended mapping by ψ. We begin by deﬁning the image of an interval
[r, s] ⊆R with rational endpoints r, s as the set of points on the segment
PrPs ⊆G, that is,
ψ([r, s]) = PrPs.
We note that the length of the segment PrPs is given by
ℓ(PrPs) = s −r.
Now let α ∈R be an arbitrary real number. The construction of the real num-
bers together with the nested intervals principle shows that we can obtain
α as the intersection of the intervals In = [an, bn] (n ∈N) of a sequence of
nested intervals with rational endpoints. The intervals In = [an, bn] (n ∈N)
are mapped by ψ to the segments PanPbn. To continue the mapping ψ from
Q to R, we require at this point an additional axiom.
Deﬁnition 5.1. The line G satisﬁes the axiom of geometric completeness if ev-
ery sequence of nested line segments PanPbn (n ∈N) with
lim
n→∞ℓ
 PanPbn
 = 0
has a nonempty intersection, that is, if we have
∞
\
n=0
PanPbn ̸= ∅.
(10)
Remark 5.2. We see that the intersection (10) in Deﬁnition 5.1 consists of a
single point P ∈G: First of all, the intersection (10) is nonempty by the axiom
of geometric completeness. For the sake of obtaining a contradiction, let us
suppose that the intersection (10) contains at least the two points P, Q. These
two points are separated by some positive distance d > 0. If we choose n
large enough, then the length of the segment PanPbn will be less than d. This
leads to a contradiction, since under these conditions, the points P, Q cannot
both belong to the intersection (10).

5. The Real Numbers and the Real Number Line
167
Using the axiom of geometric completeness and taking into account the
above observation, we now set
ψ(α) :=
∞
\
n=0
PanPbn = {P}.
We see easily that this deﬁnition is independent of the choice of sequence
of nested intervals. We thereby obtain a mapping ψ from the set R of real
numbers to the set of points on the line G. As in the case of the rational
numbers, we have that the mapping ψ respects the order relation <. We say
that the mapping ψ is order-preserving. This gives us at once the injectivity
of ψ.
Finally, we observe that the mapping ψ is also surjective. To see this, let
P ∈G be a point. We consider the set
M := {r ∈Q | ψ(r) lies to the left of P}.
Since there exists a natural number a whose image point Pa lies to the right
of P, the nonempty set M is bounded from above. There exists, therefore,
the supremum for M; we set α := sup(M) ∈R and claim that P = ψ(α). If
we had P ̸= ψ(α), then we would have ψ(α) strictly to the left of P, due to
the order-preserving nature of ψ; that is, the segment from ψ(α) to P would
have positive length. If we now choose a monotonically decreasing sequence
(cn) of rational numbers that converges to α, we ﬁnd that there exists some
element cn0 such that cn0 > α and such that the image ψ(cn0) lies to the left
of P. Therefore, we have cn0 ∈M, that is, cn0 ≤α. But this is a contradiction,
whence our assumption is false, and we have proved the surjectivity of ψ.
Exercise 5.3. Prove that ψ(α) is independent of the choice of sequence of
nested intervals for α ∈R.
We have now identiﬁed the set R of real numbers with the line G. We
shall henceforth refer to this line as the real number line. A point P on the real
number line determines an interval, namely the (directed) segment from the
zero point P0 to P. Addition and multiplication of real numbers translates,
as in our discussion of rational numbers, to an addition and multiplication
of the corresponding intervals. We can consider the real number line with
these two operations to be a model for the ﬁeld R of real numbers.
We close this section with a historical note. The axiom of geometric com-
pleteness that we required in the above discussion was characterized by
Richard Dedekind in his 1872 essay Continuity and Irrational Numbers, in
which he introduced the notion of what are now called Dedekind cuts with
the following words:
The above comparison of the domain R of rational numbers with a straight line has
led to the recognition of the existence of gaps, of a certain incompleteness or discon-

168
IV The Real Numbers
tinuity of the former, while we ascribe to the straight line completeness, absence of
gaps, or continuity. In what then does this continuity consist? Everything must de-
pend on the answer to this question, and only through it shall we obtain a scientiﬁc
basis for the investigation of all continuous domains. By vague remarks upon the un-
broken connection in the smallest parts obviously nothing is gained; the problem is to
indicate a precise characteristic of continuity that can serve as the basis for valid de-
ductions. For a long time I pondered over this in vain, but ﬁnally I found what I was
seeking. This discovery will, perhaps, be differently estimated by different people; the
majority may ﬁnd its substance very commonplace. It consists of the following. In the
preceding section attention was called to the fact that every point p of the straight
line produces a separation of the same into two portions such that every point of one
portion lies to the left of every point of the other.1
6.
The Axiomatic Point of View
Deﬁnition 6.1. A ﬁeld (K,+, ·) is said to be ordered if for all α ∈K, there
exists a relation α > 0 satisfying the following two properties:
(i)
Exactly one of the following three possibilities holds: α > 0, α = 0, α < 0
(that is, −α > 0).
(ii)
If we have α, β ∈K with α, β > 0, then we have α + β > 0 and α · β > 0.
Remark 6.2. If (K,+, ·) is an ordered ﬁeld, then the order relation allows us
to deﬁne an absolute value for the elements of K, which in turn allows us to
introduce the notion of a Cauchy sequence (αn) ⊆K.
Deﬁnition 6.3. An ordered ﬁeld (K,+, ·) is said to be complete if every
Cauchy sequence (αn) ⊆K converges to an element of K.
Remark 6.4. The ﬁeld R of real numbers is a complete ordered ﬁeld. As in
the case of the real numbers, completeness in an arbitrary ordered ﬁeld can
also be characterized in terms of the supremum and inﬁmum principles or
the nested intervals principle.
To complete the chapter, we sketch a proof of a theorem, which goes back
to David Hilbert, stating that the ﬁeld of real numbers R is (up to isomor-
phism) the unique complete ordered ﬁeld.
Theorem 6.5. A complete ordered ﬁeld (K,+, ·) is uniquely determined up to
order-preserving ring isomorphism; that is, if (K′,+, ·) is an arbitrary complete
ordered ﬁeld, then there exists a ring isomorphism
ϕ : (K,+, ·) −→(K′,+, ·)
1 Translation by Wooster Woodruff Beman, 1901.

6. The Axiomatic Point of View
169
such that
α > 0
=⇒
ϕ(α) > 0
(α ∈K).
⊓⊔
Remark 6.6. We state without proof that a complete ordered ﬁeld K has a
subring isomorphic to the ring Z of integers and therefore also a subﬁeld
isomorphic to the ﬁeld Q of rational numbers. We shall henceforth identify
Z and Q with this subring and subﬁeld. We can then show that our complete
ordered ﬁeld K is archimedean; that is, it has the property that for every α, β ∈
K with 0 < α < β, there exists n ∈N such that n · α > β. This leads to the fact
that the rational numbers Q are dense in K; that is, there is a rational number
r in every ε-neighborhood
Uε = {β ∈K | α −ε < β < α + ε}
of α ∈K.
Proof. We are now ready to begin our sketch of Theorem 6.5. We divide the
proof into three steps.
Step 1: We have ﬁrst to deﬁne a mapping ϕ : K −→K′. To this end, we
consider, for α ∈K, the set
Mα := {r ∈Q | r < α} ⊆K.
Since Q is dense in K, the set Mα is nonempty. It is clearly bounded from
above, and there exists, therefore, by the completeness of K, the supremum
of Mα, and we easily see that
sup(Mα) = α.
By our earlier identiﬁcation, we have the inclusions
Mα ⊆Q ⊆K′.
Since K′ is also complete, there exists as well the supremum for the nonempty
set Mα in K′, which is bounded from above; we denote this supremum by
sup ′(Mα). With this, we deﬁne the mapping ϕ : K −→K′ by
ϕ(α) := sup ′(Mα).
One easily veriﬁes that for r ∈Q, we have ϕ(r) = r. We can now see as
follows that ϕ is order-preserving. If α, β ∈K with α < β, then there exists,
because Q is dense in K, a number r ∈Q such that α < r < β; it follows that
sup ′(Mα) < r < sup ′(Mβ),
that is, ϕ(α) < ϕ(β), which proves that ϕ is order-preserving.

170
IV The Real Numbers
Step 2: We show here that the mapping ϕ is bijective. We begin with the
proof of injectivity. If we have α, β ∈K with α ̸= β, then we may assume
without loss of generality that α < β. Because ϕ is order-preserving, we have
also ϕ(α) < ϕ(β), that is, ϕ(α) ̸= ϕ(β), which proves that ϕ is injective.
To show the surjectivity of ϕ, we choose α′ ∈K′ and consider the set
Mα′ ⊆K′, which we also, of course, view as a subset of K. We set α :=
sup(Mα′) ∈K. From the equality
sup(Mα) = α = sup(Mα′),
we see that the sets Mα and Mα′ are identical, whence
ϕ(α) = sup ′(Mα) = sup ′(Mα′) = α′.
This proves that ϕ is surjective.
Step 3: We now show that ϕ is a ring homomorphism. We begin with the
additivity of ϕ. For α, β ∈K, we consider the set
Nα,β := {r + s | r, s ∈Q, r < α, s < β}
and show that Nα,β = Mα+β. Namely, if t := r + s ∈Nα,β, that is, t = r + s with
r, s ∈Q and r < α, s < β, then we have t ∈Q and t < α + β, that is, t ∈Mα+β.
That is, we have the inclusion Nα,β ⊆Mα+β. Conversely, if t ∈Mα+β, that is,
t ∈Q and t < α + β, then using the density of Q in K, we can ﬁnd r ∈Q that
satisﬁes
t −β < r < α.
Setting s := t −r, we obtain rational numbers r, s with r < α and s < β. Since
now t = r + s with r, s ∈Q and r < α, s < β, we see that we have t ∈Nα,β,
from which follows the inclusion Mα+β ⊆Nα,β.
It follows from the equality of sets Nα,β = Mα+β that
ϕ(α + β) = sup ′(Mα+β) = sup ′(Nα,β).
(11)
It remains to show that sup ′(Nα,β) = ϕ(α) + ϕ(β). To this end, we assert that
ϕ(α) + ϕ(β) is an upper bound for Nα,β. Indeed, if t := r + s ∈Nα,β, that is,
t = r + s with r, s ∈Q and r < α, s < β, then we have
t = r + s = ϕ(r) + ϕ(s) < ϕ(α) + ϕ(β),
from which follows the assertion. It remains now to show that ϕ(α) + ϕ(β)
is the least upper bound for Nα,β. Let K′ ∋γ < ϕ(α) + ϕ(β) be a smaller
upper bound for Nα,β. Since Q is dense in K′, there exist t, r ∈Q such that
γ < t < ϕ(α) + ϕ(β),
t −ϕ(β) < r < ϕ(α).

D. The p-adic Numbers: Another Completion of Q
171
Setting s := t −r, we have obtained rational numbers r, s with r < α and
s < β. Since now t = r + s with r, s ∈Q and r < α, s < β, we see that t ∈Nα,β.
But since we have also γ < t, it follows that γ cannot be an upper bound for
Nα,β. Therefore, we have
ϕ(α) + ϕ(β) = sup ′(Nα,β).
The additivity of ϕ now comes from (11). If α > 0, then we obtain in partic-
ular from the fact that ϕ is additive and order-preserving that
ϕ(α) > ϕ(0) = 0.
One proceeds similarly to prove the multiplicativity of ϕ. We shall omit the
proof. This completes our sketch of the proof of Theorem 6.5.
⊓⊔
Exercise 6.7. Fill in the missing details in the above proof sketch.
Remark 6.8. If we proceed from the axiomatic point of view, it is not clear
a priori that a complete ordered ﬁeld K even exists. Our construction of the
real numbers R in Section 2 has given us a model of such a ﬁeld. An alter-
native model is provided by the real number line.
D.
The p-adic Numbers: Another Completion of
Following our construction of the real numbers, we end this chapter by in-
troducing an alternative completion of the rational numbers that will lead
us to the set of p-adic numbers. In what follows, we shall discuss the utility
of the p-adic numbers, which will give us interesting new insights that will
again lead us to some current problems in number theory.
D.1
The p-adic Absolute Value
We begin with the deﬁnition of the absolute value on the ﬁeld Q of rational
numbers.
Deﬁnition D.1. A mapping ∥· ∥: Q −→R is called an absolute value if it
satisﬁes the following three properties:
(i)
For all r ∈Q, one has ∥r∥≥0 and ∥r∥= 0 ⇐⇒r = 0.
(ii)
For all r,s ∈Q, one has the product rule ∥r · s∥= ∥r∥· ∥s∥.
(iii) For all r,s ∈Q, one has the triangle inequality ∥r + s∥≤∥r∥+ ∥s∥.
Example D.2.
(i) The absolute value | · | of a rational number introduced
in Deﬁnition 6.8 of Chapter III is clearly an absolute value in the above sense.
We call it the archimedean absolute value on Q.
Q

172
IV The Real Numbers
(ii) If we deﬁne |r|triv := 1 for r ∈Q, r ̸= 0, and set |0|triv := 0, we obtain
another absolute value | · |triv, which we call the trivial absolute value on Q.
Remark D.3. We can construct yet another absolute value, one for each
prime number p, in the following way: If r = a/b is a nonzero rational num-
ber, we can write r in the form
r = a′
b′ pn,
where a′,b′ are nonzero integers relatively prime to p, and n is an integer
(which by the fundamental theorem of arithmetic is uniquely determined).
If we now set vp(r) := n and vp(0) := ∞, we obtain a mapping
vp : Q −→Z ∪{∞},
which clearly possesses the following two properties:
(i)
For all r,s ∈Q, one has vp(r · s) = vp(r) + vp(s).
(ii)
For all r,s ∈Q, one has vp(r + s) ≥min(vp(r),vp(s)).
We call the mapping vp the p-adic valuation on Q. With it, we deﬁne for r ∈Q
the quantity
|r|p := p−vp(r).
Using the properties of the p-adic valuation vp(·), one can verify at once
that | · |p deﬁnes an absolute value. In particular, the validity of the triangle
inequality can be seen as follows:
|r + s|p = p−vp(r+s) ≤p−min(vp(r),vp(s)) = max(|r|p,|s|p) ≤|r|p + |s|p,
that is, one has in fact the sharper inequality |r + s|p ≤max(|r|p,|s|p), which
is known as the ultrametric inequality.
Deﬁnition D.4. We call the absolute value | · |p constructed in the previous
remark for an arbitrary prime p the p-adic absolute value on Q.
Remark D.5. If r is a nonzero rational number, then using the deﬁnition of
the p-adic absolute value, one may easily verify the important formula
|r| · ∏
p∈P
|r|p = 1,
known as the product formula.
The larger the power n of the prime number p that divides r ∈Q, the
smaller the p-adic absolute value |r|p of r, and conversely. This is illustrated
in the following examples.

D. The p-adic Numbers: Another Completion of Q
173
Example D.6.
(i) Let
r =
96
9801 = 25 · 31
34 · 112 .
Then v2(r) = 5, v3(r) = −3, v11(r) = −2, and vp(r) = 0 for all primes p such
that p ̸= 2,3,11. It follows that |r|2 = 1
32, |r|3 = 27, |r|11 = 121, and |r|p = 1
for all primes p such that p ̸= 2,3,11.
(ii) Let r1 = 735 = 3 · 5 · 72, r2 = 3 · 5 · 712, and r3 = 3 · 5 · 7−10. Then
|r1|7 = 1
49,
|r2|7 = 1
712 =
1
13841287201,
|r3|7 = 710 = 282475249,
but |r1|p = |r2|p = |r3|p for all primes p such that p ̸= 7.
We recall that two absolute values ∥· ∥and ∥· ∥′ are said to be equivalent
if there exists a positive real number σ such that ∥· ∥′ = ∥· ∥σ. With this in
mind, we obtain the following theorem, due to Alexander Ostrowski.
Theorem D.7 (Ostrowski [5]). Every nontrivial absolute value
∥· ∥: Q −→R
deﬁned on the ﬁeld Q of rational numbers is equivalent either to the archimedean
absolute value | · | or to a p-adic absolute value | · |p.
⊓⊔
Remark D.8. For two distinct primes p,q, the associated absolute values | · |p
and | · |q are inequivalent.
D.2
The p-adic Numbers
In analogy to the notions of a rational Cauchy sequence and rational null
sequence that we introduced in Deﬁnition 2.1 in relation to the archimedean
absolute value, we can now also deﬁne rational Cauchy sequences and ra-
tional null sequences with respect to the p-adic absolute value.
Deﬁnition D.9. A sequence (an) = (an)n≥0 with an ∈Q for all n ∈N is
called a rational Cauchy sequence with respect to the p-adic absolute value if for
every ϵ ∈Q, ϵ > 0, there exists N(ϵ) ∈N such that for all m, n ∈N with
m, n > N(ϵ), the inequality
|am −an|p < ϵ
holds.
A sequence (an) = (an)n≥0 with an ∈Q for all n ∈N is called a rational
null sequence with respect to the p-adic absolute value if for every ϵ ∈Q, ϵ > 0,

174
IV The Real Numbers
there exists N(ϵ) ∈N such that for all n ∈N with n > N(ϵ), the inequality
|an|p < ϵ
holds.
Example D.10.
(i) The sequence (an) = (7n)n≥0 is a rational null sequence
with respect to the 7-adic absolute value; to see this, one has only to observe
that |7n|7 = 7−n holds for all n ∈N. If, on the other hand, p is a prime dif-
ferent from 7, then (7n)n≥0 is not a rational null sequence with respect to the
p-adic absolute value, although it is a bounded sequence, since in this case,
one has |7n|p = 1 for all n ∈N.
(ii) Let p be an arbitrary prime. Then the sequence (an) = ( 1
n)n>0 is not
a rational null sequence with respect to the p-adic absolute value, since for
the subsequence (p−m)m≥0, one has
 1
pm

p = pm.
This shows that the sequence (an) = ( 1
n)n>0 is not convergent.
(iii) The sequence (an) = (2−n)n≥0 is a bounded sequence with respect to
the 7-adic absolute value. It is not, however, a Cauchy sequence, since
 1
2n −
1
2n+1

7 =

1
2n+1

7 = 1.
These examples provide a ﬁrst impression of a “calculus” of the p-adic
absolute value, known as p-adic analysis, which appears to contradict much
of our experience with real analysis. We refer the interested reader to the
literature on the subject, in particular, the books [1] and [3].
Remark D.11. In analogy to the construction of the real numbers, let us now
consider the set Mp of all rational Cauchy sequences with respect to the p-
acid absolute value, that is,
Mp =
(an)
(an) is a rational Cauchy sequence with respect to the p-adic
absolute value
	
.
If we equip Mp with a componentwise additive operation + and a multi-
plicative operation ·, then (Mp,+,·) becomes a commutative ring with unit
element. Analogously, we set
np =
(an) ∈Mp
(an) is a rational null sequence with respect to the p-adic
absolute value
	
,

D. The p-adic Numbers: Another Completion of Q
175
and we see that np is an ideal of Mp. As in the case of the archimedean
absolute value, one can show that the quotient ring (Mp/np,+,·) is a ﬁeld.
Deﬁnition D.12. We call the ﬁeld (Mp/np,+,·) the ﬁeld of p-adic numbers
and denote it by Qp.
The ﬁeld of p-adic numbers was discovered at the end of the nineteenth
century by Kurt Hensel.
Theorem D.13. The mapping that associates with every rational number r the p-
adic number (r) + np, where (r) denotes the rational Cauchy sequence with respect
to the p-adic absolute value whose every term is equal to r, induces an injective ring
homomorphism
Fp : (Q,+,·) −→(Qp,+,·).
Moreover, the ﬁeld Qp of p-adic numbers is complete; that is, every Cauchy sequence
(αn) ⊂Qp with respect to the p-adic absolute value converges to a limiting value
α ∈Qp.
⊓⊔
Remark D.14. In analogy to the decimal fraction representation of a real
number, it can be shown that a p-adic number α ∈Qp can be represented
by a series
α =
∞
∑
j=ℓ
qj pj
with ℓ∈Z and qj ∈{0,..., p −1} = Fp. The set

α ∈Qp
α =
∞
∑
j=0
qj pj

is called the set of p-adic integers and denoted by Zp; it can then be seen that
(Zp,+,·) is a commutative subring of the ﬁeld of p-adic numbers (Qp,+,·).
From the deﬁnition of Zp, it can be seen at once that one has an isomorphism
Zp/pZp ∼= Fp.
D.3
The Local–Global Principle
For a polynomial P(X1,...,Xn) ∈Z[X1,...,Xn] in the n variables X1,...,Xn
with integer coefﬁcients, we called in Appendix C an n-tuple of rational
numbers (x1,...,xn) such that P(x1,...,xn) = 0 a rational zero of the poly-
nomial P(X1,...,Xn). We had previously not investigated the question of

176
IV The Real Numbers
the existence of rational zeros of polynomials. Rather, we considered the
question of the existence of ﬁnitely or inﬁnitely many zeros of polynomials
under the assumption that at least one such zero existed. In this section, we
shall investigate the question of existence by considering some examples.
Remark D.15. As earlier, let P(X1,...,Xn) ∈Z[X1,...,Xn], and let (x1,...,xn)
∈Qn be a rational zero of P(X1,...,Xn). From the embedding of Q in the p-
adic numbers Qp as well as in the real numbers R, the n-tuple (x1,...,xn) can
also be viewed as an element of Qn
p or of Rn. We thereby observe that the
existence of a rational zero of P(X1,...,Xn) entails the existence of a p-adic
zero for all prime numbers p as well as a real zero. This, of course, raises at
once the converse question: If a polynomial P(X1,...,Xn) has for all primes
p a p-adic zero as well as a real zero, does the polynomial P(X1,...,Xn) then
necessarily possess a rational zero?
To simplify the notation, we shall denote the set of real numbers R by Q∞
and the archimedean absolute value | · | by | · |∞.
Deﬁnition D.16. A polynomial P(X1,...,Xn) ∈Z[X1,...,Xn] satisﬁes the
local–global principle if the existence of p-adic zeros for all p ∈P ∪{∞} im-
plies the existence of a rational zero of the polynomial P(X1,...,Xn).
If the polynomial P(X1,...,Xn) satisﬁes the local–global principle, then
in the search for rational zeros, we are led to the search for p-adic zeros of
the polynomial P(X1,...,Xn) for all p ∈P ∪{∞}. We shall now consider this
question for p ∈P. We begin by recalling the following simple lemma.
Lemma D.17. Let P(X1,...,Xn) ∈Z[X1,...,Xn] be a polynomial and p ∈P a
prime number. Then the following three statements are equivalent:
(i)
P(X1,...,Xn) has a zero in Qn
p,
(ii)
P(X1,...,Xn) has a primitive zero in Zn
p,
(iii)
P(X1,...,Xn) has a zero in (Z/pmZ)n for all m ∈N>0,
where a zero (x1,...,xn) ∈Zn
p is primitive if not all the xj (j = 1,...,n) are divisible
by p.
⊓⊔
This lemma reduces the question of p-adic zeros of a polynomial to the
solution of polynomial congruences modulo pm for all m ∈N>0 (we refer in
this regard to Section B.2). The following theorem shows under what condi-
tions a zero modulo p already gives rise to a p-adic zero.
Theorem D.18. Let P(X1,...,Xn) ∈Z[X1,...,Xn] be a polynomial and p ∈P a
prime. Then every simple zero of P(X1,...,Xn) modulo p induces a p-adic zero of
P(X1,...,Xn). Here a zero (x1,...,xn) ∈Zn modulo p is called simple if
 ∂P
∂Xj
(x1,...,xn)

j=1,...,n
̸≡(0,...,0) mod p.

D. The p-adic Numbers: Another Completion of Q
177
Proof. We carry out the proof ﬁrst for the case n = 1 and for simplicity of
notation write X = X1. Let x(0) ∈Z be a simple zero of the polynomial P(X)
modulo p. That is, we have
P(x(0)) ≡0 mod p, i.e., P(x(0)) = p a with a ∈Z,
P′(x(0)) ̸≡0 mod p, i.e., P′(x(0)) = b with b ∈Z, (b, p) = 1.
With an integer y yet to be determined, we set x(1) := x(0) + py and obtain,
with the help of Taylor’s formula,
P(x(1)) = P
 x(0) + py P′ x(0) + p2 c = p(a + yb) + p2 c,
for some c ∈Z. Since b is relatively prime to p, there exists y ∈Z such that
a + yb ≡0 mod p. We thereby obtain
P(x(1)) ≡0 mod p2
and
x(1) ≡x(0) mod p.
If we proceed in the same way, that is, deﬁne x(2) := x(1) + p2 z with some z ∈
Z yet to be determined, we obtain a sequence of integers (x(0),x(1),x(2),...)
for which we have
P(x(j)) ≡0 mod pj+1
and
x(j+1) ≡x(j) mod pj+1
(j = 0,1,2,...).
The sequence (x(0),x(1),x(2),...) is clearly a Cauchy sequence with respect
to the p-adic absolute value that converges to a p-adic number, say ξ. By
construction, we have P(ξ) = 0; that is, ξ is the desired p-adic zero.
Finally, we reduce the case n > 1 to the case n = 1. We begin with the sim-
ple zero (x1,...,xn) of P(X1,...,Xn) modulo p and deﬁne for k ∈{1,...,n}
the polynomial
Q(Xk) := P(x1,...,xk−1,Xk,xk+1,...,xn) ∈Z[Xk].
We then construct as previously, beginning with xk, a p-adic zero ξk of Q(Xk)
(with a suitable choice of k). After interpreting the xj as p-adic numbers ξj
(j = 1,...,n; j ̸= k), we obtain, as desired, P(ξ1,...,ξn) = 0. This completes
the proof of the theorem.
⊓⊔
Remark D.19. The method employed in the previous proof of constructing
a p-adic zero ξ of the polynomial P(X) by beginning with a zero x(0) ∈Z
modulo p yields in the case of the ﬁeld R of real numbers the well-known
Newton’s method of ﬁnding the zeros of a polynomial.

178
IV The Real Numbers
D.4
The Theorem of Hasse–Minkowski
In this section, we shall introduce a special class of polynomials for which
the local–global principle is valid. To this end, we consider the set
Q :=

Q(X1,...,Xn) =
n
∑
j,k=1
aj,kXjXk
 aj,k = ak,j ∈Z, det(aj,k) ̸= 0

of nondegenerate quadratic forms over Z. We can now formulate the main the-
orem of this section.
Theorem D.20 (Hasse–Minkowski). A quadratic form Q(X1,...,Xn) ∈Q
satisﬁes the local–global principle.
⊓⊔
We shall not prove Theorem D.20 here; we refer the interested reader to
the book [7]. Instead, we shall present some examples to indicate how one
can use the Hasse–Minkowski theorem to ﬁnd nontrivial rational zeros of
nondegenerate quadratic forms over Z.
Remark D.21. Ernst S. Selmer showed that the Hasse–Minkowski theorem
cannot, in general, be generalized to cubic polynomials. To that end, he in-
troduced the polynomial
P(X1,X2,X3) = 3X3
1 + 4X3
2 + 5X3
3,
which has nontrivial p-adic zeros for all p ∈P ∪{∞} but no nontrivial ratio-
nal zeros. In contrast, Roger Heath-Brown showed that every cubic form in
at least 14 variables satisﬁes the local–global principle (see [2]). According
to an idea introduced by Yuri I. Manin, the obstruction to the validity of the
local–global principle for cubic forms is measured by the Brauer group, a
certain second cohomology group (see [4]). In general, further obstructions
to the validity of the local–global principle for polynomials can arise. One
speaks in this regard of the Brauer–Manin Obstruction (see [8]).
Remark D.22. By the Hasse–Minkowski theorem, a quadratic form Q(X1,...,
Xn) ∈Q has a nontrivial rational zero if the underlying form has nontriv-
ial p-adic zeros for all p ∈P ∪{∞}. This raises the question as to how one
might prove the existence of such zeros. In the real case, that is, if p = ∞, this
means simply that the given quadratic form must be indeﬁnite. For the case
p ∈P with p ̸= 2, we have the following sufﬁcient criterion.
Proposition D.23. A nondegenerate quadratic form
Q(X1,...,Xn) =
n
∑
j,k=1
aj,kXjXk ∈Q

D. The p-adic Numbers: Another Completion of Q
179
form has a nontrivial p-adic zero for all odd primes p if n ≥3 and vp(det(aj,k)) = 0.
Proof. Since vp(det(aj,k)) = 0 holds for the odd prime p by hypothesis, the
matrix (aj,k) is invertible modulo p. Therefore, for all nontrivial integer n-
tuples (x1,...,xn), one has the relationship
 ∂Q
∂Xj
(x1,...,xn)

j=1,...,n
=
 n
∑
k=1
2aj,k xk

j=1,...,n
̸≡(0,...,0) mod p.
Thus the conditions of Theorem D.18 are satisﬁed, so that a nontrivial zero
(x1,...,xn) modulo p can be lifted to a p-adic zero (ξ1,...,ξn) of Q(X1,...,Xn).
We are therefore led to search for a nontrivial zero (x1,...,xn) modulo p of
Q(X1,...,Xn).
To that end, let us begin with the case n = 3. Then the quadratic form
under consideration has, without loss of generality, the form
Q(X1,X2,X3) = a1,1X2
1 + a2,2X2
2 + a3,3X2
3,
(12)
with aj,j ∈Z and p ∤aj,j (j = 1,2,3). We consider now the two sets
S1 := {a1,1x2
1 | x1 ∈Fp} ⊆Fp ,
S2 := {−a2,2x2
2 −a3,3 | x2 ∈Fp} ⊆Fp .
The sets S1 and S2 clearly have cardinality (p + 1)/2, from which it follows
that S1 ∩S2 ̸= ∅. There exists, therefore, a nontrivial zero of (12) of the form
(x1,x2,1) modulo p.
Finally, the case n ≥3 can be easily reduced to the case n = 3, which
completes the proof of the proposition.
⊓⊔
Remark D.24. The Hasse–Minkowski theorem shows, with the help of Propo-
sition D.23, for example, that an indeﬁnite unimodular (that is, det(aj,k) =
±1) form over Z of rank n ≥3 has a nontrivial rational zero.
Having considered these examples of the existence of nontrivial rational
zeros of nondegenerate quadratic forms over Z, we shall end this section by
introducing a necessary and sufﬁcient criterion for the existence of nontriv-
ial p-adic zeros of the quadratic form Q(X1,...,Xn), which with the help of
the Hasse–Minkowski theorem completely answers the question of the exis-
tence of nontrivial rational zeros of nondegenerate quadratic forms over Z.
But ﬁrst, we recall the theory of quadratic residues and the law of quadratic
reciprocity.
Deﬁnition D.25. Let p be a prime number and a an integer relatively prime
to p. We deﬁne the Legendre symbol
  a
p

of a over p by

180
IV The Real Numbers
 a
p

:=
(
+1,
if a is a quadratic residue modulo p,
−1,
if a is a quadratic nonresidue modulo p.
Here a is a quadratic residue modulo p means that there exists x ∈Z such that
x2 ≡a mod p; otherwise, a is a quadratic nonresidue modulo p. If p | a, we set
  a
p

:= 0.
Remark D.26. Since the Legendre symbol is multiplicative with respect to
the “numerator,” its evaluation can be reduced to the cases a = −1, a = 2,
and a = q (q an odd prime). In the ﬁrst two cases, one has
−1
p

=
(
+1,
if p ≡+1 mod 4,
−1,
if p ≡−1 mod 4,
as well as
 2
p

=
(
+1,
if p ≡±1 mod 8,
−1,
if p ≡±3 mod 8.
The calculation of
  q
p

proceeds with the help of the law of quadratic reci-
procity:
 q
p

= (−1)
p−1
2
q−1
2
 p
q

.
The Legendre symbol enables us to calculate the Hilbert symbol, which
we now deﬁne for the ﬁeld of p-adic numbers Qp.
Deﬁnition D.27. For α,β ∈Qp, we consider the quadratic form
−αX2
1 −βX2
2 + X2
3
(13)
and deﬁne the Hilbert symbol (α,β)p of α,β with respect to Qp as +1 if (13) has
a nontrivial solution (x1,x2,x3) ∈Q3
p and as −1 otherwise.
Remark D.28. The Hilbert symbol (α,β)p can be calculated as follows. We
write
α = u · pa,
with u ∈Z×
p and a ∈Z,
β = v · pb,
with v ∈Z×
p and b ∈Z;
here we can identify u and v with integers relatively prime to p on account
of the isomorphism Zp/pZp ∼= Z/pZ; we again denote these integers by u
and v. Then if p is odd, we have

D. The p-adic Numbers: Another Completion of Q
181
(α,β)p =
−1
p
abu
p
b v
p
a
.
In the case p = 2, there is an equally simple formula.
Deﬁnition D.29. A nondegenerate quadratic form
Q(X1,...,Xn) =
n
∑
j,k=1
aj,kXjXk
deﬁned over Z has two important invariants in addition to its degree n.
The ﬁrst invariant is given by the discriminant disc(Q) of Q, deﬁned by
det(aj,k) mod(Q×)2.
The second invariant is given by the following collection of Hilbert sym-
bols hilbp(Q) ∈{±1} for p ∈P ∪{∞}: if we diagonalize the quadratic form
Q(X1,...,Xn) by a suitable choice of basis, we may assume without loss of
generality that
Q(X1,...,Xn) = a1X2
1 + ··· + anX2
n.
We thereby set
hilbp(Q) := ∏
j<k
 aj,ak

p .
It can be shown that hilbp(Q) is equal to −1 for only a ﬁnite (even) num-
ber of primes (including p = ∞) and that it satisﬁes the relation
∏
p∈P∪{∞}
hilbp(Q) = +1.
We can now formulate the promised necessary and sufﬁcient criterion.
Theorem D.30. A nondegenerate quadratic form
Q(X1,...,Xn) = a1X2
1 + ··· + anX2
n
deﬁned over Qp has a nontrivial p-adic zero if and only if one of the following
conditions holds:
(i)
n = 2 and disc(Q) = −1.
(ii)
n = 3 and hilbp(Q) = (−1,−disc(Q))p.
(iii) n = 4 and disc(Q) ̸= +1 or disc(Q) = +1 and hilbp(Q) = (−1,−1)p.
(iv)
n ≥5.
Proof. For the proof, we refer the reader to the book [7].
⊓⊔

182
IV The Real Numbers
Remark D.31. We note that Theorem D.30 conﬁrms the result given in Propo-
sition D.23, since all Hilbert symbols appearing there are equal to +1.
This brings to an end this ﬁrst look into the theory of p-adic numbers
with examples that attest to its importance. In addition to the examples
we have given, there are numerous further questions—some topics of cur-
rent research—that can be initially investigated with p-adic methods, in the
hope that the p-adic information obtained can lead to a global solution of
the given problem.
References
[1] F. Q. Gouvêa: p-adic numbers: an introduction. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New
York, 2nd edition, 1997.
[2] D. R. Heath-Brown: Cubic forms in 14 variables. Invent. Math. 170 (2007), 199–
230.
[3] N. Koblitz: p-adic numbers, p-adic analysis, and zeta functions. Springer, Berlin
Heidelberg New York, 2nd edition, 1984.
[4] Y. I. Manin: Cubic forms. North-Holland Mathematical Library, Volume 4.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2nd edition, 1986.
[5] A. Ostrowski: Über einige Lösungen der Funktionalgleichung ϕ(x)ϕ(y) = ϕ(xy).
Acta Math. 41 (1918), 271–284.
[6] E. S. Selmer: The diophantine equation ax3 + by3 + cz3 = 0. Acta Math. 85 (1957),
203–362.
[7] J.-P. Serre: A course in arithmetic. Translated from the French original. Springer,
Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1973.
[8] A. Skorobogatov: Torsors and rational points. Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics
144. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001.

V
The Complex Numbers
1.
The Complex Numbers as a Real Vector Space
Through the extension of the set of natural numbers to the integers and then
to the ﬁeld of rational numbers, it became possible to solve the linear equa-
tion
a · x + b = c
(a, b, c ∈Q, a ̸= 0).
A natural question that arises is whether and how we might be able to solve
quadratic equations, in particular the purely quadratic (i.e., no linear term)
equation
x2 = a
(1)
for a ∈Q. If a < 0, then the equation is a priori unsolvable for x ∈Q, since
the square of a rational number is always nonnegative. Moreover, even for
a > 0, the equation is not necessarily solvable in rational numbers, as the
example a = 2 shows. If there were such a solution, then there would exist
positive natural numbers m, n such that
m2
n2 = 2
⇐⇒
m2 = 2 · n2.
If we now take the prime factorizations of m and n, we see that on the left-
hand side, all the prime factors appear to even powers, while the prime
number 2 on the right-hand side appears to an odd power, which contradicts
unique factorization.
With our extension of the rational numbers Q to R, equation (1) is solv-
able for a > 0. Indeed, such an equation can be solved for any positive real
number α, for if we have α ∈R, α > 0, then as we shall now see, the purely
quadratic equation
x2 = α
has a real solution. We begin by choosing a real positive number β0 and
deﬁne recursively, for n ∈N,
βn+1 := α + β2
n
2βn
.
(2)
One can easily verify that this deﬁnes a monotonically decreasing sequence
(βn) that is bounded from below. By the completeness of R, this real se-
quence has a limit, namely
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69429-0_5
J. Kramer and A.-M. von Pippich, From Natural Numbers to Quaternions, 

184
V The Complex Numbers
β := lim
n→∞βn = inf
n∈N{βn}.
By passing to the limit on both sides of (2), we see that β2 = α. We notate
this by writing β = √α and note that there is an additional solution, namely
β = −√α.
On the other hand, the equation x2 = α remains unsolvable for α < 0 in
the ﬁeld of real numbers, as can be seen in the example x2 = −1. We shall
therefore now undertake to enlarge the ﬁeld R of real numbers in such a
way that the quadratic equation x2 = −1 has a solution. And we shall do so
in such a way that the extension that we create is again a ﬁeld.
Exercise 1.1. Using the above procedure, compute
√
3 and
√
5 to ten decimal
places.
Deﬁnition 1.2. We deﬁne i := √−1, that is, i2 = −1. We call i the imaginary
unit.
We now use the imaginary unit i to deﬁne the complex numbers.
Deﬁnition 1.3. The set of complex numbers C is deﬁned to be the set of all
real linear combinations of the unit element 1 in R and the imaginary unit i.
That is, we have
C := {α = α1 · 1 + α2 · i | α1, α2 ∈R}.
In place of α = α1 · 1 + α2 · i ∈C, we use the shorthand notation α1 + α2i.
The real number α1 is called the real part of α and is denoted by Re(α). The
real number α2 is called the imaginary part of α and is denoted by Im(α). If
Re(α) = 0, then we say that α is purely imaginary.
Remark 1.4. We can view the set C of complex numbers as a 2-dimensional
real vector space with basis {1, i}. In this way, we can identify C with the
Cartesian plane, which we call the complex plane in this case.
/
R
O Ri
; α = α1 + α2i
α1
α2i

_
Fig. 1. The complex plane.

1. The Complex Numbers as a Real Vector Space
185
Remark 1.5. As an R-vector space, C has in particular the structure of an
abelian group. Namely, if α = α1 + α2i, β = β1 + β2i ∈C, then we have
α + β = (α1 + α2i) + (β1 + β2i) = (α1 + β1) + (α2 + β2)i.
This addition is associative and commutative. The additive identity element,
that is, the zero element of C, is given by 0 := 0 + 0i. If α = α1 + α2i ∈C, then
the additive inverse of α is given by
−α := (−α1) + (−α2)i = −α1 −α2i.
Deﬁnition 1.6. The product of two complex numbers α = α1 + α2i and β =
β1 + β2i is given by
α · β = (α1 + α2i) · (β1 + β2i) := (α1 · β1 −α2 · β2) + (α1 · β2 + α2 · β1)i.
Theorem 1.7. The mathematical structure (C,+, ·) is a ﬁeld with unit element
1 := 1 + 0i that contains the ﬁeld (R,+, ·) of real numbers as a subﬁeld.
Furthermore, the quadratic equation
α · x2 + β · x + γ = 0,
(3)
with α, β, γ ∈R, has solutions in C.
Proof. We have already shown that (C, +) is an abelian group with additive
identity element 0. It is also easy to verify that the multiplication of two
complex numbers that we have deﬁned is associative and commutative and
that the unit element 1 is the multiplicative identity element. Once we have
veriﬁed the two distributive laws
α · (β + γ) = α · β + α · γ,
(β + γ) · α = β · α + γ · α
for α, β, γ ∈C, we will have shown that (C,+, ·) is a commutative ring with
unit element 1. To prove the ﬁeld property of C, it remains to show that
every α = α1 + α2i ̸= 0 has a multiplicative inverse in C. Since α ̸= 0, we
must have α1 ̸= 0 or α2 ̸= 0, whence we have α2
1 + α2
2 ̸= 0; using this fact, we
can see easily that
β =
α1
α2
1 + α2
2
−
α2
α2
1 + α2
2
i
is the multiplicative inverse of α.
By the mapping
ψ : (R,+, ·) −→(C,+, ·),
given by the assignment α1 7→α1 + 0i, we obtain an injective ring homomor-
phism from (R,+, ·) to (C,+, ·). This shows that we may consider the ﬁeld
of real numbers to be a subﬁeld of the ﬁeld of complex numbers.
The quadratic equation (3) has the two solutions

186
V The Complex Numbers
x1,2 = −β ±
p
β2 −4αγ
2α
,
where
p
β2 −4αγ =
p
|β2 −4αγ|i if β2 −4αγ < 0. This completes the proof
of the theorem.
⊓⊔
Exercise 1.8. Fill in the missing details in the proof of Theorem 1.7.
Remark 1.9. One can generalize the previous theorem to show that the
quadratic equation (3) with complex coefﬁcients α, β, γ also has a solution
in the ﬁeld of complex numbers. This is an astounding result. We enlarged
the ﬁeld of real numbers to the complex numbers by introducing a single
additional number, namely the square root of −1, and the result is that every
quadratic equation with complex coefﬁcients becomes solvable in C.
Exercise 1.10. Derive a formula for the solutions of the quadratic equation
x2 = α for α = α1 + α2i ∈C, α ̸= 0. Use your formula to calculate the roots
of x2 = α for α = i, α = 2 + i, and α = 3 −2i.
Exercise 1.11. Find all solutions of the quadratic equations x2 + (1 + i) · x +
i = 0 and x2 + (2 −i) · x −2i = 0.
Deﬁnition 1.12. For α = α1 + α2i ∈C, we deﬁne the complex conjugate of α,
denoted by α, as
α := α1 −α2i.
In the complex plane, the point α can be located by reﬂecting α in the real
axis.
/
R
O Ri
; α = α1 + α2i
α1
α2i

_
-α2i
#
α = α1 −α2i
Fig. 2. The complex conjugate α of the complex number α.
Deﬁnition 1.13. The Euclidean scalar product ⟨·, ·⟩: C × C −→R is de-
ﬁned by

2. Complex Numbers of Modulus 1 and the Special Orthogonal Group
187
⟨α,β⟩:= Re(α · β) = α1β1 + α2β2,
where α = α1 + α2i, β = β1 + β2i ∈C. The absolute value, or modulus, |α| of α
is given by
|α| :=
√
α · α =
q
α2
1 + α2
2.
Exercise 1.14.
(a) Prove that for all α, β ∈C, one has the product rule |α · β| = |α| · |β|.
(b) Use part (a) of this exercise to prove the following: if each of two natural
numbers can be represented as the sum of the squares of two natural
numbers, then the product of these two numbers can also be represented
as the sum of the squares of two natural numbers.
Remark 1.15. Using the previous deﬁnition, the multiplicative inverse of 0 ̸=
α ∈C can be written in the form
α−1 =
α
|α|2 .
Moreover, one can easily check that the modulus function | · | has the prop-
erties of a norm. It turns out that the ﬁeld (C,+, ·) is complete with respect
to this norm.
2.
Complex Numbers of Modulus 1 and the Special Orthogonal Group
In this section, we are going to identify the set of complex numbers of unit
modulus with the special orthogonal group.
We begin by considering the noncommutative ring (M2(R), +, ·), which
consists of all 2 × 2 matrices with real entries,
M2(R) :=

A =
α1 α2
α3 α4
 α1, α2, α3, α4 ∈R

,
together with matrix addition and multiplication as it has been deﬁned in
Example 2.4 (iv) of Chapter III. We denote the unit element of M2(R) by
E :=
1 0
0 1

.
If A =
  α1 α2
α3 α4
 ∈M2(R), then the transpose of A, denoted by At, is given by
At :=
α1 α3
α2 α4

∈M2(R).
Deﬁnition 2.1. We deﬁne

188
V The Complex Numbers
S1 := {α ∈C | |α| = 1}
to be the set of all complex numbers of modulus 1.
Remark 2.2. The set S1 is a subgroup of the group (C \ {0},·).
Exercise 2.3. Verify the assertion of Remark 2.2.
In the following, we shall identify the ﬁeld of complex numbers with a
subring of the noncommutative ring (M2(R), +, ·).
Lemma 2.4. The mapping f : (C, +, ·) −→(M2(R), +, ·) deﬁned by
α = α1 + α2i 7→
 α1 α2
−α2 α1

is an injective ring homomorphism. The image
C := im( f ) =
 α1 α2
−α2 α1
 α1, α2 ∈R

is a ﬁeld. In particular, f induces the isomorphism C ∼= C.
Proof. We begin by proving that f is an injective ring homomorphism. Let
α = α1 + α2i ∈C and β = β1 + β2i ∈C. We obtain
f (α + β) = f ((α1 + β1) + (α2 + β2)i) =

α1 + β1
α2 + β2
−(α2 + β2) α1 + β1

=
 α1 α2
−α2 α1

+
 β1
β2
−β2 β1

= f (α) + f (β)
and
f (α · β) = f ((α1 · β1 −α2 · β2) + (α1 · β2 + α2 · β1)i)
=

α1 · β1 −α2 · β2
α1 · β2 + α2 · β1
−(α1 · β2 + α2 · β1) α1 · β1 −α2 · β2

=
 α1 α2
−α2 α1

·
 β1
β2
−β2 β1

= f (α) · f (β).
Since we have ker( f ) = {0}, we have shown that f is an injective ring ho-
momorphism. The image of f is the set
C = im( f ) =
 α1 α2
−α2 α1
 α1, α2 ∈R

.
By Lemma 3.4 of Chapter III, C is in fact a subring of (M2(R), +, ·). Finally,
it follows from the homomorphism theorem for rings that we have the iso-

2. Complex Numbers of Modulus 1 and the Special Orthogonal Group
189
morphism
C = C/ker( f ) ∼= im( f ) = C.
But since C is a ﬁeld, C must also be a ﬁeld, as asserted.
⊓⊔
Exercise 2.5. Show that there are inﬁnitely many subrings of (M2(R), +, ·)
that are isomorphic to C.
Deﬁnition 2.6. The orthogonal group O2(R) is deﬁned by
O2(R) := {A ∈M2(R) | A · At = E}.
The special orthogonal group SO2(R) is deﬁned by
SO2(R) := {A ∈O2(R) | det(A) = 1}.
Remark 2.7. The orthogonal group (O2(R),·) is a group whose operation is
matrix multiplication. The special orthogonal group SO2(R) is a subgroup,
indeed a normal subgroup, of (O2(R),·).
Exercise 2.8. Show that we have det(A) = ±1 for A ∈O2(R), and verify the
assertions in Remark 2.7.
Theorem 2.9. We have the group isomorphism
(S1,·) ∼= (SO2(R),·).
Proof. We note ﬁrst that for an arbitrary matrix
A =
 α1 α2
−α2 α1

∈C,
we have the equalities det(A) = α2
1 + α2
2 and
A · At =
 α1 α2
−α2 α1

·
α1 −α2
α2 α1

=
α2
1 + α2
2
0
0
α2
1 + α2
2

= det(A) · E.
If we now have α = α1 + α2i ∈S1, that is, |α| = 1, then it follows that |α|2 =
α2
1 + α2
2 = 1, and we therefore obtain under the mapping f from Lemma 2.4,
for
A = f (α) = f (α1 + α2i) =
 α1 α2
−α2 α1

,
the equalities det(A) = α2
1 + α2
2 = 1 and A · At = det(A) · E = E. This proves
that A ∈SO2(R). Thus the mapping f induces an injective group homomor-
phism g := f |S1 : S1 −→SO2(R) with image

190
V The Complex Numbers
im(g) =

A ∈C
 det(A) = 1
	 ⊆SO2(R).
To prove the surjectivity of g, we have to prove that SO2(R) ⊆im(g). To this
end, let
B :=
α1 α2
α3 α4

∈SO2(R).
We then have B · Bt = E, whence also B−1 = Bt. Since det(B) = 1, we have
also
B−1 =
 α4 −α2
−α3 α1

.
We must therefore have α4 = α1 and α3 = −α2, which proves that B ∈C.
Since det(B) = 1, it then follows that
SO2(R) ⊆

A ∈C
 det(A) = 1
	 = im(g).
This completes the proof.
⊓⊔
Corollary 2.10. Every complex number α ∈C \ {0} can be represented uniquely
in the form
α = |α| · (cos(ϕ) + isin(ϕ))
(4)
for some ϕ ∈[0,2π).
Proof. The proof of Theorem 2.9 shows in particular that every matrix A ∈
SO2(R) can be represented in the form
A =
 α1 α2
−α2 α1

with α1, α2 ∈R, where we have the relation α2
1 + α2
2 = 1. We must also
have α1, α2 ∈[−1,1], and so there exists a uniquely determined ϕ ∈[0,2π)
with α1 = cos(ϕ) and α2 = sin(ϕ). Since we have α/|α| ∈S1, there exists a
uniquely determined ϕ ∈[0,2π) with
α
|α| = cos(ϕ) + isin(ϕ),
from which the assertion of the corollary follows.
⊓⊔
Remark 2.11. The representation (4) is called the polar-coordinate representa-
tion of the complex number α. Using this representation, one can prove the
important fact that it is possible to extract the kth root of a complex number
α for every k ∈N, k > 1. We saw this earlier, in Exercise 1.10, for the case
k = 2.

3. The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra
191
Exercise 2.12. Prove de Moivre’s theorem: Let α ∈C \ {0} be represented in
polar coordinates as α = |α| · (cos(ϕ) + isin(ϕ)). Then we have the equality
αm/n = |α|m/n ·

cos
m
n ϕ

+ isin
m
n ϕ

for m, n ∈N and n ̸= 0.
3.
The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra
In this section, we shall give an elementary proof of the fundamental the-
orem of algebra. In doing so, we shall use without proof the well-known
fact from calculus that a continuous real function of one or several variables
deﬁned on a closed, bounded set assumes a minimum value.
Theorem 3.1 (Fundamental theorem of algebra). Every polynomial
f (X) = αnXn + αn−1Xn−1 + ··· + α1X + α0
of degree n > 0 with complex coefﬁcients α0,..., αn has at least one root in the ﬁeld
C. As a result, the polynomial f can be decomposed in C into linear factors. That
is, there exist complex numbers ζ1,..., ζn such that
f (X) = αn · (X −ζ1)···(X −ζn).
Proof. Without loss of generality, we shall assume that αn = 1, and we write
f (X) = Xn + g(X),
with g(X) := αn−1Xn−1 + ··· + α1X + α0. We begin by showing that there
exists a complex number ζ0 ∈C such that
| f (ζ0)| ≤| f (ζ)|
for all ζ ∈C. For the real number
r := 1 + |αn−1| + ··· + |α1| + |α0| ∈R,
we obtain for all ζ ∈C with |ζ| > r ≥1 the estimate
|g(ζ)| ≤|ζn−1| ·

|αn−1| + ··· +
|α1|
|ζn−2| +
|α0|
|ζn−1|

≤|ζn−1| ·
 |αn−1| + ··· + |α1| + |α0|

≤|ζ|n−1 · (r −1) < |ζ|n−1 · (|ζ| −1).
This yields for ζ ∈C with |ζ| > r ≥1 the inequality

192
V The Complex Numbers
| f (ζ)| = |ζn + g(ζ)| ≥|ζn| −|g(ζ)|
≥|ζ|n −|ζ|n−1 · (|ζ| −1) = |ζ|n−1 ≥|ζ| > r.
(5)
To obtain an estimate for ζ ∈C with |ζ| ≤r, we identify C with the Carte-
sian plane, as in Remark 1.4. By decomposing the (complex) variable X and
thereby also f (X) into its real and imaginary parts, we may view f as a con-
tinuous real mapping from R2 to R2. But then the function | f | deﬁned on
the closed disk {ζ ∈C | |ζ| ≤r} ⊆R2 must attain a minimum. That is, there
exists ζ0 ∈C, |ζ0| ≤r, such that
| f (ζ0)| ≤| f (ζ)|
(6)
for all ζ ∈C with |ζ| ≤r. In particular, we must have
| f (ζ0)| ≤| f (0)| = |α0| < r.
(7)
In sum, the estimates (5), (6), and (7), prove that the inequality | f (ζ0)| ≤
| f (ζ)| holds for all ζ ∈C, as asserted.
We show now that ζ0 is a zero of f (X). Without loss of generality, we may
assume that ζ0 = 0, since otherwise, we could as well consider the polyno-
mial f (X + ζ0). We shall carry out a proof by contradiction and assume that
f (0) = α0 ̸= 0. If k ∈{1,...,n} is minimal with αk ̸= 0, then we can write
f (X) = Xk+1 · h(X) + αkXk + α0
for some polynomial h(X). Since we may extract the kth root of any complex
number, there exists a complex number β ∈C, β ̸= 0, such that
βk = −α0
αk
.
We then deﬁne, for t ∈R, the function
q(t) := tβk+1 · h(tβ), i.e., f (tβ) = tk · q(t) + αktkβk + α0.
Since q(0) = 0 and the function |q(t)| is continuous, there exists t0 ∈R with
0 < t0 < 1 such that
|q(t0)| < |α0|.
We thereby obtain the estimate
| f (t0β)| =
tk
0 · q(t0) −α0tk
0 + α0
 ≤
tk
0 · q(t0)
 + |α0|

1 −tk
0

< tk
0 · |α0| + |α0|

1 −tk
0

= |α0| = | f (0)|.

4. Algebraic and Transcendental Numbers
193
But this contradicts that | f | assumes its minimum at ζ0 = 0. Our assumption
must therefore be false, and we must have f (0) = 0. That is, the polynomial
f (X) has at least the zero ζ0 ∈C.
⊓⊔
Remark 3.2. A ﬁeld K in which the analogue of the fundamental theorem of
algebra holds is said to be algebraically closed. Thus the ﬁeld C of complex
numbers is algebraically closed.
4.
Algebraic and Transcendental Numbers
Deﬁnition 4.1. A complex number α is said to be algebraic of degree n if it is
the root of a polynomial
f (X) = anXn + an−1Xn−1 + ··· + a1X + a0
(8)
of degree n > 0 with integer coefﬁcients a0,..., an but is not a root of such a
polynomial of lower degree.
We denote the set of algebraic numbers by Q.
Remark 4.2. The set Q of algebraic numbers contains all rational numbers,
since every rational number r = m/n (m, n ∈Z; n > 0) is algebraic of de-
gree 1, namely as the root of the polynomial
f (X) = nX −m.
This means in addition that an algebraic number of degree n > 1 cannot be
rational.
Example 4.3. The irrational number
√
2 is algebraic of degree 2, since it is a
root of the polynomial f (X) = X2 −2.
Exercise 4.4. Let p be a prime number. Show that √p is algebraic of degree 2.
Theorem 4.5. The set Q of algebraic numbers is countable.
Proof. To prove that the set of algebraic numbers is countable, it sufﬁces to
prove that the set (8) of polynomials is countable, since each polynomial has
only ﬁnitely many roots. For a ﬁxed degree n > 0, there are countably many
possibilities for each of the coefﬁcients. Therefore, there are countably many
polynomials of degree n with integer coefﬁcients. Since there are only count-
ably many choices for the degree n of a polynomial, it follows that there are
countably many polynomials of positive degree with integer coefﬁcients.
This proves the theorem.
⊓⊔

194
V The Complex Numbers
Remark 4.6. Since the set C of complex numbers is uncountable, the set dif-
ference T := C\ Q, comprising the nonalgebraic numbers, must be uncount-
able. Similarly, since the set R of real numbers is uncountable, and the inter-
section R ∩Q is countable, the set difference R \ (R ∩Q) = R ∩T must be
uncountable.
Deﬁnition 4.7. We call a complex number α ∈T transcendental. A transcen-
dental number α is thus a complex number for which there is no polynomial
f ∈Z[X] such that f (α) = 0.
Remark 4.8. The observation made in Remark 4.6 conﬁrms the existence of
transcendental numbers. Indeed, that observation shows that transcenden-
tal numbers occur with much greater frequency than algebraic numbers. On
the other hand, it does not seem particularly easy to show that a given real
or complex number is indeed transcendental, since one would have to prove
a negative, namely that the number is the root of no polynomial with inte-
ger coefﬁcients. Therefore, we are familiar with many more algebraic num-
bers than transcendental numbers, since algebraic numbers appear (more or
less) easily as roots of polynomials with integer coefﬁcients. We shall devote
the remainder of this chapter to the search for transcendental numbers. We
begin with a theorem of Joseph Liouville that characterizes real algebraic
numbers in terms of their approximation by rational numbers.
Theorem 4.9 (Liouville’s theorem). Let α be a real algebraic number of degree
n > 1. Then for all p ∈Z and sufﬁciently large q ∈N, we have the inequality
α −p
q
 >
1
qn+1 .
(9)
This inequality says that algebraic numbers can be only “poorly” approximated by
rational numbers.
Proof. Suppose the real algebraic number α is a zero of the polynomial
f (X) = anXn + an−1Xn−1 + ··· + a1X + a0 ∈Z[X].
Moreover, let (rm) be a sequence of rational numbers such that limm→∞rm =
α; such sequences exist, since α is real. We assume in what follows that
rm = pm
qm
with pm ∈Z, qm ∈N, qm ̸= 0 (m ∈N). Since α is a zero of f, we have
f (rm) = f (rm) −f (α)
= an(rn
m −αn) + an−1(rn−1
m
−αn−1) + ··· + a2(r2
m −α2) + a1(rm −α).

4. Algebraic and Transcendental Numbers
195
Division by (rm −α) yields
f (rm)
rm −α = an(rn−1
m
+ rn−2
m
α + ··· + rmαn−2 + αn−1) + ···
+ a3(r2
m + rmα + α2) + a2(rm + α) + a1.
Since limm→∞rm = α, there exists N ∈N such that
|rm −α| < 1
for all m ≥N. We therefore have |rm| < |α| + 1 for all m ≥N. Using the
triangle inequality, we thereby obtain for sufﬁciently large m the estimate

f (rm)
rm −α
 < n · |an| · (|α| + 1)n−1 + ··· + 3 · |a3| · (|α| + 1)2
+ 2 · |a2| · (|α| + 1) + |a1| =: M.
We note that the positive real number M is determined solely by α. In par-
ticular, it is independent of m. We now choose the index m sufﬁciently large
that for the denominator qm of the approximating fraction rm = pm/qm, we
have qm > M. This leads to

f (rm)
rm −α
 < qm
⇐⇒
|α −rm| > | f (rm)|
qm
.
(10)
Now, the rational numbers rm cannot be zeros of the polynomial f, since we
could then factor out the linear factor (X −rm) from f, revealing α as a zero
of a polynomial of degree less than n, which cannot be the case. In other
words, we have
| f (rm)| =

anpn
m + an−1pn−1
m
qm + ··· + a1pmqn−1
m
+ a0qn
m
qnm
 ̸= 0.
(11)
Since the numerator in (11) is a nonzero integer, its absolute value must be
at least 1. Using the estimates (10) and (11), we ﬁnally obtain
α −pm
qm
 > | f (rm)|
qm
≥1
qnm
· 1
qm
=
1
qn+1
m
.
This completes the proof of Liouville’s theorem.
⊓⊔
Remark 4.10. With Liouville’s theorem at our disposal, we can now ﬁnd
transcendental numbers as follows. Assume that a given real number α is
algebraic of degree n > 0. Showing that the inequality (9) cannot hold means
that α must be transcendental. Standard examples of such numbers are real
numbers whose decimal expansions contain blocks of zeros of rapidly in-

196
V The Complex Numbers
creasing length. Such numbers are called Liouville numbers. As an example,
consider the Liouville number
αL :=
∞
∑
j=1
10−j! = 0.110001000000000000000001000... .
Proposition 4.11. The Liouville number αL is transcendental.
Proof. For m ∈N, we set
pm := 10m! ·
m
∑
j=1
10−j!,
qm := 10m!,
rm := pm
qm
.
We thereby obtain
αL −rm =
∞
∑
j=1
10−j! −
m
∑
j=1
10−j! =
∞
∑
j=m+1
10−j!,
and it follows that
|αL −rm| =
∞
∑
j=m+1
10−j! < 10−(m+1)! ·
∞
∑
j=0
10−j
= 10−(m+1)! ·
1
1 −1
10
= 10−(m+1)! · 10
9 < 10 · 10−(m+1)!.
If αL were algebraic of some degree n, then by Liouville’s theorem, we would
have, for m sufﬁciently large,
|αL −rm| >
1
qn+1
m
=
1
10(n+1)m! .
Combining these two inequalities yields
1
10(n+1)m! <
1
10(m+1)!−1
⇐⇒
(n + 1)m! > (m + 1)! −1
⇐⇒
n > m −1
m!,
which leads to the inequality m < n + 1. Since n is some ﬁxed number, and
we may choose m as large as we like, we obtain a contradiction to the as-
sumption that αL is algebraic. That is, αL is transcendental.
⊓⊔
Exercise 4.12. Find other transcendental numbers similar to the Liouville
number just discussed.

5. The Transcendence of e
197
A transcendental number much better known than the Liouville numbers
is Euler’s number e, the base of the natural logarithm, whose transcendence
we shall prove in the following section.
5.
The Transcendence of e
Deﬁnition 5.1. Euler’s number e is deﬁned by the inﬁnite series
∞
∑
j=0
1
j! .
Remark 5.2. The number e thus begins with the decimal expansion e =
2.718281828459.... It is the base of the exponential function, deﬁned by
eX :=
∞
∑
j=0
Xj
j! .
For real values of X, the exponential function is strictly monotonically in-
creasing, and it assumes only positive values. It is inﬁnitely differentiable
and is equal to all its derivatives.
Before we prove that e is transcendental, we shall begin by showing that
e is irrational.
Lemma 5.3. The number e is irrational.
Proof. We begin by assuming for the sake of obtaining a contradiction that
e is rational, that is, that e = m
n for m, n ∈N and n > 0. We now choose
a natural number k > 2 and consider the following decomposition of the
deﬁning series for e:
m
n = e = sk + rk
with
sk :=
k
∑
j=0
1
j!,
rk :=
∞
∑
j=k+1
1
j! .
(12)
We now estimate
rk =
1
(k + 1)!

1 +
1
k + 2 +
1
(k + 2)(k + 3) + ···

<
1
(k + 1)!
∞
∑
j=0
1
(k + 2)j =
1
(k + 1)! ·
1
1 −
1
k+2
<
2
(k + 1)! .

198
V The Complex Numbers
Multiplying (12) by k!, yields
m
n · k! = e · k! = sk · k! + rk · k!,
that is,
m
n · k! −sk · k! = rk · k!.
For k > n, the left-hand side of this last equation represents an integer,
whereas on the right-hand side, since k > 2, we have
0 < rk · k! <
2k!
(k + 1)! =
2
k + 1 < 1.
This contradiction proves that our assumption of the rationality of e was
false.
⊓⊔
Remark 5.4. In the following proof of the transcendence of e, we shall at-
tempt to approximate the exponential function by a polynomial. We shall
use the fact that the exponential function is characterized as the unique dif-
ferentiable function g : R −→R satisfying the following two properties:
(1) g′(X) = g(X)
(X ∈R),
(2) g(0) = 1.
This can be seen as follows. We consider the differentiable function e−Xg(X),
whose derivative is given by
 e−Xg(X)
′ = e−Xg′(X) −e−Xg(X) = 0.
From this, we see that the function e−Xg(X) is constant on R. Since e−0g(0) =
1, this constant must be equal to 1, from which it follows that g(X) = eX.
For approximating the exponential function, we shall attempt to construct a
polynomial whose derivative is more or less equal to the polynomial itself
and whose value at the point X = 0 is equal to 1.
Theorem 5.5. The number e is transcendental.
Proof. We break the proof into six steps.
Step 1: proof strategy. We shall assume the opposite of the statement of
the theorem, namely that e is algebraic of degree m, that is, that there exist
a0,..., am ∈Z with a0 ̸= 0 and am ̸= 0 such that
amem + am−1em−1 + ··· + a1e + a0 = 0.
We sketch in this ﬁrst step how we are going to manage to obtain a con-
tradiction. We shall assume that there exists a polynomial H ∈Q[X] that
satisﬁes the following four properties:
(i)
H(0) ̸= 0,

5. The Transcendence of e
199
(ii)
H(j) ∈Z
(j = 0,..., m),
(iii) ∑m
j=0 ajH(j) ̸= 0,
(iv)
∑m
j=1 aj
 H(0)ej −H(j)
 < 1.
In the following steps, we shall construct such a polynomial. We then set
c :=
m
∑
j=0
ajH(j),
(13)
εj := H(0)ej −H(j)
(j = 0,..., m),
(14)
σ :=
m
∑
j=1
ajεj.
(15)
Properties (ii) and (iii) show that c in (13) is a nonzero integer. Using prop-
erty (i), we can transform (14) to
ej = H(j)
H(0) +
εj
H(0)
(j = 0,..., m);
this can be interpreted as an approximation to the powers ej of e (j = 0,...,m)
by the polynomial H(X)/H(0). From property (iv), we see that for σ in (15),
we have |σ| < 1. Putting everything together, we have
0 =
m
∑
j=0
ajej
=
m
∑
j=0
aj
 H(j)
H(0) +
εj
H(0)

=
1
H(0)
m
∑
j=0
ajH(j) +
1
H(0)
m
∑
j=0
ajεj
=
c
H(0) +
σ
H(0).
After multiplying the last equation by H(0) on both sides and rearranging,
we end up with the equation
c = −σ,
that is,
|c| = |σ|.
(16)
But now we have c ∈Z and c ̸= 0; that is, |c| ≥1. But we also have |σ| <
1. Therefore, (16) is impossible. This gives the desired contradiction to the
assumption of the algebraicity of e. We conclude, then, that the number e
must be transcendental.
Step 2: deﬁnition of H. We choose an arbitrary prime number p, which we
shall specify more precisely later. We also deﬁne an auxiliary polynomial

200
V The Complex Numbers
f (X) := Xp−1(X −1)p(X −2)p ···(X −m)p,
of degree N = p −1 + m · p. From it, we construct another auxiliary polyno-
mial, namely
F(X) := f (X) + f ′(X) + ··· + f (N)(X).
Since the (N + 1)st derivative of f vanishes identically, we have
F′(X) = f ′(X) + f ′′(X) + ··· + f (N)(X) = F(X) −f (X).
The derivative of the polynomial F would now more or less approximate
F itself on the interval [0, m] if f were in some sense small there. To get a
handle on the size, we have to estimate the auxiliary polynomial f on the
interval [0, m]. We observe ﬁrst that
|X(X −1)···(X −m)| ≤mm+1
(X ∈[0, m]).
Setting M := mm+1 gives us the estimate
max
0≤X≤m| f (X)| ≤Mp.
We see that f is not small on the interval [0, m]. For this reason, we consider,
instead of F, the polynomial
H(X) :=
F(X)
(p −1)!.
These considerations lead to the equation
H′(X) = H(X) −
f (X)
(p −1)!;
and we have also
max
0≤X≤m

f (X)
(p −1)!
 ≤
Mp
(p −1)!.
Since the quantity Mp/(p −1)! can be made arbitrarily small by choos-
ing the prime p sufﬁciently large, we see that the normalized polynomial
H(X)/H(0) approximates the exponential function eX well on the interval
[0, m] if p is chosen sufﬁciently large.
Step 3: H satisﬁes property (i). We have
f (X) =
N
∑
k=0
bkXk

5. The Transcendence of e
201
with b0,..., bN ∈Z as well as b0,..., bp−2 = 0 and bp−1 =
 (−1)m · m!
p.
Since, on the other hand, we have for k = 0,..., N the relationship f (k)(0) =
bk · k!, we obtain
F(0) = f (0) + f ′(0) + ··· + f (N−1)(0) + f (N)(0)
= 0 + ··· + 0 +
 (−1)m · m!
p · (p −1)! + bp · p! + ··· + bN · N!,
that is,
H(0) =
 (−1)m · m!
p + bp · p + ··· + bN ·
N!
(p −1)! ∈Z.
If we choose, moreover, p > m, then the prime p does not divide the ﬁrst
term in the above sum, but it does divide all the others. Therefore, we have
H(0) ̸= 0.
Step 4: H satisﬁes property (ii). In the previous step, we showed in particu-
lar that H(0) ∈Z. We have therefore still to prove that the property H(j) ∈Z
holds also for j = 1,..., m. For j = 1,..., m, we write
f (X) =
N
∑
k=0
ck(X −j)k
with c0,..., cN ∈Z, and we note that c0,..., cp−1 = 0, since in the deﬁnition
of f (X), the factor (X −j) appears to the power p. On account of the rela-
tionship f (k)(j) = ck · k!, valid for k = 0,..., N, we may calculate
F(j) = f (j) + f ′(j) + ··· + f (N−1)(j) + f (N)(j)
= 0 + ··· + 0 + cp · p! + ··· + cN · N!.
This yields
H(j) = cp · p + ··· + cN ·
N!
(p −1)! ∈Z
for j = 1,..., m, as claimed, since we have N > p −1. We note here that the
prime number p divides each H(j) (j = 1,..., m).
Step 5: H satisﬁes property (iii). We begin by noting that property (ii) of H
gives us that
c =
m
∑
j=0
ajH(j)
is an integer. Our deliberations in steps 3 and 4 now show in particular that
– p ∤H(0),
– p | H(j)
(j = 1,..., m).
By increasing the prime p if necessary, we may achieve as well that p ∤
a0H(0). Then we see that

202
V The Complex Numbers
p ∤
 a0H(0) + a1H(1) + ··· + amH(m)

⇐⇒
p ∤c.
Thus c is an integer that is not divisible by p; in particular, we have c ̸= 0.
Step 6: H satisﬁes property (iv). For t ∈R, we have the differential equation
d
dt
 F(0) −F(t)e−t = F(t)e−t −F′(t)e−t =
 F(t) −F′(t)

e−t = f (t)e−t.
Applying the fundamental theorem of calculus to X ∈R yields
F(0) −F(X)e−X =
Z X
0
f (t)e−t dt.
On dividing by (p −1)!, we obtain at the point X = j ∈{1,..., m} the equal-
ity
H(0) −H(j)e−j =
1
(p −1)!
Z j
0 f (t)e−t dt.
From this, we obtain the estimate
H(0) −H(j)e−j ≤
1
(p −1)! max
0≤X≤m| f (X)|
Z j
0 e−t dt
≤
Mp
(p −1)!(1 −e−j)
≤
Mp
(p −1)!.
On multiplying by ej, we obtain
H(0)ej −H(j)
 ≤
Mp
(p −1)!ej,
whence

m
∑
j=1
ajεj
 =

m
∑
j=1
aj

H(0)ej −H(j)
 ≤
Mp
(p −1)!
m
∑
j=1
|aj|ej.
Since the sum ∑m
j=1 |aj|ej is independent of p, and we can make the quantity
Mp/(p −1)! arbitrarily small by choosing p sufﬁciently large, we obtain for
a suitable choice of the prime p the estimate
|σ| =

m
∑
j=1
ajεj
 < 1.
We have thereby ﬁnally shown that the polynomial H satisﬁes property (iv),
which ensures the existence of the polynomial H having properties (i)–(iv)

5. The Transcendence of e
203
postulated in the ﬁrst step. This completes the proof of the transcendence
ofe.
⊓⊔
Remark 5.6. Even more spectacular than the proof of the transcendence of
e is the proof of the transcendence of π. This result shows in particular that
the number π is not constructible with straightedge and compass, which in
turn proves the impossibility of squaring the circle. The proof of the tran-
scendence of π follows along some of the same lines as that of the transcen-
dence of e. However, at a certain point, it is necessary to bring in some of the
tools of complex analysis, in particular Cauchy’s integral theorem, which
would take us beyond the scope of this book.
Example 5.7. We will close out the main part of this chapter by presenting
two examples that illustrate how the polynomial H constructed in the proof
of Theorem 5.5 can be used to obtain good approximations to the number e.
Recall from that theorem that
H(X) =
F(X)
(p −1)!
and that H(X)/H(0) = F(X)/F(0) is a “good” approximation to the expo-
nential function eX on the interval [0, m]. To obtain an approximation to the
number e itself, we consider the quotient F(1)/F(0).
(i) We choose m = 1, p = 3 and calculate
f (X) = X2(X −1)3,
F(X) = X5 + 2X4 + 11X3 + 32X2 + 64X + 64,
F(0) = 64,
F(1) = 174.
We thereby obtain
F(1)
F(0) = 2.71875,
which is already a fairly good approximation to e.
(ii) We choose m = 2, p = 5 and calculate
f (X) = X4(X −1)5(X −2)5,
F(X) = X14 −X13 + 87X12 + 654X11 + ··· + 29141344128,
F(0) = 29141344128,
F(1) = 79214386200.
We now obtain
F(1)
F(0) = 2.718281828458561...,
which agrees with the decimal expansion of e to ten decimal places.

204
V The Complex Numbers
Exercise 5.8. Compute in the way described above further approximations
to e.
E.
Zeros of Polynomials: The Search for Solution Formulas
The point of departure for this appendix is the fundamental theorem of al-
gebra, which we proved in this chapter as Theorem 3.1. The theorem says
that every polynomial f (X) of positive degree n with complex coefﬁcients,
that is, f ∈C[X], has all of its zeros in C.
Knowing as we do that the zeros of every quadratic polynomial can be
expressed through an explicit formula involving the four arithmetic opera-
tions and the extraction of roots, the question naturally arises whether sim-
ilar formulas exist for polynomials of higher degree. It is this question and
its consequences that we wish to explore in this appendix. And as we do,
we shall come to realize that efforts to resolve this problem extend to active
research in number theory today.
E.1
Zeros of Polynomials of Degree n ≤4
The zeros of linear and quadratic polynomials with complex coefﬁcients are
easily determined. In the quadratic case, we presented the solution formulas
in the proof of Theorem 1.7, in connection with which the reader should also
take note of Remark 1.9.
We now turn to determining the zeros of an arbitrary third-degree poly-
nomial f (X) with complex coefﬁcients. First of all, we may, without loss of
generality, assume that f (X) has the form
f (X) = X3 + βX + γ
(17)
with β,γ ∈C. Namely, if f (X) = X3 + α′X2 + β′X + γ′, then one can obtain
the desired form (17) by means of the substitution X 7→X −α′/3, known as
the Tschirnhaus transformation.
If we now decompose a zero ζ ∈C of the polynomial (17) as ζ = ξ + η,
we obtain the equation
3ξηζ + ξ3 + η3 = ζ3 = −βζ −γ.
Comparing coefﬁcients yields
ξ3 + η3 = −γ
and
ξ · η = −β
3 ,
whence
ξ3 · η3 = −
 β
3
3

E. Zeros of Polynomials: The Search for Solution Formulas
205
and thus ξ3 and η3 can be viewed as the two zeros of the quadratic polyno-
mial
X2 + γX −β3
27.
This is, incidentally, the assertion of Viète’s theorem. This polynomial is
called the quadratic resolvent of the cubic polynomial (17). The ﬁrst zero of
(17) thus takes the form
ζ1 =
3
s
−γ
2 +
r
γ2
4 + β3
27 +
3
s
−γ
2 −
r
γ2
4 + β3
27.
The other two zeros of the cubic polynomial (17) can be obtained with the
help of a complex third root of unity ε, that is, a complex number ε satisfying
ε3 = 1, for example,
ε = −1
2 +
√
3
2 i.
Taking into account the relation ξη = −β/3, we obtain
ζ2 = ε
3
s
−γ
2 +
r
γ2
4 + β3
27 + ε2 3
s
−γ
2 −
r
γ2
4 + β3
27 ,
ζ3 = ε2 3
s
−γ
2 +
r
γ2
4 + β3
27 + ε
3
s
−γ
2 −
r
γ2
4 + β3
27 .
These solution formulas ﬁrst appeared in Girolamo Cardano’s 1545 book
Ars Magna and are therefore known as Cardano’s formulas; they had been
discovered earlier by Niccolò Tartaglia. Altogether, we may state that in the
case of a cubic polynomial, its zeros can be expressed in terms of (square
and cube) roots of the polynomial’s coefﬁcients.
We now turn our attention to determining the zeros of an arbitrary fourth-
degree polynomial f (X) with complex coefﬁcients. In analogy to the cubic
case, we may assume without loss of generality that f (X) is of the form
f (X) = X4 + βX2 + γX + δ,
(18)
with β,γ,δ ∈C. As in the previous case, the problem of ﬁnding the zeros
of (18) will be reduced to determining the zeros of a polynomial of lower
degree, the so-called cubic resolvent, which is given by the cubic polynomial
X3 + 2βX2 + (β2 −4δ)X −γ2 .
(19)

206
V The Complex Numbers
If we denote the three zeros of the cubic resolvent (19) by η1,η2,η3, the four
zeros of (18) can be represented in the form
ζ1 = +√η1 + √η2 + √η3
2
,
ζ2 = +√η1 −√η2 −√η3
2
,
ζ3 = −√η1 + √η2 −√η3
2
,
ζ4 = −√η1 −√η2 + √η3
2
.
It thus turns out that in this case as well, the zeros that we are seeking can
be expressed in terms of roots of the coefﬁcients of the underlying quar-
tic polynomial. The solution formulas presented here also ﬁrst appeared in
Cardano’s book Ars Magna; they were ﬁrst discovered by Ludovico Ferrari.
E.2
Zeros of Polynomials of Degree n = 5
The description of the zeros of polynomials of degree n ≤4 readily leads
to the conjecture that the zeros of higher-degree polynomials can also be
reduced, with the help of expressions involving the extraction of roots, to the
determination of the zeros of polynomials of lower degree, whose zeros, in
turn, can also be expressed in terms of expressions involving the extraction
of roots. We shall see that in general, this conjecture is false, as was proved
by Niels Henrik Abel at the beginning of the nineteenth century. In order to
present Abel’s results, we begin by introducing some general concepts.
Let f ∈C[X] be a polynomial of degree n > 0, which we shall write in the
form
f (X) = βnXn −βn−1Xn−1 ± ··· ± β1X + (−1)nβ0 ,
with β0,...,βn ∈C and βn ̸= 0. For the sake of simplicity, in what follows we
shall assume that f is monic, that is, that βn = 1. If we denote the zeros of f
by ζ1,...,ζn, we obtain the factorization
f (X) = (X −ζ1)···(X −ζn).
By introducing along with the indeterminate X the additional independent
indeterminates X1,...,Xn, we deﬁne the general nth-degree polynomial by the
formula
fgen(X) := (X −X1)···(X −Xn),
which on multiplying out the linear factors takes the form
fgen(X) = Xn −σ1Xn−1 ± ··· ± σn−1X + (−1)nσn ,

E. Zeros of Polynomials: The Search for Solution Formulas
207
where the coefﬁcients σ1,...,σn are given by the elementary symmetric polyno-
mials
σ1 = σ1(X1,...,Xn) =
n
∑
j=1
Xj,
σ2 = σ2(X1,...,Xn) =
n
∑
j,k=1
j<k
XjXk,
···
σn = σn(X1,...,Xn) = X1 ··· Xn .
The coefﬁcients of fgen lie in the ﬁeld of rational functions in the indetermi-
nates σ1,...,σn, that is, in the quotient ﬁeld Quot(C[σ1,...,σn]) of the polyno-
mial ring C[σ1,...,σn], whose elements are quotients of polynomials in the
indeterminates σ1,...,σn and which we denote by C(σ1,...,σn). The zeros of
the polynomial
fgen ∈C(σ1,...,σn)[X]
lie in the ﬁeld of rational functions in the indeterminates X1,...,Xn, that is,
in the ﬁeld C(X1,...,Xn), which contains the ﬁeld C(σ1,...,σn).
Example E.1. The general polynomial of degree 2 is given by
fgen(X) = (X −X1) · (X −X2)
= X2 −(X1 + X2)X + X1X2
= X2 −σ1X + σ2.
Its coefﬁcients are the elementary symmetric polynomials σ1 = σ1(X1,X2) =
X1 + X2 and σ2 = σ2(X1,X2) = X1X2. We therefore have fgen ∈C(σ1,σ2)[X].
The two zeros X1 and X2 of fgen(X) are elements of the ﬁeld C(X1,X2). By
specializing σ1 and σ2, that is, by evaluating σ1 and σ2 at particular complex
numbers, one can obtain every monic second-degree polynomial f ∈C[X].
This explains why we call fgen(X) the general polynomial of degree 2.
Deﬁnition E.2. Let fgen ∈C(σ1,...,σn)[X] be the general polynomial of de-
gree n. We say that the zeros X1,...,Xn can be expressed in terms of radicals if
there exist m ∈N>0 and polynomials p0, p1,..., pm−1,R ∈C(σ1,...,σn) with
R1/m /∈C(σ1,...,σn) such that every Xj can be represented in the form
Xj = p0 + p1R1/m + p2R2/m + ··· + pm−1R(m−1)/m
(20)
or more generally as a ﬁnite iteration of such expressions. Here the depen-
dence of the right-hand side of (20) on the index j (j = 1,...,n) comes into

208
V The Complex Numbers
play, in that various choices of the radical R1/m can be made, which differ
from one another by an mth root of unity.
Example E.3. For the two zeros X1,X2 of the general quadratic polynomial
fgen(X) = X2 −σ1X + σ2, one has
X1,2 =
σ1 ±
q
σ2
1 −4σ2
2
= σ1
2 ± 1
2 R1/2 ,
with p0 = σ1/2, p1 = 1/2, and R = σ2
1 −4σ2 ∈C(σ1,σ2). Thus the two zeros
X1,X2 of fgen(X) can be expressed in terms of radicals.
Similarly, one can easily see, using the solution formulas given above, that
the zeros of the general cubic and quartic polynomials can also be expressed
in terms of radicals. However, one has the following theorem.
Theorem E.4 (Abel). Let fgen ∈C(σ1,...,σ5)[X] denote the general polynomial
of degree 5. Then the zeros X1,...,X5 of fgen(X) cannot be represented in terms of
radicals.
Proof. We shall brieﬂy sketch the idea of the proof. We begin by supposing,
in contradiction to the assertion of the theorem, that the zeros of fgen are
indeed representable in terms of radicals. Based on that assumption, it turns
out that the zeros X1,...,X5 must satisfy an algebraic relation over C, which
contradicts the assumption that fgen is the general polynomial of degree 5,
whose zeros are therefore algebraically independent over C and therefore
can satisfy no polynomial relation over C.
⊓⊔
E.3
The Bridge to Group Theory: Galois Theory
The negative result given by Abel’s theorem, Theorem E.4, raises the prob-
lem of providing a conceptual characterization of the zeros of polynomials
whose coefﬁcients lie in a ﬁxed ﬁeld K. With this in mind, we again consider
the general polynomial fgen ∈C(σ1,...,σn)[X] of degree n and observe that
K := C(σ1,...,σn) can be characterized by the fact that K is the ﬁeld con-
structed of all rational functions from E := C(X1,...,Xn) that remain invari-
ant under permutations of the indeterminates X1,...,Xn. This insight arises
from the nontrivial fact that a polynomial g ∈C[X1,...,Xn] that remains in-
variant under all permutations of the indeterminates X1,...,Xn must be a
polynomial in the elementary symmetric polynomials σ1,...,σn. This result
carries over directly to rational functions in the indeterminates X1,...,Xn
that are invariant under all permutations of X1,...,Xn. We have thereby, in
a natural way, associated with the ﬁeld E and subﬁeld K a characterizing
group, the nth symmetric group Sn (see Example 2.8 (iv) of Chapter II). This

E. Zeros of Polynomials: The Search for Solution Formulas
209
association is the starting point of Galois theory, whose basic features we
shall now present.
Deﬁnition E.5. Let K be an arbitrary ﬁeld. A ﬁeld E that contains the ﬁeld
K is called a ﬁeld extension of K. The extension E ⊇K is denoted by E/K, and
we say “E over K.” A ﬁeld extension E of K can be viewed naturally as a
K-vector space, and such a ﬁeld extension is said to be ﬁnite over K if E is
ﬁnite-dimensional as a K-vector space. We let [E : K] denote the dimension
dimK E and call this number the degree of E over K.
Deﬁnition E.6. Let K be an arbitrary ﬁeld, and E/K a ﬁeld extension. We
say that an element α ∈E is algebraic over K if α is a zero of a polynomial
f ∈K[X]. A ﬁeld extension E of K is said to be algebraic over K if all of its
elements are algebraic over K; we also say that we have an algebraic ﬁeld
extension E/K.
Example E.7. For K = Q and E = C, we saw in Section 4 of this chapter that
a number α ∈C is algebraic over Q precisely when α ∈Q, that is, when α
is an algebraic number. In particular, transcendental numbers are not alge-
braic over Q. We have therefore that neither C/Q nor R/Q is an algebraic
ﬁeld extension. We saw, however, in Section 1 of this chapter that C/R is an
algebraic and ﬁnite ﬁeld extension of degree [C : R] = dimR C = 2.
Remark E.8. One can see at once that a ﬁnite ﬁeld extension E/K is algebraic,
since the [E : K] + 1 powers
1, α, α2, ..., α[E:K]
of an arbitrary element α ∈E must be linearly dependent over K, whence α
is a zero of a polynomial with coefﬁcients in K.
Remark E.9. If α is a zero of a nontrivial polynomial in the polynomial ring
K[X], then there exists a monic polynomial f of minimal degree with α as a
zero. Such a polynomial f is uniquely determined and is called the minimal
polynomial of α. The existence of such a polynomial f can be seen simply
by considering the set
aα := {g ∈K[X] | g(α) = 0},
which is obviously a nontrivial ideal of K[X], and indeed, it is a principal
ideal, since K[X] is a Euclidean domain. That is, aα = ( f ) with f a polynomial
of minimal positive degree, which can be made monic. The uniqueness can
be seen at once by applying the Euclidean algorithm. Moreover, one sees
that the minimal polynomial f of α is irreducible over K.
Example E.10. Let K = Q and

210
V The Complex Numbers
E =

α = a + b
√
−3 | a,b ∈Q
	
.
It is easily veriﬁed that E is a ﬁeld that contains the ﬁeld K = Q. The ﬁeld ex-
tension E/K is ﬁnite over K. Indeed, we have [E : K] = 2, since the elements
1 and √−3 constitute a basis of E over K. And so E is also algebraic over K.
The minimal polynomial of the element α = √−3 is f (X) = X2 + 3.
Remark E.11. In general, we can construct a ﬁeld extension of K that con-
tains the zero α of a polynomial f that is irreducible over K. To this end, we
consider the ring homomorphism ϕ : K[X] →K[α] given by replacing the
indeterminate X with the element α. Since the kernel of the homomorphism
ϕ is the ideal aα = ( f ), the homomorphism theorem for rings gives us the
isomorphism
K[α] ∼= K[X]/( f ).
Since the polynomial f is irreducible over K, the principal ideal ( f ) is a
prime ideal, indeed a maximal ideal, which means that the quotient ring
K[X]/( f ) is a ﬁeld. This ﬁeld is the desired extension of K that contains the
element α. Moreover, our construction shows that the ring K[α] is in fact a
ﬁeld, equal to its ﬁeld of quotients K(α). It is easy to see that K(α) is a ﬁnite
ﬁeld extension of K and that [K(α) : K] = deg( f ). A basis of K(α) over K is
given by the elements
1, α, α2, ..., αdeg( f )−1.
One says that the ﬁeld K(α) is constructed by adjoining α to K.
Example E.12. From these observations, we obtain for Example E.10 that
E = Q(√−3). In particular, we conclude that Q ⊂E ⊂Q. By considering
additional square roots, one sees that there are inﬁnitely many distinct ﬁelds
lying between Q and Q that are algebraic over Q.
Remark E.13. Every ﬁnite ﬁeld extension E/K can be constructed by succes-
sively adjoining ﬁnitely many elements α1,...,αn that are algebraic over K.
One thereby obtains E in the form
E = K(α1)(α2)···(αn) =: K(α1,...,αn).
We shall now restrict our attention to ﬁnite ﬁeld extensions E/K, and shall
further assume that char(K) = 0.
Deﬁnition E.14. Let E/K be a ﬁnite ﬁeld extension. A K-isomorphism of E is
a ﬁeld isomorphism of E into (some) ﬁeld E′/K that leaves each element of
K ﬁxed. We denote the set of K-isomorphisms of E (into some ﬁeld E′/K) by
IsoK(E).

E. Zeros of Polynomials: The Search for Solution Formulas
211
The subset of K-automorphisms of E is denoted by AutK(E). This set is
clearly a group. If we have the equality AutK(E) = IsoK(E), then E is called
a Galois extension of K. The group
Gal(E/K) := AutK(E)
is called the Galois group of E/K.
Example E.15. For example, if α and α′ are zeros of the irreducible polyno-
mial f ∈K[X], then the assignment α 7→α′ induces a K-isomorphism of K(α)
to K(α′).
Remark E.16. If E/K is a Galois extension of K, then clearly, |Gal(E/K)| =
[E : K].
Example E.17. The ﬁnite ﬁeld extension Q(√−3)/Q from Example E.10 is
a Galois extension with Galois group Gal(Q(√−3)/Q) ∼= Z/2Z. The two
Q-automorphisms of Q(√−3) are given by the assignments
id : a + b
√
−3 7→a + b
√
−3
and
σ : a + b
√
−3 7→a −b
√
−3.
Example E.18. Let α =
3√
2 ∈R be the real zero of X3 −2. The other two
zeros of X3 −2 are not real, being given by ζα and ζ2α, with ζ = e2πi/3. The
ﬁeld extension Q(α)/Q is ﬁnite of degree [Q(α) : Q] = 3, but it is not a Galois
extension. Namely, if ϕ ∈AutQ(Q(α)) is an arbitrary Q-automorphism, then
ϕ(α) is a zero of the polynomial X3 −2, yet we must have ϕ(α) ∈Q(α) ⊂R.
This shows that ϕ(α) = α and therefore AutQ(Q(α)) = {id}; that is, we have
|AutQ(Q(α))| = 1. Taking Remark E.16 into account, we see that Q(α)/Q
cannot be a Galois extension.
The fundamental theorem of Galois theory establishes the following cor-
respondence between ﬁelds and groups.
Theorem E.19 (Fundamental theorem of Galois theory). With the forego-
ing notation and assumptions, let E/K be a Galois extension with Galois group
Gal(E/K). We consider the sets
K := {L a ﬁeld | K ⊆L ⊆E},
G := {H a group | {id} ≤H ≤Gal(E/K)}.
Then there exists a one-to-one correspondence between the sets K and G.
Proof. In the following proof sketch, we shall present the mutually inverse
mappings of K to G and from G to K without providing a rigorous proof of
bijectivity. To this end, we set G := Gal(E/K). The mapping

212
V The Complex Numbers
ϕ : K −→G
is given by the assignment
L 7→GL := {g ∈G | g(α) = α, ∀α ∈L};
it is easily veriﬁed that the set GL is in fact a group, and therefore belongs to
G. The inverse mapping
ψ : G −→K
is given by the assignment
H 7→EH := {α ∈E | g(α) = α, ∀g ∈H},
and again one easily checks that the set EH is a ﬁeld with K ⊆EH, and there-
fore belongs to K.
As we mentioned, the proof consists in showing that the two mappings
ϕ and ψ are inverses of each other.
⊓⊔
Remark E.20. The fundamental theorem of Galois theory, Theorem E.19,
shows in particular that under the above assumptions, E is a Galois exten-
sion of every intermediate ﬁeld K ⊆L ⊆E with Galois group Gal(E/L) =
Gal(E/K)L.
Example E.21. Let α =
3√
2 and ζ = e2πi/3 be as in Example E.18, K = Q, and
E = Q
 α,ζα,ζ2α
 = Q(α,ζ). The ﬁeld E is the smallest ﬁeld that contains
all the zeros of the polynomial f (X) = X3 −2 and is therefore, by Deﬁni-
tion E.24 below, a Galois extension of Q. The Galois group Gal(E/Q) con-
sists of the Q-automorphisms induced by all the permutations of the three
zeros α1 := α, α2 := ζα, α3 := ζ2α of the polynomial f (X). Since these six
permutations lead to six distinct Q-automorphisms of E, we conclude that
the Galois group of E/Q is the symmetric group S3. With the notation of
Example 4.23 of Chapter II, we thereby obtain
Gal(E/Q) = {π1,π2,π3,π4,π5,π6},
where the action of πj (j = 1,...,6) on the zeros α1,α2,α3 is described by the
corresponding permutation of the indices.
In Exercise 2.26 of Chapter II, we showed that S3 has six subgroups: the
group S3 itself and the following ﬁve proper subgroups:
⟨π1⟩= {id}, ⟨π2⟩= ⟨π3⟩= {π1,π2,π3},
⟨π4⟩= {π1,π4}, ⟨π5⟩= {π1,π5}, ⟨π6⟩= {π1,π6}.
We therefore have

E. Zeros of Polynomials: The Search for Solution Formulas
213
G =
{id},⟨π2⟩,⟨π4⟩,⟨π5⟩,⟨π6⟩,S3
	
.
By the fundamental theorem of Galois theory, the trivial subgroup {id} cor-
responds to the ﬁeld Q(α,ζ), while the group S3 corresponds to the ﬁeld Q.
The ﬁeld extension Q(α,ζ)/Q must therefore have precisely four strictly in-
termediate ﬁelds. They are Q(ζ), Q(α), Q(ζα), Q(ζ2α), and they correspond
to the four remaining subgroups, as shown in the following diagram, where
the intermediate ﬁelds are shown on the left, and their corresponding sub-
groups on the right at the corresponding locations.
Q(a,z)
{id}
Q(z)
Q(a)
Q(za)
Q(z2a)
hp2i
hp4i
hp5i
hp6i
Q
S3
E.4
Zeros of Polynomials and Galois Theory
We begin with the following deﬁnition, which brings us back to group the-
ory.
Deﬁnition E.22. Let G be a ﬁnite group with identity element e. A normal
series of G is a ﬁnite descending chain of subgroups
G = G0 ≥G1 ≥··· ≥Gn−1 ≥Gn = {e}
(21)
such that for j = 1,...,n, the subgroup Gj is a normal subgroup of Gj−1.
Furthermore, a group G is said to be solvable if it possesses a normal series
of the form (21) such that the quotient groups Gj−1/Gj for j = 1,...,n are
abelian.
Example E.23. The symmetric group S4 of permutations on four symbols is
solvable, for it possesses the normal series
S4 > A4 > V4 > U2 > {id},
where A4 is the alternating group on four symbols,
V4 = {id,(12)(34),(13)(24),(14)(23)}
is a subgroup of order 4 isomorphic to the dihedral group D4 from Exam-
ple 2.8 (iii) of Chapter II, and U2 = {id,(12)(34)} is a subgroup of order 2.
Here the notation (jk) (j,k = 1,...,4; j ̸= k) represents the permutation (trans-
position) in S4 that interchanges j and k while leaving all the other elements

214
V The Complex Numbers
ﬁxed. For the successive quotient groups, we have the group isomorphisms
S4/A4 ∼= Z/2Z,
A4/V4 ∼= Z/3Z,
V4/U2 ∼= Z/2Z,
U2/{id} ∼= Z/2Z.
A similar analysis shows that the symmetric groups Sn for n = 1,2,3 are
solvable. In contrast, it can be shown that the symmetric groups Sn for n ≥5
are not solvable.
Deﬁnition E.24. Let f ∈K[X] be a polynomial of degree n with zeros
ζ1,...,ζn. Then the smallest ﬁeld E that contains all these zeros is given by
the ﬁnite ﬁeld extension E = K(ζ1,...,ζn), called the splitting ﬁeld of f. The
splitting ﬁeld E is a Galois extension of K. We deﬁne the Galois group Gal( f )
of f to be the Galois group Gal(E/K).
Example E.25. The general polynomial fgen ∈C(σ1,...,σn)[X] of degree n
has the splitting ﬁeld C(X1,...,Xn). The Galois group of fgen thus consists
of all C(σ1,...,σn)-automorphisms that permute the n zeros X1,...,Xn of the
polynomial fgen(X) in all possible ways. That is, Gal( fgen) = Sn.
The following theorem concludes our discussion of the representation of
the zeros of a polynomial f ∈K[X] by radicals by providing a complete char-
acterization of the Galois group Gal( f ) of f in terms of its group-theoretic
properties.
Theorem E.26 (Representation of zeros by radicals). The zeros of a polyno-
mial f ∈K[X] are representable by radicals if and only if Gal( f ), the Galois group
of f, is solvable as a group.
⊓⊔
Remark E.27. Taking into account Examples E.23 and E.25, Theorem E.26
gives a new proof of Abel’s theorem.
E.5
A Way Out of a Dilemma: The Case of the Ground Field Q
As a consequence of the negative result of Theorems E.4 and E.26, the ques-
tion arises how we might somehow conceptually “get a handle” on the zeros
of a polynomial f ∈K[X]. The answer to this question is one of the central
tasks of algebraic number theory. In this last section, we would like to pro-
vide an answer to this question in the case K = Q.
Since we know by Theorem E.26 that the zeros ζ1,...,ζn of a polynomial
f ∈Q[X] of degree n ≥5 cannot in general be represented in terms of radi-
cals and that therefore, the splitting ﬁeld E = Q(ζ1,...,ζn) is not easily acces-
sible, it is clear that we need to ﬁnd another way to pursue our investigation
of the Galois group Gal( f ) = Gal(E/Q). Before we can do this, we need
some facts about the arithmetic properties underlying the ﬁeld E in order

E. Zeros of Polynomials: The Search for Solution Formulas
215
to characterize the Galois group Gal(E/Q). This theory goes back to David
Hilbert. For this, we draw on the ﬁrst chapter of the book [8].
If f is a polynomial of degree n = 1, then E = Q, and the arithmetic of the
ﬁeld E is described by the ring of integers Z, which was our object of study
in Sections 2, 3, and 4 of Chapter I. Once the degree of the polynomial n is
greater than 1, we shall need an analogue in the ﬁeld E of the ring of integers
Z, whose arithmetic we shall be able to describe with the help of the ideal
theory developed in Section 7 of Chapter III. In particular, the divisibility of
ideals and the notions of prime ideal and maximal ideal will be our focus.
For this, we collect in the following deﬁnition some terminology and facts.
Deﬁnition E.28. The ring of integers OE of a ﬁeld extension E/Q consists of all
α ∈E that are zeros of a monic polynomial with rational integer coefﬁcients,
that is, with coefﬁcients that are in Z.
Remark E.29. The ring of integers OE of the ﬁeld extension E/Q is a com-
mutative ring contained in the ﬁeld E and containing the ring of rational in-
tegers Z. In analogy to the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, Theorem 3.1
of Chapter I, it turns out that on the level of ideals of OE, every ideal a ⊆OE
can be uniquely (up to order) represented as a product of positive powers of
prime ideals. That is,
a = pa1
1 ···parr
for some r ∈N and distinct prime ideals p1,...,pr with positive integer ex-
ponents a1,...,ar.
Deﬁnition E.30. If p is a prime number, then the principal ideal (p) is an
ideal of the ring of integers OE with a prime ideal decomposition of the form
(p) = pe1
1 ···perr .
(22)
The exponent ej is called the ramiﬁcation index of pj over p (j = 1,...,r).
Since the prime ideals pj must be maximal ideals (otherwise, they could
be further decomposed), the quotient rings OE/pj are ﬁelds, which are
clearly ﬁnite ﬁeld extensions of the ﬁeld Fp with p elements. We set fj :=
[OE/pj : Fp] and call it the residue class degree of pj over p (j = 1,...,r).
Remark E.31. It turns out that among the quantities we have just deﬁned,
there exists the following fundamental relation:
r
∑
j=1
ej fj = [E : Q].
In the present case, this reduces to the equality e · f · r = [E : Q], since E is
a Galois extension of Q, with the result that all the ramiﬁcation indices and

216
V The Complex Numbers
all the residue class degrees are equal; that is, we have ej = e and fj = f for
j = 1,...,r. The quantities e, f,r therefore depend solely on the prime number
p. The decomposition (22) can thus be simpliﬁed to
(p) = (p1 ···pr)e.
(23)
Deﬁnition E.32. If for the Galois extension E/Q and prime number p there
exists a prime ideal decomposition (23) with e = 1, then p is said to be un-
ramiﬁed in E.
Remark E.33. Since the splitting ﬁeld E = Q(ζ1,...,ζn) of f is a ﬁnite Galois
extension of Q, it follows that the OE/pj are also ﬁnite Galois extensions
of Fp. The Galois groups Gal(OE/pj

Fp) turn out in the unramiﬁed case
(that is, e = 1) to be isomorphic to the subgroups
Dj := {σ ∈Gal(E/Q) | σ(α) ≡α mod pj, ∀α ∈E},
j = 1,...,r,
of Gal(E/Q), which are called the decomposition groups of pj and are all con-
jugate to one another.
Since the ﬁnite ﬁelds OE/pj are ﬁnite Galois extensions of Fp, the Galois
groups Gal(OE/pj

Fp) are cyclic. Each is generated by the automorphism
that takes the residue class ¯α = α mod pj ∈OE/pj to ¯αp.
Deﬁnition E.34. The automorphism of Gal(E/Q) just deﬁned in the un-
ramiﬁed case is called the Frobenius automorphism for pj and denoted by
Frobpj. The Frobenius automorphisms Frobpj, for j = 1,...,r, are conjugate
to one another. The conjugation class depends only on the prime number p.
Remark E.35. If p is a prime that is unramiﬁed in E, this corresponds to a
cyclic subgroup Dj of the Galois group Gal(E/Q) that is generated by the
Frobenius automorphism Frobpj and is uniquely determined up to conju-
gation. By the fundamental theorem of Galois theory, Theorem E.19, asso-
ciated with the subgroup Dj is an intermediate ﬁeld Q ⊆Lj ⊆E such that
Gal(E/Lj) = Dj. Since Dj is cyclic, the ﬁeld extension E/Lj is, by Kummer
theory (see, e.g., [8]), a radical extension; that is, E = Lj( mj√αj) for suitable
mj ∈N and αj ∈Lj, provided that Lj contains all the mjth roots of unity.
To end our discussion, let us summarize what we have learned: If f ∈
Q[X] is an arbitrary polynomial of degree n with decomposition ﬁeld E =
Q(ζ1,...,ζn), the Frobenius automorphisms of the primes unramiﬁed in E
give rise to intermediate ﬁelds between Q and E, so that E becomes a radical
extension over these intermediate ﬁelds. We thus conclude that one tries to
use the ﬁne structure of the Galois group Gal(E/Q) to describe the Galois
extension E/Q with the help of radical extensions.
It is thus plausible that the determination of the Frobenius automor-
phisms plays a crucial role, something that is being investigated in current

E. Zeros of Polynomials: The Search for Solution Formulas
217
number-theoretic research with the help of what is known as (modular) Ga-
lois representations of the Galois group Gal(E/Q). The prominence of this
contemporary research area is revealed particularly in the fact that the the-
ory of Galois representations played a central role in the proof of Fermat’s
last theorem, that is, Theorem C.8, proved by Andrew Wiles. The reader in-
terested in pursuing this topic is referred to the survey article [7].
References
[1] N. H.
Abel:
Mémoire
sur
les
équations
algébriques
où
l’on
démontre
l’impossibilité
de
la
résolution
de
l’équation
générale
du
cinquième
degré.
Christiania,
de
l’imprimerie
de
Groendahl,
1824.
Available
online
at
www.abelprisen.no/c53201/binfil/download.php?tid=53608.
[2] E. Artin: Galois theory. Edited and supplemented with a section on applications
by A. N. Milgram. 2nd edition, with additions and revisions, 5th reprinting.
Notre Dame Mathematical Lectures, No. 2, University of Notre Dame Press,
South Bend, IN, 1959.
[3] J. Bewersdorff: Galois theory for beginners. A historical perspective. Translated
from the second German 2004 edition by D. Kramer. American Mathematical
Society, Providence, RI, 2006.
[4] D. A. Cox: Galois Theory. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2nd edition, 2012.
[5] J.-P. Escoﬁer: Galois theory. Translated from the 1997 French original by
L. Schneps. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 2001.
[6] D. Jörgensen: Der Rechenmeister. Aufbau Taschenbuch Verlag, 6. Auﬂage, 2004.
[7] J. Kramer: Über den Beweis der Fermat-Vermutung I, II. Elem. Math. 50 (1995),
12–25; 53 (1998), 45–60.
[8] S. Lang: Algebraic number theory. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 2nd
edition, 1994.
[9] I. Stewart: Galois theory. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 4th edition, 2015.

VI
Hamilton’s Quaternions
1.
Hamilton’s Quaternions as a Real Vector Space
A question of an essentially academic nature is whether the ﬁeld C of com-
plex numbers can be enlarged to a ﬁeld that, like the ﬁeld C, is a ﬁnite-
dimensional real vector space. It turns out that such an enlargement is im-
possible. Nevertheless, there is such a larger set of numbers if one is willing
to give up commutativity of multiplication. We are then led to the skew ﬁeld
H of quaternions, ﬁrst described by William Rowan Hamilton, which we shall
present in this chapter.
We begin by deﬁning, in addition to the complex number i, two addi-
tional imaginary units j, k such that the elements 1, i, j, k are linearly inde-
pendent over R. This allows us to form the 4-dimensional vector space
H := {α = α1 · 1 + α2 · i + α3 · j + α4 · k | α1, α2, α3, α4 ∈R}.
Deﬁnition 1.1. We call the expression
α = α1 · 1 + α2 · i + α3 · j + α4 · k = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k
a quaternion, and H the set of quaternions.
Remark 1.2. By construction, the sum of two quaternions α = α1 + α2i +
α3j + α4k and β = β1 + β2i + β3j + β4k is given by
α + β := (α1 + β1) + (α2 + β2)i + (α3 + β3)j + (α4 + β4)k.
This addition is clearly associative and commutative. The additive identity
element is the zero element 0 := 0 + 0i + 0j + 0k; the additive inverse of α is
given by
−α := (−α1) + (−α2)i + (−α3)j + (−α4)k = −α1 −α2i −α3j −α4k.
Deﬁnition 1.3. The product of two quaternions α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k and
β = β1 + β2i + β3j + β4k is deﬁned by
α · β : = (α1β1 −α2β2 −α3β3 −α4β4) + (α1β2 + α2β1 + α3β4 −α4β3)i
+ (α1β3 −α2β4 + α3β1 + α4β2)j + (α1β4 + α2β3 −α3β2 + α4β1)k.
Remark 1.4. We observe that this product is associative, but it is not commu-
tative. In particular we have the following multiplication table for 1,i, j,k:
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69429-0_6
J. Kramer and A.-M. von Pippich, From Natural Numbers to Quaternions, 

220
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
i2 = j2 = k2 = −1,
1 · i = i = i · 1,
1 · j = j = j · 1,
1 · k = k = k · 1,
i · j = k = −j · i,
j · k = i = −k · j,
k · i = j = −i · k.
The multiplicative identity element is the unit element 1 := 1 + 0i + 0j + 0k.
It is not difﬁcult to prove the two distributive laws.
Remark 1.5. The noncommutativity of multiplication has as a consequence
the existence of polynomials in H[X] whose number of zeros is greater than
the degree of the polynomial. Indeed, the number of zeros can be inﬁnite.
Exercise 1.6. Verify the assertion of Remark 1.5.
Exercise 1.7. The center Z(H) of H is deﬁned by
Z(H) := {α ∈H | α · β = β · α, ∀β ∈H}.
Prove the equality Z(H) = R.
Remark 1.8. It is impossible to construct a 3-dimensional real vector space
that contains C and extends the multiplication of C. For if we choose, in
addition to i, an additional imaginary number j such that the elements 1, i, j
are linearly independent over R, and with them, form the 3-dimensional
real vector space
H∗:= {α = α1 · 1 + α2 · i + α3 · j | α1, α2, α3 ∈R},
then we must have i · j ∈H∗, that is, i · j = β1 · 1 + β2 · i + β3 · j for certain
β1,β2,β3 ∈R. But that gives us the equality
(−1) · j = (i · i) · j = i · (i · j) = β1 · i −β2 · 1 + β3 · (i · j)
= β1 · i −β2 · 1 + β3 · (β1 · 1 + β2 · i + β3 · j)
= (−β2 + β1β3) · 1 + (β1 + β2β3) · i + β2
3 · j.
Since the elements 1, i, j are linearly independent over R, we obtain in par-
ticular β2
3 = −1. But this contradicts β3 ∈R.
Remark 1.9. If we write a quaternion α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k ∈H in the form
α = z + wj with z := α1 + α2i, w := α3 + α4i ∈C, then H can be considered a
2-dimensional complex vector space.
Deﬁnition 1.10. Let α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k ∈H. The real number α1 is
called the real part of α and is denoted by Re(α). The ordered triple (α2,α3,α4)
of real numbers is called the imaginary part of α and is denoted by Im(α). If
we have Re(α) = 0 and α ̸= 0, then α is said to by purely imaginary.

1. Hamilton’s Quaternions as a Real Vector Space
221
Deﬁnition 1.11. The set
Im(H) := {α2 · i + α3 · j + α4 · k | α2, α3, α4 ∈R} ⊆H
of all quaternions with zero real part is called the imaginary space of H.
Remark 1.12. The imaginary space Im(H) is a 3-dimensional real vector
space that can be identiﬁed with R3 via the bijective R-linear mapping
h : Im(H) −→R3 given by
α = α2i + α3j + α4k 7→Im(α)t =
 α2
α3
α4
!
.
Remark 1.13. For α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k ∈H, we shall frequently write
α = Re(α) + Im(α) · i,
where we set i := (i, j,k)t.
Exercise 1.14.
(a) Show that Im(H) = {α ∈H | α /∈R \ {0} and α2 ∈R}.
(b) Show that α · β + β · α ∈R for all α,β ∈Im(H).
Exercise 1.15. Prove the following formula for the product of two purely
imaginary quaternions α = Im(α) · i and β = Im(β) · i ∈Im(H):
α · β = −⟨Im(α)t,Im(β)t⟩+ (Im(α)t × Im(β)t) · i,
where ⟨·, ·⟩is the Euclidean scalar product on R3, and × is the vector prod-
uct on R3.
Deﬁnition 1.16. In analogy to complex conjugation, we deﬁne the conjugate
quaternion α to α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k ∈H by
α := α1 −α2i −α3j −α4k.
Deﬁnition 1.17. The Euclidean scalar product ⟨·, ·⟩: H × H −→R is de-
ﬁned by
⟨α,β⟩:= Re(α · β) = α1β1 + α2β2 + α3β3 + α4β4,
where α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k, β = β1 + β2i + β3j + β4k ∈H. The modulus
|α| of α is then deﬁned by
|α| :=
√
α · α =
q
α2
1 + α2
2 + α2
3 + α2
4.
Exercise 1.18. Show that the equality β · α · β = 2 · ⟨α,β⟩· β −⟨β,β⟩· α holds
for all α, β ∈H.

222
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
Exercise 1.19.
(a) Show that for all α, β ∈H, we have the equality α · β = β · α.
(b) Show that for all α, β ∈H, we have the product rule |α · β| = |α| · |β|.
(c) Consider how one could use part (a) to prove the following statement:
if each of two natural numbers can be represented as the sum of four
squares of natural numbers, then the product of those two numbers can
also be represented as the sum of four squares of natural numbers.
Theorem 1.20. The structure (H,+, ·) is a skew ﬁeld with unit element 1 = 1 +
0i + 0j + 0k that contains the ﬁelds of real and complex numbers.
Proof. We have only to show that every nonzero quaternion α has a mul-
tiplicative inverse. This can be easily obtained, in analogy to the complex
case, by
α−1 =
α
|α|2 .
The remaining assertions are easy to prove.
⊓⊔
Exercise 1.21. Complete the proof of Theorem 1.20.
An immediate consequence of Theorem 1.20 is that the quaternions pos-
sess the structure of an R-algebra.
Deﬁnition 1.22. An R-vector space V with a multiplication operation · :
V × V −→V given by the assignment (v1,v2) 7→v1 · v2 is called an R-algebra
if the two distributive laws
(λ1v1 + λ2v2) · v3 = λ1(v1 · v3) + λ2(v2 · v3),
v1 · (λ1v2 + λ2v3) = λ1(v1 · v2) + λ2(v1 · v3),
hold for all λ1, λ2 ∈R and v1,v2,v3 ∈V. If the operation · is associative, that
is, if (v1 · v2) · v3 = v1 · (v2 · v3) for all v1,v2,v3 ∈V, then the R-algebra is
called an associative R-algebra. If the operation · is commutative, that is, if
v1 · v2 = v2 · v1 for all v1,v2 ∈V, then the R-algebra is called a commutative
R-algebra. The dimension of V as an R-vector space is called the dimension
of the R-algebra V.
Deﬁnition 1.23. A nontrivial R-algebra V is called a division algebra if the
two equations
v1 · x = v2
and
y · v1 = v2
have unique solutions x and y for v1, v2 ∈V, v1 ̸= 0, in V.
Example 1.24.
(i) The ﬁeld R is an associative and commutative division
algebra of dimension 1. The ﬁeld C is an associative and commutative divi-
sion algebra of dimension 2.

2. Quaternions of Modulus 1 and the Special Unitary Group
223
(ii) The R-vector space R3 together with the vector product × : R3 ×
R3 −→R3 given by
v1 × v2 := (µ2ν3 −µ3ν2,µ3ν1 −µ1ν3,µ1ν2 −µ2ν1)t
for v1 = (µ1, µ2, µ3)t, v2 = (ν1, ν2, ν3)t ∈R3, is an R-algebra of dimension 3
that is neither associative nor commutative. The vector product × is, how-
ever, anticommutative, that is, we have v1 × v2 = −v2 × v1 for all v1, v2 ∈R3.
(iii) The R-vector space M2(R) together with matrix multiplication is an
associative R-algebra of dimension 22 = 4. The R-vector space M2(C) to-
gether with matrix multiplication is an associative R-algebra of dimension
2 · 22 = 8. The R-algebras M2(R) and M2(C) are neither commutative alge-
bras nor division algebras.
Exercise 1.25. Verify in detail the assertions of Example 1.24.
Corollary 1.26. The quaternions H have the structure of an associative division
algebra of dimension 4.
Proof. This result is a direct consequence of Theorem 1.20.
⊓⊔
Exercise 1.27. An R-linear mapping f : V −→W of R-algebras with mul-
tiplication operations ·V and ·W is called an R-algebra homomorphism if for
all v1, v2 ∈V, we have the equality f (v1 ·V v2) = f (v1) ·W f (v2). An R-
vector subspace U ⊆V is called an R-subalgebra of V if u1 ·V u2 ∈U for all
u1, u2 ∈U.
Show that the mapping f : C −→M2(R) of Lemma 2.4 of Chapter V is
an injective R-algebra homomorphism and that the image im( f ) = C is an
R-subalgebra of M2(R).
2.
Quaternions of Modulus 1 and the Special Unitary Group
In this section, we shall identify the set of all quaternions of unit modulus
with the special unitary group.
We consider the noncommutative ring (M2(C), +, ·), that is, the set of all
2 × 2 matrices with complex entries,
M2(C) :=

A =
α β
γ δ
 α, β, γ, δ ∈C

,
together with the usual matrix addition and multiplication. If
A =
α β
γ δ

∈M2(C),

224
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
then the conjugate matrix to A, denoted by A, is deﬁned as
A :=
α β
γ δ

∈M2(C).
Deﬁnition 2.1. We denote by
S3 := {α ∈H | |α| = 1}
the set of all quaternions of modulus 1.
Remark 2.2. The set S3 is a subgroup of the group (H \ {0},·).
Exercise 2.3. Verify the assertion of Remark 2.2.
In what follows, we shall begin by identifying the skew ﬁeld of quater-
nions with a subring of the noncommutative ring (M2(C), +, ·).
Lemma 2.4. The mapping f : (H, +, ·) −→(M2(C), +, ·), given by
α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k 7→
 α1 + α2i α3 + α4i
−α3 + α4i α1 −α2i

,
is an injective ring homomorphism. The image
H := im( f ) =
 z
w
−w z
 z, w ∈C

is a skew ﬁeld. In particular, f induces the isomorphism H ∼= H.
Proof. We begin by proving that f is an injective ring homomorphism. Let
α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k ∈H and β = β1 + β2i + β3j + β4k ∈H, and we write
α · β = γ1 + γ2i + γ3j + γ4k ∈H with
γ1 := α1β1 −α2β2 −α3β3 −α4β4 ,
γ2 := α1β2 + α2β1 + α3β4 −α4β3 ,
γ3 := α1β3 −α2β4 + α3β1 + α4β2 ,
γ4 := α1β4 + α2β3 −α3β2 + α4β1 .
We obtain
f (α + β) = f ((α1 + β1) + (α2 + β2)i + (α3 + β3)j + (α4 + β4)k)
=
 (α1 + β1) + (α2 + β2)i (α3 + β3) + (α4 + β4)i
−(α3 + β3) + (α4 + β4)i (α1 + β1) −(α2 + β2)i

=
 α1 + α2i α3 + α4i
−α3 + α4i α1 −α2i

+
 β1 + β2i β3 + β4i
−β3 + β4i β1 −β2i

= f (α) + f (β)

2. Quaternions of Modulus 1 and the Special Unitary Group
225
and
f (α · β) = f (γ1 + γ2i + γ3j + γ4k)
=
 γ1 + γ2i γ3 + γ4i
−γ3 + γ4i γ1 −γ2i

=
 α1 + α2i α3 + α4i
−α3 + α4i α1 −α2i

·
 β1 + β2i β3 + β4i
−β3 + β4i β1 −β2i

= f (α) · f (β),
where in the third step, we have used the equalities
γ1 + γ2i = (α1 + α2i)(β1 + β2i) −(α3 + α4i)(β3 + β4i) = γ1 −γ2i,
γ3 + γ4i = (α1 + α2i)(β3 + β4i) + (α3 + α4i)(β1 + β2i) = −γ3 + γ4i.
Since we have ker( f ) = {0}, we have shown that f is an injective ring ho-
momorphism. The image of f is given by the set
H = im( f ) =
 z
w
−w z
 z, w ∈C

.
By Lemma 3.4 of Chapter III, H is in fact a subring of (M2(C), +, ·). Finally,
by the homomorphism theorem for rings, we have the isomorphism
H = H/ker( f ) ∼= im( f ) = H.
But since H is a skew ﬁeld, it follows that H is also a skew ﬁeld, and the
proof of the lemma is complete.
⊓⊔
Exercise 2.5. Find additional subrings of (M2(C), +, ·) that are isomorphic
to H.
Exercise 2.6. Show that the mapping f : H −→M2(C) of Lemma 2.4 is an
injective R-algebra homomorphism and that the image im( f ) = H is an R-
subalgebra of M2(C) (see Exercise 1.27).
Deﬁnition 2.7. The unitary group U2(C) is deﬁned by
U2(C) := {A ∈M2(C) | A · A
t = E}.
The special unitary group SU2(C) is deﬁned by
SU2(C) := {A ∈U2(C) | det(A) = 1}.
Remark 2.8. The unitary group (U2(C),·) is a group under the operation
of matrix multiplication. The special unitary group SU2(C) is a subgroup,
indeed a normal subgroup, of (U2(C),·).

226
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
Exercise 2.9. Show that |det(A)| = 1 for A ∈U2(C) and verify the assertions
of Remark 2.8.
Theorem 2.10. We have the group isomorphism
(S3,·) ∼= (SU2(C),·).
Proof. We begin by noting that for an arbitrary matrix
A =
 z
w
−w z

∈H,
we have the equalities det(A) = |z|2 + |w|2 and
A · A
t =
 z
w
−w z

·
 z −w
w
z

=
|z|2 + |w|2
0
0
|z|2 + |w|2

= det(A) · E.
If we have α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k ∈S3, that is, if |α| = 1, then we will
also have |α|2 = α2
1 + α2
2 + α2
3 + α2
4 = 1, which yields, under the mapping f of
Lemma 2.4, the equalities det(A) = (α2
1 + α2
2) + (α2
3 + α2
4) = 1 and A · A
t =
det(A) · E = E for
A = f (α) =
 α1 + α2i α3 + α4i
−α3 + α4i α1 −α2i

.
This proves that we have A ∈SU2(C). Thus the mapping f induces an in-
jective group homomorphism g := f |S3 : S3 −→SU2(C) with image
im(g) =

A ∈H
 det(A) = 1
	 ⊆SU2(C).
To prove the surjectivity of g, we must show that SU2(C) ⊆im(g). Let
B :=
α β
γ δ

∈SO2(C).
Then B · Bt = E, and hence B−1 = Bt. Since det(B) = 1, we have also
B−1 =
 δ −β
−γ α

.
We must therefore have δ = α and γ = −β, which proves that we have B ∈H.
Since det(B) = 1, it then follows that
SU2(C) ⊆

A ∈H
 det(A) = 1
	 = im(g).
This completes the proof of the theorem.
⊓⊔

3. Quaternions of Modulus 1 and the Special Orthogonal Group
227
3.
Quaternions of Modulus 1 and the Special Orthogonal Group
In this section, we shall identify the set of all quaternions of unit modulus
with the special orthogonal group.
We show ﬁrst that every quaternion of modulus 1 induces a mapping of
the imaginary space into itself.
Lemma 3.1. Let α ∈S3. The mapping gα : Im(H) −→Im(H) deﬁned by the
assignment
γ 7→α · γ · α
is bijective and R-linear. Furthermore, we have gα·β = gα ◦gβ for all α, β ∈S3.
Moreover, the equality gα = id holds if and only if α ∈{±1}.
Proof. We begin with a proof that the mapping gα is well deﬁned. For this, it
sufﬁces to prove the equality gα(γ) = −gα(γ) for all α ∈S3 and γ ∈Im(H),
which we obtain as follows:
gα(γ) = α · γ · α = γ · α · α = α · γ · α = α · (−γ) · α = −gα(γ).
For all γ, δ ∈Im(H) and λ1, λ2 ∈R, we now have
gα(λ1 · γ + λ2 · δ) = α · (λ1 · γ + λ2 · δ) · α
= λ1 · α · γ · α + λ2 · α · δ · α
= λ1 · gα(γ) + λ2 · gα(δ);
that is, gα is R-linear. The bijectivity of gα is immediate from the deﬁnition
of gα.
To prove the second assertion, we note that we have the equality
gα·β(γ) = (α · β) · γ · α · β = α · (β · γ · β) · α
= α · gβ(γ) · α = gα(gβ(γ)) = (gα ◦gβ)(γ)
for all α, β ∈S3 and γ ∈Im(H); that is, we have gα·β = gα ◦gβ.
Finally, we obtain
gα(γ) = γ
⇐⇒
α · γ · α = γ
⇐⇒
α · γ = γ · α
⇐⇒
α ∈R
⇐⇒
α ∈{±1}
for all α ∈S3 and γ ∈Im(H), where for the third equivalence, we have used
the fact that Z(H) = {α ∈H | α · β = β · α, ∀β ∈H} = R (see Exercise 1.7).
This proves the third assertion of the lemma.
⊓⊔
We now consider the noncommutative ring (M3(R), +, ·), that is, the set
of all 3 × 3 matrices with real entries under the operations of matrix addition
and multiplication (cf. Chapter V). We denote the unit element of M3(R) by

228
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
E :=


1 0 0
0 1 0
0 0 1

.
Deﬁnition 3.2. The orthogonal group O3(R) is deﬁned by
O3(R) := {A ∈M3(R) | A · At = E}.
The special orthogonal group SO3(R) is deﬁned by
SO3(R) := {A ∈O3(R) | det(A) = 1}.
Remark 3.3. The orthogonal group (O3(R),·) is a group under matrix mul-
tiplication. The special orthogonal group SO3(R) is a subgroup, indeed a
normal subgroup, of (O3(R),·).
Exercise 3.4. Show that det(A) = ±1 for A ∈O3(R) and verify the assertions
of Remark 3.3.
Remark 3.5. In linear algebra, one proves that every orientation-preserving
rotation of R3 about a line passing through the origin is given by an R-
linear mapping of the form v 7→A · v (v ∈R3) for some A ∈SO3(R). Con-
versely, every R-linear mapping v 7→A · v (v ∈R3) with A ∈SO3(R) is an
orientation-preserving rotation of R3 about a line through the origin. With
the choice of a suitable basis for R3, the matrix A assumes the form
A = E + sin(ϕ) · N + (1 −cos(ϕ)) · N2,
where we have set
N :=


0
−ν3 ν2
ν3
0
−ν1
−ν2 ν1
0

.
Here (ν1,ν2,ν3)t ∈R3 is a unit vector that determines the axis of rotation,
and ϕ ∈[0,2π) is the rotation angle.
Exercise 3.6. Prove the assertions of Remark 3.5.
Theorem 3.7. The mapping f : (S3, ·) −→(SO3(R), ·) given by the assignment
α 7→


α2
1 + α2
2 −α2
3 −α2
4 2(−α1α4 + α2α3)
2(α1α3 + α2α4)
2(α1α4 + α2α3)
α2
1 −α2
2 + α2
3 −α2
4 2(−α1α2 + α3α4)
2(−α1α3 + α2α4)
2(α1α2 + α3α4)
α2
1 −α2
2 −α2
3 + α2
4

,
where α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k ∈S3, is a surjective group homomorphism. We

3. Quaternions of Modulus 1 and the Special Orthogonal Group
229
have the group isomorphism
S3/{±1} ∼= SO3(R).
Proof. We set Aα := f (α) for α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k ∈S3. We show ﬁrst
that the mapping f is well deﬁned and surjective. If α ∈{±1}, then Aα =
E ∈SO3(R). If α ∈S3 \ {±1}, then α has a unique representation of the form
α = cos
 ϕ
2

+ sin
 ϕ
2

· Im(ν)t · i
with ν = ν1i + ν2j + ν3k ∈Im(H) ∩S3, where
νj :=
αj+1
q
α2
2 + α2
3 + α2
4
for j = 1, 2, 3, and ϕ ∈(0,2π) has been chosen such that cos(ϕ/2) = α1 and
sin(ϕ/2) = (α2
2 + α2
3 + α2
4)1/2. Using the identities
2α1(α2
2 + α2
3 + α2
4)1/2 = 2sin
 ϕ
2

cos
 ϕ
2

= sin(ϕ),
2(α2
2 + α2
3 + α2
4) = 2sin
 ϕ
2
2
= 1 −cos(ϕ),
we obtain the representation
Aα = E + 2α1


0
−α4 α3
α4
0
−α2
−α3 α2
0

+ 2


−α2
3 −α2
4
α2α3
α2α4
α2α3
−α2
2 −α2
4
α3α4
α2α4
α3α4
−α2
2 −α2
3


= E + sin(ϕ) · Nα + (1 −cos(ϕ)) · N2
α,
where we have set
Nα :=


0
−ν3 ν2
ν3
0
−ν1
−ν2 ν1
0

.
Taking into account Remark 3.5, we see that this proves that A ∈SO3(R)
and that f is surjective.
We shall prove the remaining assertions with the help of Lemma 3.1. To
this end, let us have α ∈S3 and let gα : Im(H) −→Im(H), γ 7→α · γ · α, be the
bijective R-linear mapping from Lemma 3.1. Furthermore, let h : Im(H) −→
R3, γ 7→Im(γ)t, be the bijective R-linear mapping from Remark 1.12. We
begin by showing that the following diagram commutes:

230
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
Im(H)
R3
Im(H)
R3
h
gα
h
Aα
Recall that the diagram being commutative means that h(gα(γ)) = Aα · h(γ)
for all γ ∈Im(H). By the R-linearity of the mappings under consideration,
it sufﬁces to prove this equality for γ = i, j, k ∈Im(H). One can prove each
of these by a short computation, which we shall demonstrate for γ = i. From
α · i · α = (−α2 + α1i + α4j −α3k) · (α1 −α2i −α3j −α4k) =
= (α2
1 + α2
2 −α2
3 −α2
4)i + 2(α1α4 + α2α3)j + 2(−α1α3 + α2α4)k
follows, as asserted, the equality
h(gα(i)) =
 α2
1 + α2
2 −α2
3 −α2
4,2(α1α4 + α2α3),2(−α1α3 + α2α4)
t
= Aα · (1,0,0)t = Aα · h(i).
In the same way, we can see that h(gα(j)) and h(gα(k)) give us the second
and third columns of the matrix Aα. Using Lemma 3.1, we obtain the equal-
ity
Aα·β · v = (h ◦gα·β ◦h−1)(v) = (h ◦gα ◦gβ ◦h−1)(v)
= ((h ◦gα ◦h−1) ◦(h ◦gβ ◦h−1))(v) = (Aα · Aβ) · v
for all α, β ∈S3 and v ∈R3; that is, we have f (α · β) = Aα·β = Aα · Aβ =
f (α) · f (β). This proves that f is a group homomorphism. Moreover, from
Lemma 3.1, we obtain the equivalence
Aα · v = v, ∀v ∈R3 ⇐⇒gα(h−1(v)) = h−1(v), ∀v ∈R3 ⇐⇒α ∈{±1}.
This proves that ker( f ) = {α ∈S3 | Aα = E} = {±1}.
Finally, by the homomorphism theorem for groups, we have the isomor-
phism
S3/{±1} ∼= im( f ) = SO3(R).
This completes the proof.
⊓⊔
Remark 3.8. Since we have the equality Nα · v = Im(ν)t × v for all v ∈R3,
the proof of Theorem 3.7 shows that the mapping gα : Im(H) −→Im(H) of
Lemma 3.1 can be described by the assignment

F. Extensions of Number Systems: What Comes after the Quaternions?
231
γ 7→

cos(ϕ) · Im(γ)t + sin(ϕ) ·
 Im(ν)t × Im(γ)t
+
 1 −cos(ϕ)

Im(ν)t,Im(γ)t · Im(ν)t
· i.
F.
Extensions of Number Systems: What Comes after the Quaternions?
Beginning with the natural numbers, we have in this book systematically
gone on to construct the integers, and from them, the ﬁeld of rational num-
bers. Using the rational numbers, we then obtained the ﬁeld of real numbers,
which we then extended to the ﬁeld of complex numbers. We have seen in
this chapter that the ﬁeld of complex numbers cannot be enlarged unless
we abandon commutativity of multiplication. We therefore arrived at the
skew ﬁeld of Hamilton’s quaternions, which contains the ﬁelds of real and
complex numbers and possesses the structure of a real associative division
algebra of dimension 4.
To conclude this book, we shall investigate in this section the question
whether and to what extent this process can be continued. We shall see in
particular that by further doing without associativity of multiplication, we
are led to the number system of Cayley’s octonions, which contains the sys-
tems R, C, and H.
F.1
Cayley’s Octonions
In October 1843, William Rowan Hamilton announced his discovery of the
quaternions. In December of that same year, John Graves gave the ﬁrst de-
scription of the octonions, but his work remained unpublished until 1848.
They were discovered independently by Arthur Cayley, who published his
results in an 1845 article, and it is on that basis that his name has become
associated with the octonions. The octonions are also known as octaves
(Graves’s term) or Cayley numbers. For further information on the histori-
cal background of the octonions, the reader is referred, for example, to the
book [8].
In order to deﬁne the octonions, we require seven imaginary units i1,...,i7
such that the elements 1, i1, i2, i3, i4, i5, i6, i7 are linearly independent over R.
To simplify the notation, we frequently write i0 instead of 1.
Deﬁnition F.1. We deﬁne an 8-dimensional vector space
O := {α = α0 · 1 + α1 · i1 + ··· + α7 · i7 | α0,...,α7 ∈R}.
We call α ∈O an octonion and O the set of octonions. The real number α0
is called the real part of α and is denoted by Re(α). The ordered 7-tuple
(α1,...,α7) of real numbers is called the imaginary part of α and is denoted

232
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
by Im(α). The set
Im(O) := {α1 · i1 + ··· + α7 · i7 | α1,...,α7 ∈R} ⊆O
of all octonions with zero real part is called the imaginary space of O.
Remark F.2. By construction, the sum of two octonions α = α0 · 1 + α1 · i1 +
··· + α7 · i7 and β = β0 · 1 + β1 · i1 + ··· + β7 · i7 is given by
α + β := (α0 + β0) · 1 + (α1 + β1) · i1 + ··· + (α7 + β7) · i7.
This addition is clearly associative and commutative. The additive identity
element is the zero element 0 := 0 · 1 + 0 · i1 + ··· + 0 · i7; the additive inverse
of α is given by −α := −α0 · 1 −α1 · i1 −··· −α7 · i7.
Deﬁnition F.3. The product of two octonions α = α0 · 1 + α1 · i1 + ··· + α7 · i7
and β = β0 · 1 + β1 · i1 + ··· + β7 · i7 is deﬁned by
α · β :=
7
∑
l=0
7
∑
m=0
αlβm · ilim,
where the product of the elements 1,i1,i2,i3,i4,i5,i6,i7 is deﬁned by the fol-
lowing table:
·
1
i1
i2
i3
i4
i5
i6
i7
1
1
i1
i2
i3
i4
i5
i6
i7
i1
i1
−1
i3
−i2
i5
−i4
−i7
i6
i2
i2
−i3
−1
i1
i6
i7
−i4
−i5
i3
i3
i2
−i1
−1
i7
−i6
i5
−i4
i4
i4
−i5
−i6
−i7
−1
i1
i2
i3
i5
i5
i4
−i7
i6
−i1
−1
−i3
i2
i6
i6
i7
i4
−i5
−i2
i3
−1
−i1
i7
i7
−i6
i5
i4
−i3
−i2
i1
−1
Remark F.4. The multiplicative identity element is the unit element 1 := 1 +
0 · i1 + ··· + 0 · i7. In addition, we have for l,m = 1,...,7 the equalities
i2
l = −1,
1 · il = il = il · 1,
il · im = −im · il
(l ̸= m).

F. Extensions of Number Systems: What Comes after the Quaternions?
233
This multiplication is clearly not commutative. Moreover, the multiplication
is not even associative, since we have, for example, i4 · (i5 · i6) = −i4 · i3 =
i7 ̸= −i7 = i1 · i6 = (i4 · i5) · i6.
Remark F.5. The validity of the two distributive laws can be easily checked.
The Cayley octonions O possess the structure of an 8-dimensional R-algebra
that is neither associative nor commutative.
Remark F.6. Multiplication of octonions can be described with the help of
the Fano plane, which consists of seven points and seven lines, with each
line oriented so as to form cycles, as pictured in the following diagram:
i4
i1
i2
i3
i5
i6
i7
If three points il, im, in are located in ordered succession along a line, then
one has the equality il · im = in. For example, i2, i4, i6 appear in order on a
line, and one therefore has the equalities i2 · i4 = i6, i4 · i6 = i2, and i6 · i2 = i4.
Conversely, if il, im, in appear in reverse order on a line, then one has the
equality il · im = −in. For example, i6, i4, i2 appear in reverse order on a line,
and one obtains the three equalities i6 · i4 = −i2, i4 · i2 = −i6, and i2 · i6 = −i4.
To see whether O, like R, C, and H, is a division algebra, we introduce
the following deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition F.7. Given an octonion α = α0 · 1 + α1 · i1 + ··· + α7 · i7 ∈O, the
conjugate octonion α is deﬁned by
α := α0 · 1 −α1 · i1 −··· −α7 · i7.
If α = α0 · 1 + α1 · i1 + ··· + α7 · i7, β = β0 · 1 + β1 · i1 + ··· + β7 · i7 ∈O, we
deﬁne a Euclidean scalar product ⟨·, ·⟩: O × O −→R by setting
⟨α,β⟩:= Re(α · β) = α0β0 + α1β1 + ··· + α7β7.
The modulus |α| of α is then given by
|α| :=
√
α · α =
q
α2
0 + α2
1 + ··· + α2
7.

234
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
Remark F.8. As in Exercise 1.19, it is easily shown that for all α,β ∈O, one
has the equalities α · β = β · α and α · α = α · α.
Remark F.9. If we identify i with i1, j with i2, and k with i3, we may then
interpret the quaternions H in a natural way as an R-subalgebra of O. Using
the identites i1i4 = i5, i2i4 = i6, and i3i4 = i7, we may write an octonion α =
α0 · 1 + α1 · i1 + ··· + α7 · i7 as
α = a + bi4,
(1)
with a := α0 · 1 + α1 · i1 + α2 · i2 + α3 · i3, b := α4 · 1 + α5 · i1 + α6 · i2 + α7 · i3 ∈
H. For the product of two octonions α = a + bi4 and β = c + di4, we have
α · β = (ac −db) + (da + bc)i4.
(2)
Moreover, we have α = a −bi4.
Lemma F.10. The equality
α(αβ) = (αα)β
(3)
holds for all α,β ∈O.
Proof. As in (1), we write α = a + bi4 and β = c + di4. With α = a −bi4, we
obtain, using (2), the equality
αβ = (ac + db) + (da −bc)i4.
Using (2) again and taking into account the associativity of multiplication in
H, we obtain
α(αβ) =
 a(ac + db) −(ad −cb)b
 +
 (da −bc)a + b(ca + bd)

i4
=
 |a|2 + |b|2)c +
 (|a|2 + |b|2)d

i4
= (αα)β,
as claimed.
⊓⊔
F.2
The Octonions as a Real Division Algebra
We now proceed to show that the octonions O possess the structure of a real,
normed, alternative division algebra.
Deﬁnition F.11. A nontrivial R-algebra V is said to be normed, or a com-
position algebra, if V is a Euclidean vector space with scalar product ⟨·, ·⟩:
V × V −→R such that

F. Extensions of Number Systems: What Comes after the Quaternions?
235
|v · w| = |v| · |w|
for all v,w ∈V, called the product rule.
We further deﬁne a weakened form of associativity.
Deﬁnition F.12. An R-algebra V is said to be alternative if the equalities
v(vw) = v2w
and
(vw)w = vw2
hold for all v,w ∈V.
Remark F.13. If an R-algebra V is alternative, we may compute
0 = (v(v + w))(v + w) −v(v + w)2
= (v2 + vw)(v + w) −v(v2 + vw + wv + w2)
= (vw)v −v(wv).
We therefore have the equality
(vw)v = v(wv)
for all v,w ∈V, known as the ﬂexible identity.
Example F.14. The R-algebras R, C, and H are normed, and since multipli-
cation is associative, they are in particular alternative.
Theorem F.15. The structure (O,+, ·) is a real, normed, alternative division al-
gebra of dimension 8 with unit element 1 = 1 + 0 · i1 + ··· + 0 · i7 that contains
the ﬁelds of real and complex numbers as well as the skew ﬁeld of quaternions.
Proof. It is clear already that (O,+, ·) is an R-algebra of dimension 8 that
contains R, C, and H. To prove that (O,+, ·) is a division algebra, we be-
gin by showing that every nonzero octonion α possesses a multiplicative
inverse. This can be shown easily in analogy to the case of the complex num-
bers or quaternions by writing
α−1 =
α
|α|2 .
By Deﬁnition 1.23, we have now to show that the two equalities
α · ξ = β
and
η · α = β,
for α,β ∈O with α ̸= 0, have unique solutions ξ,η ∈O. To this end, we shall
use the identity (3); setting ξ := α−1β = |α|−2 αβ, we then calculate

236
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
α · ξ = |α|−2 α(αβ) = |α|−2 (αα)β = β.
Through conjugation of (3), we obtain the identity (βα)α = β(αα), which
leads to the equality
(βα)α = β(αα),
(4)
valid for all α,β ∈O, since along with α,β ∈O, α,β run through all elements
of O. Setting η := βα−1 = |α|−2 βα, we thereby obtain
η · α = |α|−2(βα)α = |α|−2 β(αα) = β.
To prove that (O,+, ·) is an alternative algebra, we substitute α = 2Re(α) −α
in (3) and obtain the identity
2Re(α)αβ −α(αβ) = 2Re(α)αβ −α2β,
which leads to the identity
α(αβ) = α2β
for all α,β ∈O. If we now substitute α = 2Re(α) −α in (4), we obtain analo-
gously the equality
(βα)α = βα2
for all α,β ∈O. We have thereby shown that O is alternative.
Finally, to show that the product rule holds, we ﬁrst establish the identity
(αβ)(βα) = α((ββ)α)
(5)
for all α,β ∈O. Since this equality holds trivially for α = 0, we may assume
that α ̸= 0, in which case there exists the multiplicative inverse α−1, and since
O is a division algebra, it sufﬁces to show that
((αβ)(βα))α = (α((ββ)α))α.
To prove this equality, we ﬁrst calculate
((αβ)(βα))α = ((αβ)(αβ))α = (αβ)((αβ)α) = (αβ)((βα)α)
= (αβ)(β(αα)) = |α|2(αβ)β = |α|2α(ββ) = |α|2|β|2α,
where for the second equality, we have used (3), and for the fourth and sixth
equalities, (4). But we also have
(α((ββ)α))α = (|β|2αα)α = |α|2|β|2α.

F. Extensions of Number Systems: What Comes after the Quaternions?
237
Altogether, this proves the equality (5). Finally, we calculate
|αβ|2 = (αβ)(αβ) = (αβ)(βα) = α((ββ)α) = |β|2αα = |α|2|β|2,
where for the third equality, we have used (5). This completes the proof.
⊓⊔
Remark F.16. The product rule can be proved directly, but doing so is te-
dious.
Remark F.17. We note that by making suitable use of the product rule, simi-
larly to what was done in Exercise 1.19, one may prove the following asser-
tion: If each of two natural numbers can be represented as the sum of eight
squares of natural numbers, then the product of those two numbers can also
be represented as the sum of eight squares of natural numbers.
F.3
Normed R-Algebras
In this section, let (V,⟨·, ·⟩) be a ﬁnite-dimensional normed R-algebra with
unit element 1. Conjugation on V is deﬁned by
v := 2⟨v,1⟩−v
(6)
for all v ∈V, from which one immediately deduces the relationship v = v.
The validity of the product rule in its squared form
|v · w|2 = |v|2 · |w|2
(v,w ∈V)
(7)
has several immediate consequences, which we shall proceed to list.
Lemma F.18. For all t,u,v,w ∈V, the following equalities hold:
(i)
⟨uv,uw⟩= |u|2⟨v,w⟩and ⟨vu,wu⟩= |u|2⟨v,w⟩.
(ii)
⟨tv,uw⟩= 2⟨t,u⟩⟨v,w⟩−⟨uv,tw⟩.
(iii) ⟨tv,w⟩= ⟨v,tw⟩and ⟨tv,w⟩= ⟨t,wv⟩.
(iv)
v = v and vw = w · v.
Proof. To prove (i), we consider the relationship
|v + w|2 = |v|2 + |w|2 + 2⟨v,w⟩
(v,w ∈V),
(8)
from which we conclude that
|uv + uw|2 = |uv|2 + |uw|2 + 2⟨uv,uw⟩.
(9)
If, on the other hand, we replace v in (7) by u, and w by v + w, we obtain,
taking into account the distributive law,

238
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
|uv + uw|2 = |u|2 · |v + w|2 = |u|2 ·
 |v|2 + |w|2 + 2⟨v,w⟩

,
(10)
where for the last equality we have again made use of (8). Comparing (9)
with (10) yields
|uv|2 + |uw|2 + 2⟨uv,uw⟩= |u|2|v|2 + |u|2|w|2 + 2|u|2⟨v,w⟩,
which gives us the ﬁrst equality on application of the product rule (7) and
division by 2. The second equality can be proved analogously.
To prove (ii), we begin by using (i) to write
 |t|2 + |u|2⟨v,w⟩= ⟨tv,tw⟩+ ⟨uv,uw⟩,
thereby obtaining, again considering (i), the equality
 |t|2 + |u|2⟨v,w⟩+ ⟨tv,uw⟩+ ⟨uv,tw⟩= ⟨(t + u)v,(t + u)w⟩
= |t + u|2⟨v,w⟩=
 |t|2 + |u|2 + 2⟨t,u⟩
⟨v,w⟩,
which implies the assertion.
To prove (iii), we set u = 1 in (ii), which yields
⟨tv,w⟩= 2⟨t,1⟩⟨v,w⟩−⟨v,tw⟩= ⟨v,(2⟨t,1⟩−t)w⟩= ⟨v,tw⟩,
which proves the ﬁrst equality. The second equality can be proved analo-
gously.
To prove (iv), we have now only to prove the second equality, since the
ﬁrst has already been established. To this end, consider, using (iii), the equal-
ity
⟨vw,r⟩= ⟨r · vw,1⟩= ⟨r,vw⟩= ⟨v · r,w⟩= ⟨v,wr⟩= ⟨w · v,r⟩
for arbitrary r ∈V, from which we conclude that vw = w · v. This completes
the proof of the lemma.
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition F.19. The imaginary space of V is deﬁned as the set
Im(V) = {v ∈V | v /∈R \ {0} and v2 ∈R}.
Remark F.20. (i) We have Im(V) ∩R = {0}, and v ∈Im(V) implies λv ∈
Im(V) for all λ ∈R.
(ii) Frobenius’s lemma says that Im(V) is an R-vector space and that V =
R ⊕Im(V). In particular, we have the equivalence
v ∈Im(V)
⇐⇒
⟨v,1⟩= 0,
and therefore the equality v = 2⟨v,1⟩−v = −v for all v ∈Im(V).

F. Extensions of Number Systems: What Comes after the Quaternions?
239
Theorem F.21. Every ﬁnite-dimensional normed R-algebra with unit element 1
is an alternative division algebra.
Proof. First of all, by Lemma F.18 (iii) and (i), we have the respective equali-
ties
⟨v(vw),r⟩= ⟨vw,vr⟩= |v|2⟨w,r⟩,
⟨(wv)v,r⟩= ⟨wv,rv⟩= |v|2⟨w,r⟩,
for all r ∈V, from which we obtain
v(vw) = |v|2w = (wv)v
(11)
for all v,w ∈V. For v ∈V with v ̸= 0, we set v−1 := v/|v|2. Multiplication of
(11) by 1/|v|2 yields the equivalent equality
v−1(vw) = w = (wv)v−1,
(12)
which on replacing v with v−1 and taking account of (v−1)−1 = v leads to
the equality
v(v−1w) = w = (wv−1)v.
We have thereby proved that the two equations
v · x = w
and
y · v = w
for v,w ∈V with v ̸= 0 possess the unique solutions x := v−1w ∈V and
y := wv−1 ∈V, which completes the proof that V is a division algebra.
If we now substitute v = 2⟨v,1⟩−v in (11), we obtain (2⟨v,1⟩−v)(vw) =
(v(2⟨v,1⟩−v))w, from which we conclude at once that
v(vw) = v2w
for all v,w ∈V. We prove analogously that
(vw)w = vw2
for all v,w ∈V. Thus we have shown that V is an alternative R-algebra.
⊓⊔
Finally, we prove a theorem that will be of great importance in the fol-
lowing section. We recall that an R-subalgebra of V is an R-vector subspace
U ⊆V such that for all u1,u2 ∈U, the product u1 · u2 is also in U (see Exer-
cise 1.27).
Theorem F.22. Let V be a ﬁnite-dimensional normed R-algebra with unit element
1, and U ⊊V a proper R-subalgebra of V with 1 ∈U. Then there exists i = iU ∈V

240
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
with the property that
i2 = −1
and
⟨i,u⟩= 0
(13)
for all u ∈U. In particular, we then have i = −i and |i| = 1.
Proof. We have V = R ⊕Im(V) and thereby also U = R ⊕Im(U), from
which on account of U ⊊V, we have in particular also Im(U) ⊊Im(V).
There exists, therefore, an element v0 ∈Im(V) with v0 ̸= 0 that satisﬁes
⟨v0,u⟩= 0
(14)
for all u ∈Im(U). Since v0 ∈Im(V), there exists as well r ∈R with v2
0 = r.
We assert that we must have r < 0, for otherwise, we would obtain the rela-
tionship
 v0 −√
r
 v0 + √
r
 = v2
0 −r = 0,
from which we conclude that v0 ∈R, because V has no zero divisors, which
contradicts that v0 ∈Im(V) with v0 ̸= 0. We have thus shown that v2
0 = −|r|
for a nonzero number r ∈R. Deﬁning
i :=
1
p
|r|
v0 ∈Im(V),
we see at once that i2 = −1. If now u ∈U = R ⊕Im(U), then we may rep-
resent u in the form u = u1 + u2 with u1 ∈R and u2 ∈Im(U). Taking into
account (14), we thereby obtain
⟨i,u⟩= ⟨i,u1⟩+ ⟨i,u2⟩= 0 + 0 = 0,
as desired. Finally, we calculate
i = 2⟨i,1⟩−i = −i
and obtain thereby, since i2 = −1, the equality
|i| =
p
ii =
p
−i2 = 1,
which completes the proof of the theorem.
⊓⊔
F.4
Hurwitz’s Theorem
In this ﬁnal section we prove Hurwitz’s theorem, which states that up to
isomorphism, the only ﬁnite-dimensional normed R-algebras with unit el-

F. Extensions of Number Systems: What Comes after the Quaternions?
241
ement 1 are the R-algebras R, C, H, and O. To prove this, we shall use the
so-called Cayley–Dickson doubling process.
Proposition F.23. Let V be a ﬁnite-dimensional normed R-algebra with unit ele-
ment 1. Let U ⊊V be a proper R-subalgebra of V with 1 ∈U, and let i = iU ∈V
be an element with the property (13). Then for all a,b,c,d ∈U, the following condi-
tions are satisﬁed:
(i)
⟨a + bi,c + di⟩= ⟨a,c⟩+ ⟨b,d⟩.
(ii)
a + bi = a −bi.
(iii) bi = ib.
(iv) (a + bi) · (c + di) = (ac −db) + (da + bc)i.
In particular, U + Ui is an R-subalgebra of V.
Proof. To prove (i), we verify, using Lemma F.18 (iii) and (i) as well as prop-
erties (13) of i the equalities
⟨a,di⟩=

da,i
 = 0,
⟨bi,c⟩=

i,bc
 = 0,
and
⟨bi,di⟩= |i|2⟨b,d⟩= ⟨b,d⟩.
This gives us the ﬁrst assertion.
For the proof of (ii), we consider, taking into account Lemma F.18 (iii) and
(13), the equality
bi = 2⟨bi,1⟩−bi = 2⟨i,b⟩−bi = −bi,
from which a + bi = a + bi = a −bi follows at once.
To prove (iii), we take a = 0 in (ii) and obtain, with the additional help of
Lemma F.18 (iv), the equality
−bi = bi = i · b = −ib.
This gives the third assertion.
To prove (iv), we ﬁrst calculate
(a + bi) · (c + di) = ac + a(di) + (bi)c + (bi)(di).
For an arbitrary v ∈V we obtain, using Lemma F.18 (iii), the equality (iii)
just proved, and Lemma F.18 (ii), the equality
⟨a(di),v⟩= ⟨di,av⟩= ⟨id,av⟩= 0 −⟨ad,iv⟩= ⟨i(ad),v⟩= ⟨(da)i,v⟩,
where we note that ⟨i,a⟩= 0. We conclude from this that a(di) = (da)i. We
verify analogously, for an arbitrary v ∈V, using again Lemma F.18 (iii) and
Lemma F.18 (ii), the equality

242
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
⟨(bi)c,v⟩= ⟨bi,vc⟩= 0 −⟨vi,bc⟩= ⟨v,(bc)i⟩= ⟨(bc)i,v⟩,
where we have noted that ⟨i,c⟩= 0. From this we conclude that (bi)c = (bc)i.
Finally, we obtain analogously for an arbitrary v ∈V, using Lemma F.18 (iii),
the just proved equality (iii), and Lemma F.18 (ii), the equality
⟨(bi)(di),v⟩= ⟨bi,v · di⟩= −⟨ib,v(id)⟩= 0 + ⟨vb,i(id)⟩,
where we note that ⟨b,id⟩= 0. A further application of Lemma F.18 (iii)
and (i) now gives
⟨(bi)(di),v⟩= −⟨i(vb),id⟩= −|i|2⟨vb,d⟩= −⟨v,db⟩= ⟨−db,v⟩,
from which we obtain (bi)(di) = −db. Altogether, we thereby obtain
(a + bi) · (c + di) = ac + (da)i + (bc)i −db,
as asserted. This proves in particular that U + Ui is an R-subalgebra of V.
⊓⊔
Remark F.24. The R-subalgebra U + Ui of V from Proposition F.23 is also
called the Cayley–Dickson double of U (with respect to i). The above proposition
shows that whenever an R-algebra V possesses a proper R-subalgebra, it
must also contain its Cayley–Dickson double. If V is ﬁnite-dimensional, then
V itself must arise from its smallest R-subalgebra by a ﬁnite Cayley–Dickson
doubling process. In the following theorem, we shall see that the property
of being normed allows only three Cayley–Dickson doubling processes.
Theorem F.25. Let V be a ﬁnite-dimensional normed R-algebra with unit ele-
ment 1. In addition, let U ⊊V be a proper R-subalgebra of V with 1 ∈U, and
let i = iU ∈V be an element with properties (13). Then the following hold for the
Cayley–Dickson double U + Ui:
(i)
U + Ui is normed if and only if U is normed and associative.
(ii)
U + Ui is normed and associative if and only if U is normed, associative, and
commutative.
(iii) U + Ui is normed, associative, and commutative if and only if U is normed,
associative, commutative, and invariant under conjugation.
Proof. (i) If U + Ui is normed, then U is normed. Furthermore, by Proposi-
tion F.23 (iv), the R-algebra U + Ui is normed if and only if
|a + bi|2 · |c + di|2 = |(ac −db) + (da + bc)i|2
for all a,b,c,d ∈U. By (8), (13), and Lemma F.18 (iii), this equality is equiva-
lent to

F. Extensions of Number Systems: What Comes after the Quaternions?
243
(|a|2 + |b|2) · (|c|2 + |d|2) = |ac −db|2 + |da + bc|2
⇐⇒
0 = −⟨ac,db⟩+ ⟨da,bc⟩
⇐⇒
⟨d(ac),b⟩= ⟨(da)c,b⟩,
where we have made use of the product rule in U. This proves that U + Ui
is normed if and only if d(ac) = (da)c for all a,c,d ∈U, that is, if and only if
U is associative. Conversely, if U is normed and associative, then the above
equivalences show that then U + Ui is normed as well.
(ii) If U + Ui is normed and associative, then U is also normed and asso-
ciative. Moreover, by Proposition F.23 (iv), the equality
(ad)i = a(di) = (da)i
holds for all a,d ∈U, which means that U is commutative. Conversely, if
U is normed, associative, and commutative, then by (i), it remains to show
that U + Ui is associative. To this end, we compute for a,b,c,d,e, f ∈U the
equalities
 (a + bi) · (c + di)
 · (e + f i) =
 (ac −db) + (da + bc)i
 · (e + f i)
= (ac −db)e −f (da + bc) +
 f (ac −db) + (da + bc)e

i
= (ac)e −(db)e −f (da) −f (bc) +
 f (ac) −f (db) + (da)e + (bc)e

i
and
(a + bi) ·
 (c + di) · (e + f i)
 = (a + bi) ·
 (ce −f d) + ( f c + de)i

= a(ce −f d) −( f c + de)b +
 ( f c + de)a + b(ce −f d)

i
= a(ce) −a( f d) −(c f )b −(ed)b +
 ( f c)a + (de)a + b(ec) −b(d f )

i.
Since U is associative and commutative, these two expressions agree. This
proves that U + Ui is associative.
(iii) If U + Ui is normed, associative, and commutative, then U is also
normed, associative, and commutative. Moreover, we have then by Propo-
sition F.23 (iii) the equality
ia = ai = ia
for all a ∈U; that is, we have a = a for all a ∈U. Therefore, U is invariant
under conjugation. Conversely, if U is normed, associative, commutative,
and invariant under conjugation, then by (ii), it remains to show that U + Ui
is commutative. To prove this, we calculate for a,b,c,d ∈U the equalities
(a + bi) · (c + di) = (ac −db) + (da + bc)i,
(c + di) · (a + bi) = (ca −bd) + (bc + da)i.

244
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
Since U is associative, commutative, and invariant under conjugation, the
two expressions agree. This proves that U + Ui is commutative.
⊓⊔
Example F.26. Starting with the 1-dimensional associative, commutative,
and conjugation-invariant R-algebra R, we obtain by the Cayley–Dickson
doubling process the 2-dimensional associative and commutative R-algebra
C ∼= R + Ri. If in a further step we apply the Cayley–Dickson doubling
process to the R-algebra of complex numbers C, we will arrive at the 4-
dimensional associative R-algebra H ∼= C + Cj. By Remark F.9, we obtain ﬁ-
nally in a third Cayley–Dickson step applied to the R-algebra of quaternions
the 8-dimensional algebra O ∼= H + Hi4 of octonions. This example demon-
strates quite clearly the successive loss of conjugation-invariance, commuta-
tivity, and associativity through repeated application of the Cayley–Dickson
doubling process.
Theorem F.27 (Hurwitz’s theorem). The R-algebras R, C, H, and O are (up to
isomorphism) the only ﬁnite-dimensional normed R-algebras with unit element 1.
Proof. Let V be a ﬁnite-dimensional normed R-algebra with unit element 1.
We shall show that V is isomorphic to R, C, H, or O.
If V is 1-dimensional, then V is isomorphic to R. Otherwise, V has a
proper R-subalgebra U1 ⊊V that is isomorphic to R. We have 1 ∈U1,
and by Theorem F.22, there exists i = iU1 ∈V satisfying properties (13). By
Theorem F.25, the Cayley–Dickson double U1 + U1iU1 is a normed, asso-
ciative, and commutative R-subalgebra of V, since U1 ∼= R is normed, as-
sociative, commutative, and invariant under conjugation. If we now have
V = U1 + U1iU1, then V is isomorphic to R + RiU1 ∼= C.
Otherwise, V possesses a proper R-subalgebra U2 ⊊V that is isomorphic
to C. We again have 1 ∈U2, and by Theorem F.22, there exists i = iU2 ∈
V satisfying properties (13). By Theorem F.25, the Cayley–Dickson double
U2 + U2iU2 is a normed and associative R-subalgebra of V, since U2 ∼= C
is normed, associative, and commutative. If we now have V = U2 + U2iU2,
then V is isomorphic to C + CiU2 ∼= H.
Otherwise, V possesses a proper R-subalgebra U3 ⊊V isomorphic to H.
We again have 1 ∈U3, and by Theorem F.22, there exists i = iU3 ∈V satisfy-
ing properties (13). By Theorem F.25, the Cayley–Dickson double U3 + U3iU3
is a normed R-subalgebra of V, since U3 ∼= H is normed and associative. If
we now have V = U3 + U3iU3, then V is isomorphic to H + HiU3 ∼= O.
If now V were to contain a proper R-subalgebra U4 ⊊V isomorphic to O,
then we would again have 1 ∈U4, and by Theorem F.22, there would exist
i = iU4 ∈V satisfying properties (13). By Theorem F.25, the Cayley–Dickson
double U4 + U4iU4 would not, however, be a normed R-subalgebra of V,
since U4 ∼= O is not associative. This contradicts the fact that V is normed.
This case can therefore not occur, and the theorem is proved.
⊓⊔

F. Extensions of Number Systems: What Comes after the Quaternions?
245
Remark F.28. The statement of Hurwitz’s theorem holds more generally for
ﬁnite-dimensional real division algebras that are not necessarily normed.
In this context, Heinz Hopf showed in [5], already in 1940, that the dimen-
sion of such a division algebra must be a power of 2. In 1958, Michel Ker-
vaire and John Milnor proved in [7], independently of each other, that every
ﬁnite-dimensional real division algebra has dimension 1, 2, 4, or 8. It then
follows from this more general assumption that every such division algebra
is isomorphic to R, C, H, or O. The proof of the deep theorem of Kervaire–
Milnor uses methods of algebraic topology (see Chapter 10, contributed by
Friedrich Hirzebruch, in [4]). As of today, there is no known purely algebraic
proof.
If one applies the Cayley–Dickson doubling process again to the skew
ﬁeld of octonions, one obtains the 16-dimensional R-algebra S of sedenions,
which is neither commutative nor alternative; it is also not associative, and it
has zero divisors, and is therefore, as we know by now, no longer a division
algebra.
Remark F.29. We end this section with the observation that there is an al-
ternative way to construct higher-dimensional R-algebras containing R, C,
and H beginning with the real numbers and passing to the complex num-
bers and the quaternions. To do so, we begin with an n-dimensional Eu-
clidean R-vector space (V,⟨·, ·⟩); we note that we could as well begin more
generally with a K-vector space, over an arbitrary ﬁeld K, and an arbitrary
scalar product. We then form the tensor algebra T(V) and consider its ideal
I(V) =

v ⊗w + w ⊗v + 2 · ⟨v,w⟩
v,w ∈V

.
We then deﬁne the so-called Clifford algebra
C(V,⟨·, ·⟩) := T(V)/I(V),
in which we denote the product by · as usual. The Clifford algebra is by con-
struction an associative R-algebra of dimension 2n. Namely if {e1, ..., en} is
an ordered orthonormal basis of V, then C(V,⟨·, ·⟩) has the basis
{1; e1, ...,en; e1 · e2, e1 · e3, ...,en−1 · en; ... ; e1 ···en},
from which, on account of
n
0

+
n
1

+
n
2

+ ··· +
n
n

= 2n,
we can easily read off the dimension of C(V,⟨·, ·⟩).
If n = 0, we obtain C(V,⟨·, ·⟩) ∼= R. For n = 1, we have C(V,⟨·, ·⟩) ∼= C.
Namely, if V is generated by i := e1, then C(V,⟨·, ·⟩) is generated by 1 and i
with i2 = −1. For n = 2, we obtain C(V,⟨·, ·⟩) ∼= H; namely, if V is generated

246
VI Hamilton’s Quaternions
by i := e1 and j := e2, then C(V,⟨·, ·⟩) will be generated by 1, i, j, and k :=
e1 · e2, where i2 = j2 = k2 = −1 and i · j = k = −j · i. For n = 3, one obtains,
however, C(V,⟨·, ·⟩) ∼= H × H; associativity is preserved, but one loses the
property of being a division algebra, since now C(V,⟨·, ·⟩) is no longer free
of zero divisors.
The Clifford algebra C(V,⟨·, ·⟩) associated with an n-dimensional Eu-
clidean vector space (V,⟨·, ·⟩) makes it possible to generalize the relation-
ship described in Section 3 of this chapter between the special orthogonal
group SO3(R) and the quaternions S3 of modulus 1 with the help of the
spinor representation of the special orthogonal group SOn(R) in the group of
invertible elements of C(V,⟨·, ·⟩).
References
[1] J. C. Baez: The octonions. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 39 (2002), 145–205.
[2] J. C. Baez: Errata for: “The octonions” [Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 39 (2002),
145–205]. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 42 (2005), 213.
[3] J. H. Conway and D. A. Smith: On quaternions and octonions: their geometry, arith-
metic, and symmetry. A K Peters, Natick, MA, 2003.
[4] H. Ebbinghaus et al.: Numbers. Translated from the 2nd German 1988 edition
by H. L. S. Orde. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1991.
[5] H. Hopf: Ein topologischer Beitrag zur reellen Algebra. Comm. Math. Helvetici 13
(1940/41), 427–440.
[6] A. Hurwitz: Über die Komposition der quadratischen Formen. Math. Ann. 88
(1922), 1–25.
[7] J. Milnor: Some consequences of a theorem of Bott. Ann. of Math. (2) 68 (1958),
444–449.
[8] B. L. van der Waerden: A history of algebra. From al-Khwarizmi to Emmy Noether.
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1985.

Solutions to Exercises
In this chapter we present solutions to some exercises along with hints for
helping to solve others.
Solutions to Exercises in Chapter I
Exercise 1.8. We prove ﬁrst the validity of the associative law of addition,
that is, the equality
n + (m + p) = (n + m) + p
(1)
for all n, m, p ∈N. We do this by induction on p. For p = 0, the assertion is
clear. Suppose, then, that assertion (1) holds for an arbitrary but ﬁxed p ∈N
and for all n, m ∈N. Then from the deﬁnition of addition and the induction
hypothesis, we have the equality
(n + m) + p∗= ((n + m) + p)∗= (n + (m + p))∗
= n + (m + p)∗= n + (m + p∗),
as desired. This proves the associativity of addition. The ﬁrst distributive
law, that is, the equality
(n + m) · p = n · p + m · p
(2)
for all n, m, p ∈N, can be proved using the associativity and commutativity
of addition along with induction on p. For p = 0, the assertion is clear. Sup-
pose now that (2) holds for an arbitrary but ﬁxed p ∈N and for all n, m ∈N.
Then we have
(n + m) · p∗= (n + m) · p + (n + m) = (n · p + m · p) + (n + m)
= (n · p + n) + (m · p + m) = n · p∗+ m · p∗,
as desired. This proves the asserted distributivity. Using the ﬁrst distributive
law, one can then prove the commutativity of multiplication by induction.
This then also yields the validity of the second distributive law. Finally, one
can prove the associativity of multiplication by induction.
Exercise 1.10. Let m, n ∈N. If m = 0 or n = 0, then one immediately has
the equality m · n = 0 by Deﬁnition 1.5 (2) and the commutativity of mul-
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69429-0
J. Kramer and A.-M. von Pippich, From Natural Numbers to Quaternions, 

248
Solutions to Exercises
tiplication. To prove the converse, we assume m ̸= 0 and n ̸= 0 and prove
the inequality m · n ̸= 0. Since m ̸= 0 and n ̸= 0, there exist a,b ∈N with
m = a∗= a + 1 and n = b∗= b + 1. Therefore,
m · n = m · b∗= (m · b) + m = (m · b) + (a + 1) = (m · b + a) + 1 = (m · b + a)∗,
that is, the natural number m · n is the successor of the natural number
m · b + a. By the third Peano axiom, we must then have m · n ̸= 0.
Exercise 1.14. The power law from Lemma 1.13 can by proved by induction.
Exercise 1.17. The proof of properties (i), (ii), and (iii) of Remark 1.16 are left
to the reader.
Exercise 1.20. Properties (i) and (ii) of Remark 1.19 can be proved by induc-
tion.
Exercise 1.23. We leave it to the reader to come up with suitable examples.
Exercise 1.25. Let m, n ∈N with m ≥n. We ﬁrst prove the existence of a
natural number x ∈N with n + x = m. If m = n, then for x = 0, we have the
equality n + x = n + 0 = m. If m > n, then there exists a ∈N, a > 0, such
that m = n∗···∗(a times). Then for x = 0∗···∗(a times), we have the equality
n + x = n + 0∗···∗= n∗···∗= m. To prove uniqueness, let y ∈N be another
natural number with n + y = m. If x < y, then by Remark 1.19 (i) and the
commutativity of addition, we have the inequality
m = n + x = x + n < y + n = n + y = m,
that is, we conclude that m < m, a contradiction. If x > y, then there fol-
lows analogously the contradiction m > m. Therefore, we must have x = y,
proving the asserted uniqueness.
Exercise 2.5. (a) By assumption we have 3 | (a1 ··· ak + 1), that is, there exists
n ∈N with a1 ··· ak + 1 = 3 · n. If now 3 | aj for some j ∈{1,...,k}, then
by Lemma 2.4 (ix), we have 3 | (a1 ··· ak), that is, there exists m ∈N with
a1 ··· ak = 3 · m. We therefore have the equality
1 = 3 · n −a1 ··· ak = 3 · n −3 · m = 3 · (n −m),
a contradiction. Thus none of the numbers a1,...,ak is divisible by 3.
(b) We assume that none of the numbers a1 + 1,..., ak + 1 is divisible by 3.
One ﬁrst shows that then one must have aj + 1 = 3 · nj + rj for certain nj ∈N
and rj ∈{1,2} (j = 1,...,k), from which follows aj = 3 · nj + (rj −1), which
for j = 1,...,k implies the equality rj = 2, since by part (a), no aj is divisible
by 3. By multiplying out, one shows that the number

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter I
249
a1 ··· ak −1 =
k
∏
j=1
(3 · nj + 1) −1
is divisible by 3. But this contradicts the assumption that a1 ··· ak + 1 is di-
visible by 3. Therefore, at least one of the numbers a1 + 1,..., ak + 1 must be
divisible by 3.
Exercise 2.12. To make the proceedings clear, we calculate ﬁrst, with a1 = 2
and an+1 = (an −1) · an + 1 for n ∈N, n ≥1, the numbers a2 = 3, a3 = 7,
a4 = 43, a5 = 1807, a6 = (1807 −1) · 1806 + 1 = 3263443. With Mn = {p ∈P |
p | an}, we obtain the ﬁrst six sets,
M1 = {2},
M2 = {3},
M3 = {7},
M4 = {43},
M5 = {13, 139},
M6 = {3263443}.
We claim that we have the equality an = 5· bn + rn with bn ∈N and rn ∈{2,3}
(n ∈N, n ≥1). This can be proved by induction on n. If n = 1, the assertion is
clear. We now assume that the assertion holds for arbitrary but ﬁxed n ∈N,
n ≥1. Then we have
an+1 = (an −1) · an + 1 = (5 · bn + rn −1) · (5 · bn + rn) + 1
= 5 · (5b2
n + 2bnrn −bn) + r2
n −rn + 1.
If rn = 2, then r2
n −rn + 1 = 3; if rn = 3, then r2
n −rn + 1 = 5 + 2. Therefore, in
both cases, an+1 is of the form 5 · bn+1 + rn+1 with bn+1 ∈N and rn+1 ∈{2,3},
as desired. We have thus shown that 5 ∤an, that is, 5 /∈Mn, for all n ∈N,
n ≥1.
Exercise 2.13. Let us assume, contrary to the assertion, that there are only
ﬁnitely many prime numbers p1,..., pn in 2 + 3 · N. We then consider the
natural number
a := 3 · p1 ··· pn −1.
We have that a > 1, and by Lemma 2.9, a has a prime divisor p. Since 3 ∤a,
it follows that p ̸= 3. We now show that p ∈2 + 3 · N; that is, we must show
that 3 | (p + 1). If p = a, we are done. If p < a, then there exists q ∈N, q > 1,
with a = p · q. Since 3 | (p · q + 1), it follows by Exercise 2.5 (b) that 3 | (p + 1)
or 3 | (q + 1). In the ﬁrst case, we are done. In the second case, we repeat the
process for a prime divisor of q. Finally, after ﬁnitely many steps, we obtain
a prime divisor p of a with p ∈2 + 3 · N. We now proceed as in Euclid’s
proof, for on the assumption that there are only ﬁnitely many prime num-
bers in the set 2 + 3 · N, we must have p ∈{p1,..., pn}. In particular, we have
p | (p1 ··· pn). However, since we have the divisibility relation p | a, we must
have p | 1 from the divisibility rules, which is a contradiction.
Exercise 2.15. We prove the contrapositive of the asserted implication.

250
Solutions to Exercises
(i) Suppose that n is not a prime. Then there exist natural numbers a,b ∈N
with n = a · b and 1 < a,b < n. We thus obtain
2n −1 = 2a·b −1 = (2a −1) · (2a·(b−1) + 2a·(b−2) + ··· + 2a + 1).
Since 1 < 2a −1 < 2n −1, it follows that 2a −1 is a nontrivial divisor of
2n −1, which proves that 2n −1 is not prime.
(ii) Let n ∈N, n > 0, with n not a power of 2. Then n > 2, and there exist
natural numbers a,b ∈N, b odd, with n = a · b and 1 ≤a < n, 1 < b ≤n.
Since b is odd, we obtain
2n + 1 = 2a·b + 1 = (2a + 1) · (2a·(b−1) ∓··· −2a + 1).
Since 1 < 2a + 1 < 2n + 1, it follows that 2a + 1 is a nontrivial divisor of
2n + 1, which proves that 2n + 1 is not prime.
Exercise 2.18. Let {a1,..., an} and {b1,..., bm} denote the sets of all divisors
of a and all divisors of b. Since a and b are relatively prime, the set of all
divisors of a · b is equal to {aj · bk | j = 1,..., n; k = 1,..., m}. It follows that
S(a) · S(b) = (a1 + ··· + an) · (b1 + ··· + bm) =
n
∑
j=1
m
∑
k=1
aj · bk = S(a · b).
This completes the proof of the assertion.
Exercise 2.19. The assertion can be proved by induction on m.
Exercise 2.20. (a) We have the equalities
S(220) −220 = 1 + 2 + 4 + 5 + 10 + 11 + 20 + 22 + 44 + 55 + 110 = 284,
S(284) −284 = 1 + 2 + 3 + 71 + 142 = 220.
Therefore, we have S(220) = 220 + 284 = S(284), which proves that the
numbers 220 and 284 are amicable.
(b) We must show that S(a) = a + b = S(b). Since x,y,z are distinct odd
primes, it follows that
S(a) = S(2n · x · y) = S(2n) · S(x) · S(y) = (2n+1 −1)(x + 1)(y + 1),
S(b) = S(2n) · S(z) = (2n+1 −1)(z + 1),
where we have used the well-known equality S(2n) = 2n+1 −1. A direct
calculation shows that x · y = 9 · 22n−1 −9 · 2n−1 + 1, and therefore, x · y +
x + y = z. This implies S(a) = (2n+1 −1)(z + 1) = S(b). Finally, we calculate

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter I
251
a + b = 2n · (x · y + z) = 2n · (9 · 22n −9 · 2n−1) = 22n−1 · 9 · (2n+1 −1)
= (z + 1) · (2n+1 −1) = S(a) = S(b),
which proves that the numbers a and b are amicable.
Exercise 3.2. We obtain the prime factorizations 720 = 24 · 32 · 5, 9797 = 97 ·
101 and 360360 = (23 · 32 · 5)360 = 21080 · 3720 · 5360. Finally, on using the third
binomial formula four times, we obtain
232 −1 = (22 −1) ·
 22 + 1
 ·
 24 + 1
 ·
 28 + 1
 ·
 216 + 1

= 3 · 5 · 17 · 257 · 65537.
Exercise 3.7. Let a = 232 −1 and b = 255 with prime factorizations (see Ex-
ercise 3.2)
a = ∏
p∈P
pap = 3 · 5 · 17 · 257 · 65537,
b = ∏
p∈P
pbp = 3 · 5 · 17;
here a3 = 1, a5 = 1, a17 = 1, a257 = 1, a65537 = 1, ap = 0 for all p ∈P \
{3,5,17,257,65537} and b3 = 1, b5 = 1, b17 = 1, bp = 0 for all p ∈P \ {3,5,17}.
Therefore, bp ≤ap for all p ∈P, which by the criterion of Lemma 3.5, proves
that b | a.
Exercise 4.6. With the help of Theorem 4.3, we obtain (3600, 3240) = 360,
(360360, 540180) = ((23 · 32 · 5)360,(22 · 33 · 5)180) = 2360 · 3540 · 5180, (232 −
1, 38 −28) = 5, where for the last equality, we used the prime factorization
from Exercise 3.2 and the prime factorization 38 −28 = (32 −22) · (32 + 22) ·
(34 + 24) = 5 · 13 · 97.
Exercise 4.13. We have (2880, 3000, 3240) = (120, 3240) = 120 and [36, 42, 49]
= [252, 49] = 1764.
Exercise 4.15. For example, the numbers a1 = 6, a2 = 10, a3 = 15 are rela-
tively prime, since (a1,a2,a3) = (6,10,15) = (2,15) = 1. The numbers a1, a2,
a3, however, are not pairwise relatively prime, since we have (a1,a2) = 2.
Exercise 4.17. Let a1,..., an ∈N. We leave to the reader the proof of the fol-
lowing equivalence:
(a1,..., an) · [a1,..., an] = a1 ··· an ⇐⇒a1,..., an pairwise relatively prime.
This proves the desired criterion.
Exercise 5.2. We obtain 773 = 2 · 337 + 99. Further, we calculate 25 · 34 · 52 =
(22 · 32) · (23 · 32 · 52) = (5 · 7 + 1) · (23 · 32 · 52) = 7 · (23 · 32 · 53) + (23 · 32 · 52).
Since 216 + 1 = 48 + 1, it follows that 232 −1 = (216 −1)(48 + 1) + 0.

252
Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 5.4. This process can be carried out for arbitrary natural numbers
g > 1. One obtains the unique representation
n = qℓ· gℓ+ qℓ−1 · gℓ−1 + ··· + q1 · g1 + q0 · g0
with natural numbers 0 ≤qj ≤g −1 (j = 0,..., ℓ) and qℓ̸= 0, called the g-adic
representation of the natural number n.
Solutions to Exercises in Chapter II
Exercise 1.3. For a, b, c ∈Rn, one has the equalities
(a ⊕b) ⊕c = Rn(a + b) ⊕c = Rn(Rn(a + b) + c),
a ⊕(b ⊕c) = a ⊕Rn(b + c) = Rn(a + Rn(b + c)).
Division with remainder of a + b and b + c by n yields the uniquely deter-
mined numbers q1, q2 ∈N such that
a + b = q1 · n + Rn(a + b)
and
b + c = q2 · n + Rn(b + c),
whence follows
Rn(Rn(a + b) + c) = Rn(a + b + c −q1 · n) = Rn(a + b + c)
= Rn(a + b + c −q2 · n) = Rn(a + Rn(b + c)).
We have thereby shown that the operation ⊕is associative. Analogously,
one can prove that the operation ⊙is associative.
Exercise 1.4. (a) The set 2 · N = {2 · n | n ∈N} of even natural numbers is a
nonempty subset of N. If 2 · m, 2 · n ∈2 · N, then
2 · m + 2 · n = 2 · (m + n) ∈2 · N,
(2 · m) · (2 · n) = 2 · (m · 2 · n) ∈2 · N.
Thus both + and · are operations on 2 · N. Since the operations + on N and
· on N are associative, it follows that in particular, the operations + on 2 · N
and · on 2 · N are associative. Therefore, both (2 · N, +) and (2 · N, ·) are
semigroups.
The set 2 · N + 1 = {2 · n + 1 | n ∈N} of odd natural numbers is a
nonempty subset of N. If 2 · m + 1 and 2 · n + 1 are in 2 · N + 1, then
(2 · m + 1) + (2 · n + 1) = 2 · (m + n + 1) ∈2 · N,
(2 · m + 1) · (2 · n + 1) = 2 · (m · 2 · n + m + n) + 1 ∈2 · N + 1.

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter II
253
Therefore, while · is an operation on 2 · N + 1, we see that + is not an opera-
tion on 2 · N + 1. Therefore, (2 · N + 1, +) is not a semigroup. The operation ·
on N is associative, and so in particular, the operation · on 2 · N + 1 is asso-
ciative. Therefore, (2 · N + 1, ·) is a semigroup.
(b) Let k ∈N, k > 1. The set k · N = {k · n | n ∈N} is a nonempty subset of
N. One shows, as in (a), that both (k · N, +) and (k · N, ·) are semigroups.
Exercise 1.5. Because of the inequality
(2 ◦3) ◦2 = (23) ◦2 = (23)2 = 23·2 = 26 ̸= 29 = 2 ◦(32) = 2 ◦(3 ◦2),
the operation ◦on N is not associative, and therefore (N, ◦) is not a semi-
group.
Exercise 1.8. If A1 = {a1} is a one-element set, then
map(A1) = {id},
where the mapping id : A1 −→A1 is given by the assignment a1 7→a1. The
semigroup (map(A1),◦) is abelian. If A2 = {a1, a2, ...} is an arbitrary set
that contains at least two elements a1 ̸= a2, then
map(A2) = {id, f, g, ...},
where the mapping id : A2 −→A2 is given by aj 7→aj (aj ∈A2), the mapping
f : A2 −→A2 by a1 7→a2, aj 7→aj (aj ∈A2 \ {a1}), and the mapping g : A2 −→
A2 by a2 7→a1, aj 7→aj (aj ∈A2 \ {a2}). But then we have
( f ◦g)(a1) = f (g(a1)) = f (a1) = a2 ̸= a1 = g(a2) = g( f (a1)) = (g ◦f )(a1),
whence (map(A2), ◦) is a nonabelian semigroup.
Exercise 1.12. Let eℓbe a left identity element and er a right identity element
of H. Then
eℓ= eℓ◦er = er,
where the ﬁrst equality follows from the fact that er is a right identity el-
ement of H, and the second from the fact that eℓis a left identity element
of H.
Exercise 1.14. (a) By Exercise 1.4, (2 · N,+) and (2 · N,·) are semigroups.
It remains to show that there exists an additive identity element in 2 · N.
By the deﬁnition of addition, 0 is this element. Since 1 ̸∈2 · N, there is no
multiplicative identity element, so that (2 · N,·) is only a semigroup.
(b) We leave it to the reader to ﬁnd other examples of semigroups that are
not monoids.

254
Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 2.3. (a) Suppose that g′ and g′′ are two inverse elements to an ele-
ment g ∈G. Then
g′ = g′ ◦e = g′ ◦(g ◦g′′) = (g′ ◦g) ◦g′′ = e ◦g′′ = g′′ ,
where the second equality follows from the fact that g′′ is in particular a
right inverse to g, and the fourth equality follows from the fact that g′ is in
particular a left inverse to g.
(b) Let g′
ℓbe a left inverse and g′
r a right inverse to an element g ∈G. Then it
follows that
g′
ℓ= g′
ℓ◦e = g′
ℓ◦(g ◦g′
r) = (g′
ℓ◦g) ◦g′
r = e ◦g′
r = g′
r,
analogously to part (a).
Exercise 2.6. (a) Let g−1 ∈G be the inverse element to g ∈G. Then
g ◦g−1 = e = g−1 ◦g.
Thus g is the inverse element to g−1, that is, (g−1)−1 = g.
(b) Let g−1 ∈G be the inverse element to g ∈G and h−1 ∈G the inverse
element to h ∈G. Then
(h−1 ◦g−1) ◦(g ◦h) = h−1 ◦(g−1 ◦g) ◦h = h−1 ◦e ◦h = h−1 ◦h = e,
(g ◦h) ◦(h−1 ◦g−1) = g ◦(h ◦h−1) ◦g−1 = g ◦e ◦g−1 = g ◦g−1 = e.
Thus h−1 ◦g−1 is the inverse element to g ◦h, that is, (g ◦h)−1 = h−1 ◦g−1.
The calculational rules (c) and (d) follow directly from the deﬁnition.
Exercise 2.9. We compare only the groups that have the same numbers of el-
ements. The Cayley tables of the groups (R4, ⊕), (R5 \ {0}, ⊙), and (D4, ◦)
have, reading from left to right, the following form:
⊕0 1 2 3
0 0 1 2 3
1 1 2 3 0
2 2 3 0 1
3 3 0 1 2
⊙1 2 3 4
1 1 2 3 4
2 2 4 1 3
3 3 1 4 2
4 4 3 2 1
◦d0 d1 s0 s1
d0 d0 d1 s0 s1
d1 d1 d0 s1 s0
s0 s0 s1 d0 d1
s1 s1 s0 d1 d0
One may conclude from the Cayley tables that all three groups under con-
sideration are abelian. We now determine the smallest nonzero natural num-
ber n such that gn = e for g ̸= e. In the group (R4, ⊕), we have e = 0 and
12 = 2, 13 = 3, 14 = 0;
22 = 0;
32 = 2, 33 = 1, 34 = 0.
In the group (R5 \ {0}, ⊙), we have e = 1 and

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter II
255
22 = 4, 23 = 3, 24 = 1;
32 = 4, 33 = 2, 34 = 1;
42 = 1.
Thus in each group there are two elements with n = 4 and one element with
n = 2. In the group (D4, ◦), however, d2
1 = s2
0 = s2
1 = e with e = d0, that is,
there is no element with n = 4.
The Cayley tables for (R6, ⊕) and (D6, ◦), reading from left to right, have
the following form:
⊕0 1 2 3 4 5
0 0 1 2 3 4 5
1 1 2 3 4 5 0
2 2 3 4 5 0 1
3 3 4 5 0 1 2
4 4 5 0 1 2 3
5 5 0 1 2 3 4
◦d0 d1 d2 s0 s1 s2
d0 d0 d1 d2 s0 s1 s2
d1 d1 d2 d0 s2 s0 s1
d2 d2 d0 d1 s1 s2 s0
s0 s0 s1 s2 d0 d1 d2
s1 s1 s2 s0 d2 d0 d1
s2 s2 s0 s1 d1 d2 d0
From these tables, one can see that the group (R6, ⊕) is abelian. The group
(D6, ◦) is nonabelian, since s0 ◦s1 = d2 ̸= d1 = s1 ◦s0. We again determine
the smallest nonzero natural number n such that gn = e for g ̸= e. In (R6, ⊕),
we have e = 0 and
12 = 2, 13 = 3, 14 = 4, 15 = 5, 16 = 0;
22 = 4, 23 = 0;
32 = 0;
42 = 2, 43 = 0;
52 = 4, 53 = 3, 54 = 2, 55 = 1, 56 = 0.
There exist, therefore, in (R6, ⊕) two elements with n = 6, two elements
with n = 3, and one element with n = 2. In (D6, ◦), we have e = d0 and
d2
1 = d2, d3
1 = d0;
d2
2 = d1, d3
2 = d0;
s2
0 = d0, s2
1 = d0, s2
2 = d0.
There exist, therefore, in (D6, ◦) no element with n = 6, two elements with
n = 3, and three elements with n = 2.
Exercise 2.10. (a) One shows using the Cayley table
⊙1 2
1 1 2
2 2 1
for (R3 \ {0}, ⊙) and the Cayley table from Exercise 2.9 for (R5 \ {0}, ⊙)
that (R3 \ {0}, ⊙) and (R5 \ {0}, ⊙) are groups.
(b) We leave to the reader the task of verifying the assertions of Exam-
ple 2.8 (iii) regarding the dihedral group (D2n, ◦).
(c) Let n ≥3. We consider the elements
π1 =
 1 2 3 ··· n
2 1 3 ··· n

,
π2 =
 1 2 3 ··· n
3 1 2 ··· n


256
Solutions to Exercises
of Sn, where for n > 3, each of the elements 4,...,n is mapped to itself. Then
π1 ◦π2 =
 1 2 3 ··· n
3 2 1 ··· n

̸=
 1 2 3 ··· n
1 3 2 ··· n

= π2 ◦π1,
where for n > 3, each of the elements 4,...,n is mapped to itself. This proves
that (Sn, ◦) for n ≥3 is nonabelian.
Exercise 2.13. This is proved by induction on n.
Exercise 2.19. We have S3 = {π1, π2, π3, π4, π5, π6} with
π1 =
 1 2 3
1 2 3

,
π2 =
 1 2 3
2 3 1

,
π3 =
 1 2 3
3 1 2

,
π4 =
 1 2 3
1 3 2

,
π5 =
 1 2 3
3 2 1

,
π6 =
 1 2 3
2 1 3

.
We calculate ord(π1) = 1, ord(π2) = ord(π3) = 3, and ord(π4) = ord(π5) =
ord(π6) = 2.
Exercise 2.23. Since dk
1 = dk (k = 0,...,n −1) and dn
1 = d0, we have ⟨d1⟩=
{d0,..., dn−1}. Using the subgroup criterion, one can show that the nonempty
subset ⟨g⟩= {..., (g−1)2, g−1, g0 = e, g1 = g, g2,...} ⊆G is a subgroup of G
for every group G. In particular, ⟨d1⟩= {d0,..., dn−1} is a subgroup of D2n.
Exercise 2.26. We have S3 = {π1, π2, π3, π4, π5, π6} with πj (j = 1,...,n) as
in Exercise 2.19. We have the cyclic subgroups
⟨π1⟩= {π1}, ⟨π2⟩= {π1,π2,π3} = ⟨π3⟩,
⟨π4⟩= {π1,π4}, ⟨π5⟩= {π1,π5}, ⟨π6⟩= {π1,π6},
and the subgroup S3 itself, which is not cyclic. One can see that S3 has no
other subgroups.
Exercise 3.3. We have S3 = {π1, π2, π3, π4, π5, π6} with πj (j = 1,...,n) as
in Exercise 2.19 and D6 = {d0, d1, d2, d0 ◦s0, d1 ◦s0, d2 ◦s0}, where s0 is re-
ﬂection in the median of the side joining vertices 1 and 2. By the deﬁnition
of the group homomorphism f : D6 −→S3, we have
f (d0) = π1, f (d1) = π3, f (d2) = π2,
f (d0 ◦s0) = π6, f (d1 ◦s0) = π5, f (d2 ◦s0) = π4,
which proves that f is bijective and therefore in fact a group isomorphism.
Exercise 3.5. Let dj1 ◦sk1
0 and dj2 ◦sk2
0 with j1, j2 ∈{0,..., n −1} and k1, k2 ∈
{0, 1} be two elements of D2n. Since dj ◦s0 = s0 ◦d−1
j
, we have

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter II
257
(dj1 ◦sk1
0 ) ◦(dj2 ◦sk2
0 ) =











dj1 ◦dj2,
if k1 = 0, k2 = 0;
dj1 ◦dj2 ◦s0,
if k1 = 0, k2 = 1;
dj1 ◦d−1
j2 ,
if k1 = 1, k2 = 1;
dj1 ◦d−1
j2 ◦s0,
if k1 = 1,k2 = 0.
It follows that
sgn
  dj1 ◦sk1
0
 ◦
 dj2 ◦sk2
0
 = k1 ⊕k2 = sgn
 dj1 ◦sk1
0
 ⊕sgn
 dj2 ◦sk2
0

.
Therefore, sgn is a group homomorphism, and we have im(sgn) = R2 and
ker(sgn) = {dj | j = 0,..., n −1}.
Exercise 3.7. By Lemma 3.6, we have f injective ⇐⇒ker( f ) = {eG}. It there-
fore sufﬁces to prove, under the assumption |G| < ∞, the equivalence f in-
jective ⇐⇒f surjective. We have
f injective ⇐⇒g ̸= h for g,h ∈G implies f (g) ̸= f (h)
⇐⇒
|G|<∞| f (G)| = |G|
⇐⇒for every g ∈G there exists h ∈G with f (h) = g
⇐⇒f surjective.
This proves the assertion.
Exercise 3.8. If g ∈G and ord(g) = n, then e = f (e) = f (gn) = f (g)n, which
implies ord
 f (g)
 ≤n = ord(g).
Exercise 3.9. Suppose that f : D24 −→S4 is a group isomorphism. Then for
each g ∈D24, we must have the equality
ord(g) = ord( f (g)).
Since ord(d2) = 12, we must have that f (d2) ∈S4 is an element of order
12. We ﬁrst determine the orders of the elements of S4. We obtain the nine
elements of order 2,
 1 2 3 4
2 1 3 4

,
 1 2 3 4
3 2 1 4

,
 1 2 3 4
4 2 3 1

,
 1 2 3 4
1 3 2 4

,
 1 2 3 4
1 4 3 2

,
 1 2 3 4
1 2 4 3

,
 1 2 3 4
2 1 4 3

,
 1 2 3 4
3 4 1 2

,
 1 2 3 4
4 3 2 1

,
the eight elements of order 3,

258
Solutions to Exercises
 1 2 3 4
2 3 1 4

,
 1 2 3 4
3 1 2 4

,
 1 2 3 4
2 4 3 1

,
 1 2 3 4
4 1 3 2

,
 1 2 3 4
3 2 4 1

,
 1 2 3 4
4 2 1 3

,
 1 2 3 4
1 3 4 2

,
 1 2 3 4
1 4 2 3

,
and the six elements of order 4,
 1 2 3 4
2 3 4 1

,
 1 2 3 4
2 4 1 3

,
 1 2 3 4
3 4 2 1

,
 1 2 3 4
3 1 4 2

,
 1 2 3 4
4 3 1 2

,
 1 2 3 4
4 1 2 3

.
The group S4 has, therefore, only elements of orders 1, 2, 3, and 4. There can
therefore be no group isomorphism between D24 and S4.
Exercise 3.11. (a) If f : (R4, ⊕) −→(R4, ⊕) is a group homomorphism, then
f (0) = 0. Since R4 = ⟨1⟩, it follows that
f (2) = f (1 ⊕1) = f (1) ⊕f (1), f (3) = f (1 ⊕1 ⊕1) = f (1) ⊕f (1) ⊕f (1),
that is, f is uniquely determined by specifying the image of f (1). Therefore,
there are precisely four distinct group homomorphisms, f1, f2, f3, f4, given
by the assignments
f1(0) = 0, f1(1) = 0, f1(2) = 0, f1(3) = 0,
f2(0) = 0, f2(1) = 1, f2(2) = 2, f2(3) = 3,
f3(0) = 0, f3(1) = 2, f3(2) = 0, f3(3) = 2,
f4(0) = 0, f4(1) = 3, f4(2) = 2, f4(3) = 1,
whence follows ker( f1) = R4, ker( f2) = {0}, ker( f3) = {0,2}, ker( f4) = {0},
im( f1) = {0}, im( f2) = R4, im( f3) = {0,2}, im( f4) = R4. This shows in par-
ticular that f2 and f4 are bijective.
(b) Since Rp = ⟨1⟩, every group homomorphism g : (Rp, ⊕) −→(Rn, ⊕)
is uniquely determined by specifying the image g(1). One now shows that
only g(1) = 0 is possible, since n and p are relatively prime. There is, there-
fore, only one group homomorphism g, which is given by the assignment
g(m) = 0 (m ∈Rp). We have ker(g) = Rp and im(g) = {0}.
Exercise 4.3. (a) The veriﬁcation of the statement of Example 4.2 is left to the
reader.
(b) The order relation ≤is not an equivalence relation on N, since ≤is not
symmetric.
(c) The relation ∼is not an equivalence relation on N, since ∼is not transi-
tive.

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter II
259
Exercise 4.6. Let M be a set with an element m ∈M. The equivalence class
of m with respect to equality “=” is Mm = {m′ ∈M | m′ = m}, that is, the
set of all elements of M that are equal to m. We leave it to the reader to ﬁnd
additional equivalence relations and determine the associated equivalence
classes.
Exercise 4.11. We leave the solution of this exercise to the reader.
Exercise 4.12. Let U = ⟨π4⟩= {π1, π4}. The left coset of an element π ∈
S3 with respect to U is given by π ◦U = {π ◦π1, π ◦π4}. Therefore, the
following are all left cosets of S3 with respect to U:
π1 ◦U = U = π4 ◦U,
π2 ◦U = {π2, π6} = π6 ◦U,
π3 ◦U = {π3, π5} = π5 ◦U.
Exercise 4.15. (a) If g ∈G, then ord(g) = |U| for U = ⟨g⟩≤G, which implies
by Lagrange’s theorem that ord(g) | |G|.
(b) Suppose |G| = p for a prime number p. If g ∈G, g ̸= e, then ord(g) > 1,
and therefore, by part (a), we must have the equality ord(g) = p, which im-
plies G = ⟨g⟩.
(c) Let |G| = 4, and write G = {e, a, b, c}. If G has an element g ∈G with
ord(g) = 4, then G = ⟨g⟩, that is, G is cyclic, and therefore isomorphic to the
group (R4, ⊕). If G has no element of order 4, then every element g ∈G,
g ̸= e, has order 2, that is, a2 = b2 = c2 = e. Since G is a group, it follows
that a ◦b = c = b ◦a, a ◦c = b = c ◦a, and b ◦c = a = c ◦b. Therefore, G is
isomorphic to the group (D4, ◦). Therefore, up to group isomorphism, there
are precisely two groups of order 4, given by the following Cayley tables:
◦e a b c
e e a b c
a a b c e
b b c e a
c c e a b
◦e a b c
e e a b c
a a e c b
b b c e a
c c b a e
Both groups are abelian.
One shows further that up to group isomorphism, the only groups of order
6 are (R6, ⊕) and (D6, ◦). Thus every abelian group of order 6 is isomorphic
to (R6, ⊕), and every nonabelian group of order 6 is isomorphic to (D6, ◦).
Exercise 4.19. Exercises 4.11 and 4.12 can be solved analogously for right
cosets.
Exercise 4.21. Let U = ⟨π4⟩= {π1, π4}. Then U ◦π2 = {π2, π5} ̸= {π2, π6} =
π2 ◦U, which implies that U is not a normal subgroup of S3. Analogously,
one can show that ⟨π5⟩and ⟨π6⟩are not normal subgroups of S3.

260
Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 4.24. (a) For every element h ∈H, one has h ◦H = H = H ◦h. Now
let g ∈G \ H. Then g ◦H ̸= H and H ◦g ̸= H. Because of [G : H] = 2, we
obtain the disjoint decomposition H ˙∪(g ◦H) = G = H ˙∪(H ◦g) of G. It
then follows that g ◦H = H ◦g must hold. Altogether, one has the equality
g ◦H = H ◦g for all g ∈G. This proves that H is a normal subgroup of G.
(b) The mapping f : G −→R2, given by
f (g) =
(
0,
if g ∈H;
1,
if g /∈H,
is a surjective group homomorphism.
Exercise 4.26. Since ker( f ) is a subgroup, indeed a normal subgroup, of S3,
it must be the case that ker( f ) is one of the groups {π1}, A3, S3. If ker( f ) =
{π1}, then f is injective, which is impossible because of 6 = |S3| > |R3| = 3.
If ker( f ) = {A3}, then ord(π4) < ord( f (π4)), which is impossible because
of Exercise 3.8. The only possibility is then ker( f ) = S3, which implies that
f (π) = 0 for all π ∈S3.
Exercise 5.10. Let f : G −→R2 be the surjective group homomorphism of
Exercise 4.24. Then ker( f ) = H, and by Corollary 5.8, we have an isomor-
phism G/H ∼= R2. This isomorphism can also be read off from the Cayley
table
•
H
g ◦H
H
H
g ◦H
g ◦H g ◦H
H
for the group G/H = {H,g ◦H}, where g ∈G \ H is arbitrary, and H =
eG ◦H. We note here that (g ◦H) • (g ◦H) = H must hold, since otherwise,
we would have from (g ◦H) • (g ◦H) = (g ◦g) ◦H = g ◦H the equalities
g ◦g ◦h1 = g ◦h2 ⇐⇒g ◦h1 = h2 ⇐⇒g = h2 ◦h−1
1
for certain h1, h2 ∈H, and
thus the contradiction g ∈H.
Exercise 5.11. It is clear that from H ⊴G, K ⊴G, and K ⊆H, one has K ⊴H.
That H/K is a normal subgroup of G/K comes immediately from the proof
of isomorphism. To this end, we deﬁne the mapping f : G/K −→G/H by
the assignment
g ◦K 7→g ◦H.
Since K ⊆H, it follows that f is well deﬁned. On account of K ⊴G and
H ⊴G, it is clear that f is a homomorphism. Furthermore, we have
ker( f ) = {g ◦K | f (g ◦K) = H} = {g ◦K | g ◦H = H}
= {g ◦K | g ∈H} = H/K.

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter III
261
This proves in particular that H/K ⊴G/K. Since f is surjective, it follows
from the homomorphism theorem that
(G/K)/(H/K) = (G/K)/ker( f ) ∼= G/K,
as claimed.
Exercise 6.4. (a) Let A = {a1, a2, ...} be a set with a1 ̸= a2. Then map(A) =
{id, f, g, ...}, whereby the mapping id : A −→A is given by the assignment
aj 7→aj (aj ∈A), the mapping f : A −→A by a1 7→a2, aj 7→aj (aj ∈A \ {a1}),
and the mapping g : A −→A by a2 7→a1, aj 7→aj (aj ∈A \ {a2}). It then
follows that
( f ◦g)(a1) = f (a1) = a2 = ( f ◦id)(a1), ( f ◦g)(a2) = f (a1) = a2 = ( f ◦id)(a2),
which proves f ◦g = f ◦id; however, we have g ̸= id, which proves that in
the semigroup (map(A), ◦), the ﬁrst cancellation law is invalid.
One may show analogously that the second cancellation law is also in-
valid.
(b) We leave it to the reader to ﬁnd further examples of semigroups that are
not regular.
Exercise 6.6. (a) The solution to this exercise is left to the reader.
(b) On (2 · N + 1) × (2 · N + 1) = {(a, b) | a, b ∈2 · N + 1} we deﬁne the
relation
(a, b) ∼(c, d) ⇐⇒a · d = b · c
(a, b, c, d ∈2 · N + 1).
If we write a
b for the equivalence class [a, b] of (a,b) ∈(2· N+ 1) × (2· N+ 1),
then the group G := ((2 · N + 1) × (2 · N + 1))/ ∼can be identiﬁed with the
set of all fractions of the form a
b, where a,b ∈2 · N + 1 and a,b are relatively
prime. We leave the detailed construction from Theorem 6.5 to the reader.
Exercise 7.6. The generalization to Z of the addition and multiplication rules
in Remark 1.19 of Chapter I is left to the reader.
Exercise 7.9. The veriﬁcation of the assertions of this example are left to the
reader.
Solutions to Exercises in Chapter III
Exercise 1.2. The proof of the calculational laws from Lemma 1.1 are left to
the reader.

262
Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 1.5. The proof of Theorem 1.4 is left to the reader.
Exercise 1.9. We give an idea of the proof. We assume that
a = e · p1 ··· pr = e · q1 ···qs
for e ∈{±1} and for prime numbers p1,..., pr, q1,...,qs (r ∈N, s ∈N), not
necessarily distinct. Since now we have p1 | a and therefore p1 | e · q1 ···qs, it
follows with the help of Euclid’s lemma, Lemma 1.7, that p1 | qj for some j =
1,...,s. Since p1 is prime, we must have p1 = qj. Without loss of generality,
we may assume (by renumbering if necessary) that p1 = q1. Application of
the cancellation law implies the equality
p2 ··· pr = q2 ···qs.
(3)
Since p2 divides the left-hand side of (3), p2 must also divide the right-hand
side. As in the ﬁrst step, we conclude that p2 = q2. Proceeding in this way,
we obtain the equalities r = s and pj = qj for j = 1,...,r, which proves the
asserted uniqueness.
Exercise 2.5. We leave it to the reader to prove that the polynomial ring
(R[X],+, ·) is a commutative ring if and only if (R,+, ·) is commutative.
Exercise 2.6. Let A be a nonempty set and (R,+R, ·R) a ring. Then, 0R ∈R,
and therefore, the mapping 0 : A −→R, a 7→0R, is an element of map(A, R).
Hence, the set map(A, R) is not empty. We now show that + on map(A, R)
is associative. To this end, let f, g, h ∈map(A, R). Then for all a ∈A, we have
(( f + g) + h)(a)
=
def of + ( f + g)(a) +R h(a)
=
def of + ( f (a) +R g(a)) +R h(a)
=
+R associative,
since R is a ring
f (a) +R (g(a) +R h(a))
=
def of + f (a) +R (g + h)(a)
=
def of + ( f + (g + h))(a),
which proves that + is associative. The mapping 0 : A −→R is the identity
element with respect to +, since for all f ∈map(A, R), we have the equality
(0 + f )(a)
=
def. of + 0(a) +R f (a)
=
def. of 0 0R +R f (a)
=
0R id. el.
w.r.t. +R
f (a)
and analogously the equality ( f + 0)(a) = f (a) for all a ∈A. The other ring
properties of map(A, R) are proved similarly using the ring properties of R.
Exercise 2.7. The solution of this exercise is left to the reader.

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter III
263
Exercise 2.11. If n > 1 is not prime, then there exist natural numbers a, b ∈
Rn, a > 1, b > 1, with a · b = n. But then we have a ⊙b = 0. Therefore, a and
b are zero divisors of Rn.
Exercise 2.12. We show here only that the lack of zero divisors in (R,+, ·)
implies the lack of zero divisors in (R[X],+, ·). We assume that the ring R[X]
has zero divisors and show that then the ring R must have zero divisors. Let,
then, f (X) = an · Xn + ··· + a1 · X + a0 (an ̸= 0) and g(X) = bm · Xm + ··· +
b1 · X + b0 (bm ̸= 0) be zero divisors in R[X], so that
f (X) · g(X) = (an · bm) · Xn+m + ··· + (a1 · b0 + a0 · b1) · X + a0 · b0 = 0,
where 0 denotes the zero element of R[X], i.e., the zero polynomial. In par-
ticular, we must have an · bm = 0, which proves that R has zero divisors.
Exercise 2.13. The ring (map(A, R),+, ·) from Exercise 2.6 has as its zero
element 0 : A −→R, a 7→0R. If now, for example, we have R = (R6,⊕, ⊙),
then for f : A −→R, a 7→2 (a ∈A) and g : A −→R, a 7→3 (a ∈A), we have
the equality
( f · g)(a)
=
def of · f (a) ⊙g(a)
=
def of f,g 2 ⊙3 = 0 = 0(a),
that is, f and g are zero divisors of (map(A, R),+, ·). Therefore, the ring
(map(A, R),+, ·) also has zero divisors if R has zero divisors. We note that
the ring (map(A, R),+, ·) can possess zero divisors even if R has no zero
divisors.
Exercise 2.19. In the polynomial ring (Z[X],+, ·), the unit element is given
by the unit polynomial 1. Let f (X) = an · Xn + ··· + a1 · X + a0 (an ̸= 0) be a
unit in Z[X]. Then there exists a polynomial g(X) = bm · Xm + ··· + b1 · X +
b0 (bm ̸= 0) in Z[X] such that
f (X) · g(X) = (an · bm) · Xn+m + ··· + (a1 · b0 + a0 · b1) · X + a0 · b0 = 1.
If n > 0, then we must have in particular that an · bm = 0, in contradiction
to the fact that Z has no zero divisors. Therefore, f and hence g must be
of the form f (X) = a0 and g(X) = b0. The equality a0 · b0 = 1 shows that f
and g are units if and only if a0 ∈{1,−1} and a0 = b0. The polynomial ring
(Z[X],+, ·) has therefore only the units {1,−1}.
Exercise 2.20. That the units of a ring (R,+, ·) with unit element 1 form a
group under multiplication with multiplicative identity element 1 follows
directly from how units are deﬁned.
Exercise 2.21. The group of units of R5 is (R5 \ {0}, ⊙) and is therefore
isomorphic to the group (R4,⊕). The group of units of R8 is ({1, 3, 5, 7}, ⊙).

264
Solutions to Exercises
We have 3 ⊙3 = 1, 5 ⊙5 = 1, 7 ⊙7 = 1, which shows that this group is
isomorphic to (D4,◦). The group of units of R10 is ({1, 3, 7, 9}, ⊙). We have
3 ⊙7 = 1, 9 ⊙9 = 1, which shows that this group is isomorphic to (R4,⊕)
and therefore to (R5 \ {0}, ⊙). The group of units of R12 is ({1, 5, 7, 11}, ⊙).
We have 5 ⊙5 = 1, 7 ⊙7 = 1, 11 ⊙11 = 1, which shows that this group is
isomorphic to (D4,◦) and therefore to ({1, 3, 5, 7}, ⊙).
Exercise 2.25. For n ∈N, we have that (nZ,+, ·) is a subring of (Z,+, ·).
Exercise 2.26. We leave it to the reader to show that (R,+, ·) is a subring of
the polynomial ring (R[X],+, ·).
Exercise 3.2. (a) The mapping f1 is a ring homomorphism.
(b) The mapping f2 is not a ring homomorphism, since for g1(X) = X and
g2(X) = 1, we have f2(g1(X) · g2(X)) = f2(1 · X) = 1 ̸= 0 = 1 · 0 = f2(X) ·
f2(1) = f2(g1(X)) · f2(g2(X)).
(c) The mapping f3 is a ring homomorphism if and only if r = 0.
(d) The mapping f4 is a ring homomorphism.
(e) The mapping f5 is a ring homomorphism.
Exercise 3.5. The proof of Lemma 3.4 is left to the reader.
Exercise 3.6. We obtain
ker( f1) =
n
∑
j∈N
aj · Xj  aj ∈R, a0 = 0
o
,
im( f1) = R.
The mapping f2 is not a ring homomorphism. Furthermore, we have
ker( f3) = map(A, R),
im( f3) = {0} (if r = 0);
ker( f4) = {g ∈map(A, R) | g(a) = 0},
im( f4) = {g(a) | g ∈map(A, R)};
ker( f5) = { f (X) ∈R[X] | f (r) = 0},
im( f5) = { f (r) | f (X) ∈R[X]} = R,
for the ring homomorphisms under consideration.
Exercise 3.13. To prove the equality a = R, we must show that a ⊇R. To this
end, let r ∈R. Since 1 ∈a and a is an ideal, it follows that r · 1 = r ∈a. This
proves that R ⊆a.
Exercise 3.14. No, since for every subring U of (Z,+, ·), we have in particu-
lar that (U,+) is a subgroup of (Z,+). Therefore, we must have U = nZ for
some n ∈N, which proves that (U,+) is an ideal of Z.
Exercise 3.15. For example, Z is a subring of the polynomial ring (Z[X],+, ·)
that is not an ideal of Z[X].

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter III
265
Exercise 3.16. The principal ideals of Z[X] are of the form {h · f | f ∈Z[X]}
for some h ∈Z[X]. We leave it to the reader to show that the ideal
a := {2 · f + X · g | f, g ∈Z[X]}
is not a principal ideal of (Z[X],+, ·).
Exercise 3.18. We have ker( f1) = (X) and ker( f5) = (X −r). If the ring R
possesses a unit element, then ker( f3) = (1).
Exercise 3.27. Let a ∈Z. Then the mapping f : Z[X] −→Z given by the as-
signment f (X) 7→f (a) is a surjective ring homomorphism with ker( f ) =
(X −a) by Exercises 3.2, 3.6, and 3.18. Invoking Corollary 3.25, we see that
Z[X]/(X −a) ∼= Z is a ring isomorphism, as desired.
Exercise 3.28. An analogy to the group isomorphism from Exercise 5.11 of
Chapter II can also be formulated and proved for rings by replacing “sub-
group” and “normal subgroup” throughout with “ideal” and observing that
the group homomorphisms that arise are also ring homomorphisms. We
leave this task to the reader.
Exercise 4.4. This is impossible, since one can show that every skew ﬁeld
with ﬁnitely many elements is in fact a ﬁeld.
Exercise 5.3. The proofs of associativity of ⊕, commutativity of ⊙, and the
second distributive law are left to the reader.
Exercise 5.5. We consider the ring homomorphism f : K −→Quot(K) given
by a 7→[a, 1]. The ring homomorphism f is well deﬁned, since K is a ﬁeld,
and therefore, we have 1 ∈K. Moreover, f is injective, which can be shown
as follows: Assume that [a, 1] = [b, 1] for a, b ∈K. Then (a, 1) ∼(b, 1), which
implies a · 1 = 1 · b and hence a = b. We now show that f is also surjective.
To this end, let [a, b] ∈Quot(K) with a, b ∈K, b ̸= 0, be an arbitrary element.
Since K is a ﬁeld, there exists an inverse b−1 ∈K to b. Therefore, we have
a · b−1 ∈K and
f (a · b−1) = [a · b−1, 1] = [a, b],
where the last equality follows from (a · b−1, 1) ∼(a, b) ⇐⇒a · b−1 · b =
1 · a ⇐⇒a = a. Therefore, f is a ring isomorphism, and we have the ring
isomorphism K ∼= Quot(K).
Exercise 6.3. Let r = s/t for s ∈Z and t ∈N \ {0}. Then r corresponds to the
element [s, t] ∈Z × (Z \ {0}). If now d = (s,t) > 0 is the greatest common
divisor of s and t, then we may write s = d · a and t = d · b with a ∈Z,
b ∈N \ {0}, and a, b relatively prime. From the equality s · b = (d · a) · b =
(d · b) · a = t · a we infer the equality [s, t] = [a, b]. This proves the existence

266
Solutions to Exercises
of the claimed representative. To prove the uniqueness of the representative,
we assume that [c, d] with c ∈Z, d ∈N \ {0}, and c, d relatively prime is also
an element such that [s, t] = [c, d]. Then in particular, we have [a, b] = [c, d],
and therefore
a · d = b · c.
If p is a prime number such that p | a, then we must have p | b · c and conse-
quently, since p is prime, p | b or p | c. But since a and b are relatively prime,
we must have p | c. Conversely, one can show that for an arbitrary prime p
with p | c, we must also have p | a. From this it follows that a | c and also c | a,
which, since a and c have the same sign, proves the equality a = c. We con-
clude by an analogous argument the equality b = d, completing the proof of
uniqueness.
Exercise 6.4. Since one usually learns this proof in a ﬁrst course in real anal-
ysis, we leave this exercise to the reader.
Exercise 6.7. The generalizations of the addition and multiplication rules
from Remark 1.19 of Chapter I are left to the reader.
Exercise 7.4. We obtain in Z[X] the decompositions 20X = 22 · 5 · X and
10X2 + 4X −6 = 2 · (X + 1) · (5X −3). Therefore, 2 is the greatest common
divisor, and 22 · 5 · X · (X + 1) · (5X −3) = 100X3 + 40X2 −60X the least
common multiple, of the polynomials 20X and 10X2 + 4X −6 in Z[X].
Exercise 7.9. We leave it to the reader to come up with relevant examples.
Exercise 7.15. Part (ii) of the proof of Lemma 7.14 is left to the reader.
Exercise 7.25. For example, the polynomial ring K[X,Y] in two variables
over a ﬁeld K is not a principal ideal domain, since the ideal
a := {X · f + Y · g | f, g ∈K[X,Y]}
is not principal.
Exercise 7.38. (a) We obtain (123456789,555555555) = 9.
(b) We calculate
X4 + 2X3 + 2X2 + 2X + 1 = (X + 1) · (X3 + X2 −X −1) + (2X2 + 4X + 2),
X3 + X2 −X −1 =
1
2X −1
2

· (2X2 + 4X + 2) + 0.
We thereby obtain (X4 + 2X3 + 2X2 + 2X + 1,X3 + X2 −X −1) = 2X2 +
4X + 2.

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter IV
267
Solutions to Exercises in Chapter IV
Exercise 1.6. (a) We obtain the decimal expansions 1
5 = 0.2, 1
3 = 0.3,
1
16 =
0.0625, 1
11 = 0.09, and 1
7 = 0.142857.
(b) One shows that a reduced fraction a
b (a, b ∈Z; b ̸= 0) has a terminating
decimal expansion if and only if b = 2k · 5l with k, l ∈N.
(c) We consider the fraction 1
m for m ∈N, m ̸= 0, with 2 ∤m and 5 ∤m. One
shows that m −1 is the maximal period length of the decimal expansion
of the fraction 1
m, considering that there can be at most m −1 remainders
on division by m. The fraction 1
7, for example, has a period length that is
maximal.
(d) Without loss of generality, we may assume that the periodic decimal
fraction has the form
0.q−1 ...q−v q−(v+1) ...q−(v+p)
with natural numbers v ≥0, p > 0. Then
a
b =
∑v
j=1 q−j10v−j
10v
+
1
10v ·
∑
p
j=1 q−(v+j)10p−j
10p −1
.
For example, for 0.123, one obtains the fraction
123
103 −1 = 123
999 = 41
333.
Exercise 2.2. (a) Without loss of generality, we may assume that ϵ ∈Q, 0 <
ϵ < 1. For n ∈N, we then have

1
n + 1
 < ϵ ⇐⇒1 −ϵ
ϵ
< n.
If we set N(ϵ) := [(1 −ϵ)/ϵ], where [x] is the greatest integer less than or
equal to x, then for all n ∈N with n > N(ϵ), we have the inequality

1
n + 1
 < ϵ.
This proves that the sequence

1
n+1

n≥0 is a rational null sequence. Using
the inequality
n
2n <
1
n + 1
for n ∈N, n ≥5, one shows analogously that
  n
2n

n≥0 is also a rational null
sequence.

268
Solutions to Exercises
(b) Other examples of rational null sequences are the sequences

1
(n+1)k

n≥0
with k ∈N, k ≥2.
Exercise 2.18. Let α = (an) + n, β = (bn) + n be two real numbers with α <
β, that is, there exist q ∈Q, q > 0, N(q) ∈N with bn −an > q for all n ∈
N with n > N(q). To prove the asserted independence of the choice of the
representing rational Cauchy sequences, we assume that (an) + n = (a′
n) + n
and (bn) + n = (b′
n) + n for rational Cauchy sequences (a′
n) and (b′
n). Then
in particular, we must have (a′
n) = (an) + (cn) = (an + cn) and (b′
n) = (bn) +
(dn) = (bn + dn) for rational null sequences (cn) and (dn). This yields
b′
n −a′
n = (bn −an) + (dn −cn) ≥(bn −an) −|dn −cn|.
(4)
Since, moreover, (dn −cn) is a rational null sequence, there exists for ϵ :=
q/2 ∈Q an eN(ϵ) ∈N such that for all n ∈N with n > eN(ϵ), we have the
inequality |dn −cn| < ϵ. So if we set q′ := q −ϵ = q/2 ∈Q, we have q′ > 0,
and with (4) we obtain the inequality
b′
n −a′
n > q −ϵ = q′
for all n ∈N with n > N(q′) := max(N(q), eN(ϵ)). This proves the claimed
independence of representative.
Exercise 2.22. We leave the proof of Lemma 2.21 to the reader.
Exercise 2.25. Real null sequences whose elements are irrational numbers
include, for example, the sequences

√
2
(n+1)k

n≥0 with k ∈N, k ≥1.
Exercise 2.30. We begin by considering that for a rational number a0 ∈Q,
a0 > 0, we have the following equivalences with an error of δ0:
a0 + δ0 =
√
2 ⇐⇒(a0 + δ0)2 = 2 ⇐⇒2a0δ0 + δ2
0 = 2 −a2
0
⇐⇒δ0 = 2 −a2
0
2a0
−δ2
0
2a0
.
So if we set
a1 := a0 + 2 −a2
0
2a0
= 2 + a2
0
2a0
,
then because a0 > 0, we have the inequality a2
1 > 2, that is, a1 >
√
2. This
implies
 2 −a2
1

/(2a1) < 0, and we therefore have for
a2 := a1 + 2 −a2
1
2a1
= 2 + a2
1
2a1

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter IV
269
both a1 > a2 and a2
2 > 2, that is, a2 >
√
2. We consider now the rational se-
quence (an)n≥0 with a0 ∈Q, a0 > 0, arbitrary and
an+1 := 2 + a2
n
2an
(n ∈N,n ≥1).
(5)
One ﬁrst shows by induction that both an > an+1 for all n ∈N, n ≥1, and
a2
n > 2, that is, an >
√
2, for all n ∈N, n ≥1. Using these inequalities, one
then shows in a second step that (an)n≥0 is a rational Cauchy sequence. This
rational Cauchy sequence has limit α ∈R, α > 0. Because of the recurrence
formula (5), we see that α satisﬁes the equation
α = 2 + α2
2α
⇐⇒α =
√
2,
as desired.
Exercise 3.12. (a) The decimal representation 0.101001000100001 ... is nei-
ther terminating nor periodic. Therefore, this number cannot be rational.
One can ﬁnd analogous examples, such as 0.121331222133331....
(b) Using the rational Cauchy series (an)n≥0 constructed in Exercise 2.30
for calculating
√
2, one obtains
√
2 ≈1.4142135623, accurate to ten decimal
places, by choosing, for example, a0 = 1 and iterating four times.
Exercise 4.2. We consider, for example, the sequence
(an)n≥0 :=
n2 + 2
2n

n≥0
.
We have a0 = 2 and a1 = a2 = 3/2. For n ∈N, n ≥3, one shows the inequality
2(n2 + 2) > (n + 1)2 + 2. Since
2(n2 + 2) > (n + 1)2 + 2 ⇐⇒n2 + 2
2n
> (n + 1)2 + 2
2n+1
⇐⇒an > an+1
for n ∈N, n ≥3, it follows that the sequence (an)n≥0 is monotonically de-
creasing, but not strictly. One shows analogously that the sequences

12
1
n+1

n≥0 ,
n3 + 3
3n

n≥0
are strictly monotonically decreasing and that the sequence
n3 −2
n2 −2

n≥0

270
Solutions to Exercises
is monotonically increasing. The sequence

n
1
n+1

n≥0
is neither monotonically increasing nor monotonically decreasing. How-
ever, the sequence

n
1
n+1

n≥4
is strictly monotonically decreasing.
Exercise 4.6. The subset M ⊆Q consisting of all sequence terms an (n > 0)
in the rational Cauchy sequence (an)n≥0 constructed in Exercise 2.30, which
is bounded below, has greatest lower bound
√
2 /∈Q.
Exercise 4.7. The greatest lower bound of the set { x√x | x ∈Q,x ≥0} is at-
tained when x = 0 and is equal to zero. The least upper bound is
e√e.
Exercise 5.3. The solution of this exercise is left to the reader.
Exercise 6.7. We leave the completion of the details in the sketch of the proof
of Theorem 6.5 to the reader.
Solutions to Exercises in Chapter V
Exercise 1.1. The solution of this exercise is left to the reader.
Exercise 1.8. The completion of the proof of Theorem 1.7 is left to the reader.
Exercise 1.10. Let α = α1 + α2i ∈C, α ̸= 0. If α2 = 0 and α1 > 0, then ±√α1 are
the solutions to the equation x2 = α. If α2 = 0 and α1 < 0, then ±
p
|α1|i are
the solutions to the equation x2 = α. It remains to consider the case α2 ̸= 0.
Let β = β1 + β2i ∈C with β1 ̸= 0. We then have the equivalence
β2 = α ⇐⇒(β2
1 −β2
2) + (2β1β2)i = α1 + α2i ⇐⇒β2
1 −β2
2 = α1, 2β1β2 = α2.
If we substitute the second equation, β2 = α2/(2β1), in the ﬁrst equation,
we obtain the equation 4β4
1 −4α1β2
1 −α2
2 = 0. Setting y := β2
1, we obtain the
quadratic equation 4y2 −4α1y −α2
2 = 0, which has the solutions
y1,2 =
α1 ±
q
α2
1 + α2
2
2
= α1 ± |α|
2
.

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter V
271
Since now β1 ∈R, we need consider only the nonnegative solution y1. With
β1 = ±√y1 and β2 = ±α2/(2√y1), we obtain the solution formula
β = ±
p
α1 + |α|
√
2
±
α2i
q
2
 α1 + |α|
.
Altogether, we obtain for the solutions to the equation x2 = α the following
solution formula:
x1,2 =















±√α1 ,
if α1 > 0, α2 = 0;
±
p
|α1|i,
if α1 < 0, α2 = 0;
±
q
|α|+α1
2
+
q
|α|−α1
2
i

,
if α2 > 0;
±
q
|α|+α1
2
−
q
|α|−α1
2
i

,
if α2 < 0.
From this it follows that the solutions to the equation x2 = i are
x1,2 = ±1 + i
√
2
,
those to the equation x2 = 2 + i are
x1,2 = ±
p√
5 + 2
√
2
+
p√
5 −2
√
2
i

,
and those to the equation x2 = 3 −2i are
x1,2 = ±
p√
13 + 3
√
2
−
p√
13 −3
√
2
i

.
Exercise 1.11. Since by Exercise 1.10 we have the equality ((1 + i)/2)2 = i/2,
we obtain, on completing the square,
x2 + (1 + i) · x + i = 0 ⇐⇒

x + 1 + i
2
2
+ i
2 = 0.
If we now substitute y := x + (1 + i)/2, we obtain the quadratic equation
y2 = −i/2. With the solution formula from Exercise 1.10, we obtain the so-
lution
x1,2 = y1,2 −1 + i
2
= ±1
2 ∓i
2 −1 + i
2
,
that is, x1 = −i and x2 = −1 are the solutions of x2 + (1 + i) · x + i = 0, which
can be easily checked by substitution. One can prove analogously that the
equation x2 + (2 −i) · x −2i = 0 has the solutions x1 = i and x2 = −2.

272
Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 1.14. (a) First, one veriﬁes the equality α · β = α · β for all α, β ∈C.
One then has
|α · β|2 = (α · β) · α · β = α · α · β · β = |α|2 · |β|2,
which proves the assertion.
(b) Let α1, α2, β1, β2 ∈N. The product rule from part (a) with α = α1 + α2i
and β = β1 + β2i yields
(α2
1 + α2
2) · (β2
1 + β2
2) = (α1β1 −α2β2)2 + (α1β2 + α2β1)2.
This implies the assertion.
Exercise 2.3. The statement of Remark 2.2 results immediately from use of
the product rule from Exercise 1.14.
Exercise 2.5. Let A ∈M2(R) be an invertible matrix. One may convince one-
self that the mapping fA : (C, +, ·) −→(M2(R), +, ·) given by
α = α1 + α2i 7→A ·
 α1 α2
−α2 α1

· A−1
is an injective ring homomorphism. In particular, f induces an isomorphism
C ∼= im( f ), that is, C is isomorphic to the subring im( f ) of M2(R).
Exercise 2.8. The solution of this exercise is left to the reader.
Exercise 2.12. We ﬁrst observe that for two complex numbers α, β ∈
C \ {0} with polar coordinate representations α = |α| · (cos(ϕ) + isin(ϕ))
and β = |β| · (cos(ψ) + isin(ψ)), one has the following multiplication for-
mula:
α · β = |α||β| ·
 cos(ϕ)cos(ψ) −sin(ϕ)sin(ψ)
+ i
 sin(ϕ)cos(ψ) + cos(ϕ)sin(ψ)

= |α||β| ·
 cos(ϕ + ψ) + isin(ϕ + ψ)

,
where for the second equality we have invoked the addition theorems for
sine and cosine. From this follows for m ∈N the equality
αm = |α|m ·
 cos(mϕ) + isin(mϕ)

.
Likewise, for n ∈N with n ̸= 0, we obtain the equality
α
1
n = |α|
1
n ·

cos
 ϕ
n

+ isin
 ϕ
n

.
This completes the proof of the general formula.

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter VI
273
Exercise 4.4. Let p be a prime number. Then f (X) = X2 −p is a quadratic
polynomial with integer coefﬁcients, and we have f (√p) = 0. We now as-
sume that there exists a linear polynomial g(X) = aX + b (a, b ∈Z, a ̸= 0)
with g(√p) = 0. But then we must have √p = −b/a ∈Q, a contradiction.
We have therefore shown that √p is algebraic of degree 2.
Exercise 4.12. We leave it to the reader to ﬁnd additional transcendental
numbers following the pattern of the Liouville number.
Exercise 5.8. The calculation of better approximations to e is left to the
reader.
Solutions to Exercises in Chapter VI
Exercise 1.6. For example, the quadratic polynomial X2 + 1 ∈H[X] has zeros
±i,±j,±k and every purely imaginary quaternion α2i + α3j + α4k ∈Im(H),
that satisﬁes the condition α2
2 + α2
3 + α2
4 = 1.
Exercise 1.7. It is clear that R ⊆Z(H). We therefore have to show that
Z(H) ⊆R. To this end, let α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k ∈Z(H). For each β =
β1 + β2i + β3j + β4k ∈H, we then have α · β = β · α. Since
α · β = (α1β1 −α2β2 −α3β3 −α4β4) + (α1β2 + α2β1 + α3β4 −α4β3)i
+ (α1β3 −α2β4 + α3β1 + α4β2)j + (α1β4 + α2β3 −α3β2 + α4β1)k
and
β · α = (β1α1 −β2α2 −β3α3 −β4α4) + (β1α2 + β2α1 + β3α4 −β4α3)i
+ (β1α3 −β2α4 + β3α1 + β4α2)j + (β1α4 + β2α3 −β3α2 + β4α1)k,
however, we have
α · β = β · α ⇐⇒2(α3β4 −α4β3)i + 2(−α2β4 + α4β2)j + 2(α2β3 −α3β2)k = 0
⇐⇒α3β4 = α4β3 ∧α4β2 = α2β4 ∧α2β3 = α3β2.
If α2 ̸= 0, then from the third equality, it follows that β3 = (α3α−1
2 ) · β2 for
every β ∈H. This contradiction implies that we must have α2 = 0. Similarly,
one shows that we must also have α3 = 0 and α4 = 0. Altogether, therefore,
we have that α = α1 ∈R. This proves the inclusion Z(H) ⊆R.
Exercise 1.14. (a) Let α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k. We then calculate

274
Solutions to Exercises
α2 = (α2
1 −α2
2 −α2
3 −α2
4) + 2α1α2i + 2α1α3j + 2α1α4k
= −(α2
1 + α2
2 + α2
3 + α2
4) + 2α1α,
which yields the desired result.
(b) This can be established by a direct calculation.
Exercise 1.15. Let α = Im(α) · i with Im(α) = (α2,α3,α4) and β = Im(β) · i
with Im(β) = (β2,β3,β4). We calculate
α · β = (α2i + α3j + α4k) · (β2i + β3j + β4k)
= (−α2β2 −α3β3 −α4β4) + (α3β4 −α4β3)i
+ (−α2β4 + α4β2)j + (α2β3 −α3β2)k
= −

Im(α)t,Im(β)t +
 Im(α)t × Im(β)t · i,
which proves the assertion.
Exercise 1.18. Let α, β ∈H. We calculate
2 · ⟨α,β⟩= 2 · Re(α · β) = α · β + α · β = α · β + β · α.
Multiplication of this equality on the right by β yields
2 · ⟨α,β⟩· β = α · β · β + β · α · β,
which on account of β · β = ⟨β,β⟩∈R proves the result.
Exercise 1.19. (a) The equality α · β = β · α can be veriﬁed by a direct calcu-
lation.
(b) Using part (a), one obtains
|α · β|2 = (α · β) · α · β = α · (β · β) · α = |β|2 · (α · α) = |β|2 · |α|2 = |α|2 · |β|2,
which proves the assertion.
(c) Let α1, α2, α3, α4, β1, β2, β3, β4 ∈N. Using the product rule from part (a),
we obtain
(α2
1 + α2
2 + α2
3 + α2
4) · (β2
1 + β2
2 + β2
3 + β2
4)
= (α1β1 −α2β2 −α3β3 −α4β4)2 + (α1β2 + α2β1 + α3β4 −α4β3)2
+ (α1β3 + α3β1 + α4β2 −α2β4)2 + (α1β4 + α4β1 + α2β3 −α3β2)2.
This implies the assertion.
Exercise 1.21. The completion of the proof of Theorem 1.20 is left to the
reader.

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter VI
275
Exercise 1.25. Veriﬁcation of the assertions of this problem is left to the
reader.
Exercise 1.27. The solution to this problem is left to the reader.
Exercise 2.3. The statement of Remark 2.2 is an immediate result of the prod-
uct rule from Exercise 1.19.
Exercise 2.5. Let A ∈M2(C) be an arbitrary invertible matrix. One may con-
vince oneself that the mapping f : (H, +, ·) −→(M2(C), +, ·) given by
α = α1 + α2i + α3j + α4k 7→A ·
 α1 + α2i α3 + α4i
−α3 + α4i α1 −α2i

· A−1
is an injective ring homomorphism. In particular, f induces an isomorphism
H ∼= im( f ), that is, H is isomorphic to the subring im( f ) of M2(C).
Exercise 2.6. We show that f is an R-linear mapping. Let α = α1 + α2i +
α3j + α4k ∈H and β = β1 + β2i + β3j + β4k ∈H. For arbitrary µ,ν ∈R, one
has
f (µα + νβ) = f ((µα1 + νβ1) + (µα2 + νβ2)i + (µα3 + νβ3)j + (µα4 + νβ4)k)
=
 (µα1 + νβ1) + (µα2 + νβ2)i (µα3 + νβ3) + (µα4 + νβ4)i
−(µα3 + νβ3) + (µα4 + νβ4)i (µα1 + νβ1) −(µα2 + νβ2)i

= µ
 α1 + α2i α3 + α4i
−α3 + α4i α1 −α2i

+ ν
 β1 + β2i β3 + β4i
−β3 + β4i β1 −β2i

= µ f (α) + ν f (β),
that is, f is R-linear. The veriﬁcation of the remaining assertions are left to
the reader.
Exercise 2.9. The solution to this problem is left to the reader.
Exercise 3.4. The solution to this problem is left to the reader.
Exercise 3.6. We ﬁrst prove that every R-linear mapping v 7→A · v (v ∈R3)
with A ∈SO3(R) is an orientation-preserving rotation of R3 about an axis
passing through the origin. To this end, we begin by noting that for A ∈
SO3(R), on account of
det(A −E) = 1 · det(A −E) = det(At) · det(A −E)
= det(At · (A −E)) = det(E −At) = det(E −A)t
= det(E −A) = (−1) · det(A −E),

276
Solutions to Exercises
we have the equality det(A −E) = 0, which proves that 1 is an eigenvalue
of A. Now let a1 denote a normalized (to have length 1) eigenvector of A
associated with the eigenvalue 1. We shall see that the mapping v 7→A · v
(v ∈R3) describes a rotation about an axis passing through the origin that
is determined by a1. For this, we extend a1 to an orthonormal basis of R3
by choosing an additional vector a2 ∈R3, normed to have length 1, that is
perpendicular to a1, and then setting a3 := a1 × a2. If now S ∈M2(R) denotes
a matrix with S · (1,0,0)t = a1, S · (0,1,0)t = a2, and S · (0,0,1)t = a3, then we
must have S ∈SO3(R). We further obtain
S−1 · A · S · (1,0,0)t = S−1 · A · a1 = S−1 · a1 = (1,0,0)t,
which implies the equality
S−1 · A · S =


1 0 0
0 α β
0 γ δ


for certain α, β, γ, δ ∈R. But since because of A,S ∈SO3(R), we have also
the inclusion S−1 · A · S ∈SO3(R) and thereby
α β
γ δ

∈SO2(R),
it follows that there exists a uniquely determined ϕ ∈[0,2π) with
S−1 · A · S =


1
0
0
0 cos(ϕ) −sin(ϕ)
0 sin(ϕ) cos(ϕ)

=: Dϕ.
The mapping v 7→Dϕ · v (v ∈R3) is an orientation-preserving rotation in the
x2,x3-plane through the angle ϕ about the x1-axis (counterclockwise if a1
points toward the observer). Altogether, we have shown that the mapping
v 7→A · v (v ∈R3) is an orientation-preserving rotation in the a2,a3-plane
through the angle ϕ about the a1-axis (counterclockwise if a1 points toward
the observer).
We now describe, conversely, an arbitrary orientation-preserving rotation
of R3 through the angle ϕ ∈[0,2π) about an axis passing through the origin
that is determined by the vector (normed to have length 1) a1 := (ν1,ν2,ν3)t ∈
R3. To this end, we ﬁrst consider the matrices
D1 :=




ν1
√
ν2
1+ν2
3
0
ν3
√
ν2
1+ν2
3
0
1
0
−
ν3
√
ν2
1+ν2
3
0
ν1
√
ν2
1+ν2
3



, D2 :=




q
ν2
1 + ν2
3
ν2
0
−ν2
q
ν2
1 + ν2
3 0
0
0
1



∈SO3(R).

Solutions to Exercises in Chapter VI
277
If in the ﬁrst step we apply D1 to a1, we rotate a1 about the x2-axis in such a
way that D1 · a1 lies in the x1,x2-plane. If in the second step we apply D2 to
D1 · a1, then we rotate D1 · a1 about the x3-axis, so that ﬁnally, D2 · D1 · a1 is
parallel to the x1-axis. Altogether, the orientation-preserving rotation under
discussion is given by the mapping v 7→A · v (v ∈R3) with A := D−1
1
· D−1
2
·
Dϕ · D2 · D1. Multiplying out yields
A =


ν2
1µ + cos(ϕ)
ν1ν2µ −ν3 sin(ϕ) ν1ν3µ + ν2 sin(ϕ)
ν1ν2µ + ν3 sin(ϕ)
ν2
2µ + cos(ϕ)
ν2ν3µ −ν1 sin(ϕ)
ν1ν3µ −ν2 sin(ϕ) ν2ν3µ + ν1 sin(ϕ)
ν2
3µ + cos(ϕ)

,
where we have set µ := 1 −cos(ϕ); this can now be easily decomposed as
A = E + sin(ϕ) · N + (1 −cos(ϕ)) · N2
with
N :=


0
−ν3 ν2
ν3
0
−ν1
−ν2 ν1
0

,
as asserted.

Selected Literature
The following list of books on (elementary) number theory and algebra can
serve to ﬁll in some of the gaps in this book’s presentation. Some of these
books will take the reader much deeper into various topics. The literature
on the concept of number and the representation of numbers is of cultural-
historical signiﬁcance, while the works of a historical nature provide insight
into the historical development of algebra and number theory. Finally, we
offer the interested reader two books on approaches to the teaching of alge-
bra and number theory.
Selected literature for the appendices is listed at the end of the respective
appendix.
Literature on Number Theory
[1]
D. Burton: Elementary number theory. McGraw-Hill Education, 7th edi-
tion, 2010.
[2]
W. A. Coppel: Number theory. An introduction to mathematics. Springer,
Berlin Heidelberg New York, 2nd edition, 2009.
[3]
G. H. Hardy, E. M. Wright: An introduction to the theory of numbers. Ox-
ford University Press, 6th edition, 2008.
[4]
H. Hasse: Number theory. Translated from the 3rd German edition. Sprin-
ger, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1980.
[5]
L. -K. Hua: Intoduction to number theory. Translated from the Chinese
original by P. Shiu. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1982.
[6]
K. Ireland, M. Rosen: A classical introduction to modern number theory.
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 2nd edition, 1990.
[7]
F. Jarvis: Algebraic number theory. Springer, Cham Heidelberg New York
Dordrecht London, 2014.
[8]
G. A. Jones, J. M. Jones: Elementary number theory. Springer, London,
1998.
[9]
M. B. Nathanson: Elementary methods in number theory. Springer, Berlin
Heidelberg New York, 2000.
[10] I. Niven, H. S. Zuckerman, H. L. Montgomery: An introduction to the the-
ory of numbers. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 5th edition, 2008.
[11] D. Redmond: Number theory. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1996.
[12] K. H. Rosen: Elementary number theory and its applications. Pearson, Bos-
ton, 6th edition, 2010.
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69429-0
J. Kramer and A.-M. von Pippich, From Natural Numbers to Quaternions, 

280
Selected Literature
[13] W. Sierpinski: Elementary theory of numbers. Elsevier, Amsterdam, PWN,
Warsaw, 2nd edition, 1988.
[14] A. Weil: Basic number theory. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York,
3rd edition, 1995.
Literature on Abstract Algebra
[15] M. Artin: Algebra. Pearson, Boston, 2nd edition, 2017.
[16] R. Cooke: Classical algebra: its nature, origins, and uses. John Wiley &
Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2008.
[17] D. S. Dummit, R. M. Foote: Abstract algebra. John Wiley & Sons, Hobo-
ken, NJ, 3rd edition, 2003.
[18] B. Fine, A. M. Gaglione, G. Rosenberger: Introduction to abstract algebra.
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, 2014.
[19] J. Gallian: Contemporary abstract algebra. Brooks Cole, 9th edition, 2016.
[20] R. S. Irving: Integers, polynomials, and rings. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg
New York, 2004.
[21] S. Lang: Algebra. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 3rd edition,
2002.
[22] F. Lorenz: Algebra. Volume I. Fields and Galois theory. Translated from the
1987 German edition by S. Levy. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York,
2006.
[23] W. K. Nicholson: Introduction to abstract algebra. John Wiley & Sons,
Hoboken, NJ, 4th edition, 2012.
[24] J. J. Rotman: A ﬁrst course in abstract algebra. Pearson, Boston, 3rd edi-
tion, 2005.
[25] L. H. Rowen: Algebra: groups, rings and ﬁelds. A K Peters, Wellesley, MA,
1994.
[26] J. Stillwell: Elements of algebra: geometry, numbers, equations. Springer,
Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1994.
[27] B. L. van der Waerden: Algebra. Volume I. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg
New York, 9th edition, 1993.
Literature on the Concept of Number
[28] J. H. Conway, R. K. Guy: The book of numbers. Springer Copernicus, New
York, 1996.
[29] L. Corry: A brief history of numbers. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2015.
[30] H. Ebbinghaus et al.: Numbers. Translated from the 2nd German 1988
edition by H. L. S. Orde. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1991.
[31] G. Ifrah: From one to zero: a universal history of numbers. Translated from
the French original by L. Bair. Penguin Books, New York, 1987.

281
[32] K. Menninger: Number words and number symbols: a cultural history of
numbers. Translated from the German revised edition by P. Broneer.
Dover, New York, 1992.
[33] R. Taschner: Numbers at work: a cultural perspective. Translated from the
2005 German original by O. Binder and D. Sinclair-Jones. A K Peters,
Wellesley, MA, 2007.
Literature on the History of Algebra and Number Theory
[34] I. G. Bashmakova, G. S. Smirnova: The beginnings and evolution of algebra.
Translated from the Russian original by A. Shenitzer. Mathematical As-
sociation of America, Washington, DC, 2000.
[35] V. J. Katz, K. H. Parshall: Taming the unknown: a history of algebra from an-
tiquity to early twentieth century. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, 2014.
[36] A. Weil: Number theory. Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA, 1984.
Literature on the Teaching of Algebra and Number Theory
[37] A. Arcavi, P. Drijvers, K. Stacey: The learning and teaching of algebra. IM-
PACT Series, Routledge, 2016.
[38] J. D. Sally, P. J. Sally: Integers, fractions, and arithmetic: a guide for teachers.
American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2012.

Index
associative operation, 45
bounded set, 160
Cauchy sequence
of an ordered ﬁeld, 168
rational, 145
real, 153
Cayley table, 51
Cayley’s octonions, 231
characteristic, 101
completeness
axiom of geometric, 166
of an ordered ﬁeld, 168
of real numbers, 155
completeness principle, 162
complex numbers, 184
absolute value, 187
complex conjugate, 186
imaginary part, 184
modulus, 187
purely imaginary, 184
real part, 184
complex plane, 184
coset, 61
left, 59
right, 61
decimal, 155
genuine, 159
inﬁnite, 155
terminating, 155
decimal expansion
period, 143
periodic, 143
purely periodic, 143
Dedekind cuts, 167
division with remainder, 30, 95, 125
divisor, 15, 94, 120, 121
common, 15, 95, 120
greatest common, 25, 97, 120, 122
proper, 17
trivial, 17, 95
domain, 100
element
identity, 47
inverse, 48, 101
irreducible, 120
left identity, 47
left inverse, 48, 101
prime, 121
right identity, 47
right inverse, 48, 101
unit, 98
zero, 98
equivalence class, 57
equivalence relation, 57
Euclid’s lemma, 23, 96
Euclidean algorithm, 126
extended, 127
Euclidean domain, 125
exponential function, 197
ﬁeld, 110
absolute value, 168
algebraically closed, 193
archimedean, 169
order, 168
ﬁeld of fractions, 117
fraction, 76, 118
fundamental theorem
of algebra, 191
of arithmetic, 22, 96
group, 48
abelian/commutative, 49
alternating, 68
cyclic, 52
dihedral, 50
symmetric, 51
group homomorphism, 54
group isomorphism, 54
Hamilton’s quaternions, 219
homomorphism theorem
for groups, 66
for rings, 108
ideal, 104
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69429-0
J. Kramer and A.-M. von Pippich, From Natural Numbers to Quaternions, 

284
Index
divisibility, 121
greatest common divisor, 122
intersection, 122
least common multiple, 122
principal, 105
sum, 122
unit, 105
zero, 105
image
of a group homomorphism, 55
of a ring homomorphism, 104
index of a subgroup, 61
induction, 9
inﬁmum, 161
inﬁmum principle, 162
integers, 74
absolute value, 76
decimal representation, 141
difference, 75
order, 75
product, 93
quotient, 118
integral domain, 100
kernel
of a group homomorphism, 55
of a ring homomorphism, 104
least common multiple, 26, 97, 120, 122
lower bound, 160
monoid, 47
multiplicative group of a ring, 111
natural numbers, 9
decimal representation, 31
difference, 14, 75
order, 13
product, 11
sum, 10
nested intervals, 162
nested intervals principle, 162
normal subgroup, 61
null sequence
rational, 145
number
algebraic, 193
amicable, 21
Euler, 197
irrational, 159
Liouville, 196
perfect, 20
transcendental, 194
octonions, 231
order
of a group, 52
of an element, 53
orthogonal group
O2(R), 189
O3(R), 228
Peano axioms, 9
predecessor, 9
prime number, 17, 95
Fermat, 19
Mersenne, 19
principal ideal domain, 124
quaternions, 219
conjugate quaternion, 221
imaginary part, 220
imaginary space, 221
modulus, 221
purely imaginary, 220
real part, 220
quotient group, 65
quotient ring, 108
R-algebra, 222
associative, 222
commutative, 222
dimension, 222
division algebra, 222
R-subalgebra, 223
R-algebra homomorphism, 223
rational numbers, 118
absolute value, 119
decimal representation, 143
order, 119
real number line, 164
real numbers, 151
absolute value, 153
decimal expansion, 159
decimal representation, 159
order, 152
real sequence
(strictly) monotonically decreas-
ing, 160
(strictly) monotonically increasing,
159
convergence, 153
limit, 153
relatively prime, 28
pairwise, 28
ring, 97
commutative, 98
factorial, 123

Index
285
polynomial, 99
zero, 98
ring homomorphism, 103
ring isomorphism, 103
semigroup, 45
abelian/commutative, 46
regular, 69
skew ﬁeld, 110
special orthogonal group
SO2(R), 189
SO3(R), 228
special unitary group
SU2(C), 225
subgroup, 53
subgroup criterion, 53
subring, 102
subring criterion, 102
successor, 9
supremum, 161
supremum principle, 162
theorem
Gauss’s, 123
Lagrange’s, 60
Liouville’s, 194
of Euclid, 18
unique factorization domain, 123
unit, 101
imaginary, 184
unitary group
U2(C), 225
upper bound, 160
well-ordering principle, 14
zero divisor, 100
left, 100
right, 100

