
From Interaction to Symbol

Iconicity in Language and Literature
Volume 8
From Interaction to Symbol. A systems view of the evolution of signs 
and communication
by Piotr Sadowski
A multidisciplinary book series which aims to provide evidence for the pervasive presence of 
iconicity as a cognitive process in all forms of verbal communication. Iconicity, i.e. form miming 
meaning and/or form miming form, is an inherently interdisciplinary phenomenon, involving 
linguistic and textual aspects and linking them to visual and acoustic features. The focus of the 
series is on the discovery of iconicity in all circumstances in which language is created, ranging 
from language acquisition, the development of Pidgins and Creoles, processes of language change, 
to translation and the more literary uses of language.
Editors
Olga Fischer
University of Amsterdam 
Christina Ljungberg
University of Zurich

From Interaction to Symbol
A systems view of the evolution 
of signs and communication
Piotr Sadowski
John Benjamins Publishing Company
Amsterdam / Philadelphia

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Sadowski, Piotr, 1957-
  From interaction to symbol : a systems view of the evolution of signs and 
communication / Piotr Sadowski.
       p.   cm. (Iconicity in Language and Literature, issn 1873–5037 ; v. 8)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1.  Communication--Philosophy. 2.  Signs and symbols. 3.  System theory.  I. Title. 
P91.S23    2009
302.201--dc22
2009028547
isbn	978 90 272 4344 7	 (hb; alk. paper)
isbn	978 90 272 8890 5	 (eb) 
© 2009 – John Benjamins B.V.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form, by print, photoprint, microfilm, or any 
other means, without written permission from the publisher.
John Benjamins Publishing Co. · P.O. Box 36224 · 1020 me Amsterdam · The Netherlands
John Benjamins North America · P.O. Box 27519 · Philadelphia pa 19118-0519 · usa
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of 
American National Standard for Information Sciences – Permanence of 
Paper for Printed Library Materials, ansi z39.48-1984.
8
TM

For Tanya and AdaŚ
There is an anaesthetic of familiarity, a sedative of 
ordinariness, which dulls the senses and hides 
the wonder of existence
Richard Dawkins


Table of contents
List of figures	
xi
Acknowledgements	
xiii
Preface	
xv
chapter 1
Systems theory: Between philosophy and science, but more science 
than philosophy	
1
Why we need a theory  3
Problems with philosophy  6
Logical deduction  12
Postmodern “theory”  14
A systems view  17
A holistic approach  20
chapter 2
Towards a systems model of communication	
25
What is a definition?  25
Information as difference  29
Contiguous communication  32
Indexical communication  34
Iconic communication  36
Symbolic communication  39
Parainformation as meaning  41
Communicating meaningful information  43
Meaning and significance  48
Deception  51
Self-deception  54
Metainformation as implied meaning  56
More useful definitions  66
chapter 3
Needs as motivators of behaviour	
71
Needs and emotions  72

 From Interaction to Symbol
Types of needs  76
Human uniqueness  85
Humanism versus dogmatism  88
chapter 4
From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments: The origins of  
referentiality	
91
Defining index  94
Bodily signals and the beginnings of referentiality  97
Bodily adornments as the first indexical signs  101
From memory to consciousness  105
Memory and the beginnings of culture  113
Material culture as index  119
chapter 5
Photography, or the magic of iconic indexicality	
123
When indexicality is mistaken for contiguity  123
Indexical and iconic “magic”  125
Brief history of iconic indexicality  129
Photography versus painting  132
Photography and the human face  136
chapter 6
Photography plus movement, or even more magic	
145
The birth of cinema  145
The mirror and contiguous iconic indexicality  150
Contiguous experience and the birth of television  153
Television today – contiguity still reigns supreme  156
Contiguity goes global  158
chapter 7
From mimicry to metaphor: The origins of art	
161
Iconicity in animal communication  161
From mimicry to imitation  165
Mimetic culture  167
From imitation to mimesis  169
The birth of pictorial realism  172
Fantastic representations  178
Iconic roots of metaphors  180

	
Table of contents	

chapter 8
The thrills of visual realism	
183
Art and ideology  184
Religion and realism in art  188
The rediscovery of the body  192
Physical space rediscovered  194
Photography and the decline of realism in painting  201
Why we enjoy pictures  204
chapter 9
Linguistic iconicity and the limits of arbitrariness	
207
Defining symbol  208
Indexical features of language  210
The emotive features of language and music  213
Phonetic iconicity  215
Morphological and syntactic iconicity  221
Iconic gestures  224
chapter 10
The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	
231
Discrete syntax for the (partly) discrete world  232
Selective pressures on early language  238
Language and the problem of reference  242
The origins of arbitrariness  245
How language produces meaning  248
Other possible sources of language: sexual selection and gestures  251
chapter 11
Language and the symbolic compulsion	
257
It’s not all in language  258
The excesses of language combinatorial machine   263
The conceptual indulgence of philosophic discourse  268
The humanities’ physics envy  274
References	
281
Index	
297


List of figures
Figure 1. Interaction between two systems
29
Figure 2. Information as a difference between physical states
30
Figure 3. Indirect communication (here: indexical) between systems
35
Figure 4. Correspondence of information (iconic communication) 
between original and image
37
Figure 5. Arbitrary relationship (symbolic communication) between 
original and image
39
Figure 6. Parainformation as a reaction to information
42
Figure 7. Parainformation in direct communication between autonomous 
systems
44
Figure 8. Information and parainformation in direct communication 
between autonomous systems
45
Figure 9. Information, parainformation, and metainformation in indirect 
communication between autnomous systems
57


Acknowledgements
As all academic writers know, acknowledging one’s sources and inspirations by 
listing the relevant publications in the References section is only part of the story. 
There remain equally stimulating if unpublished informal, often casual but no less 
helpful personal contributions from colleagues and friends. During my associa-
tion with the Department of Creative Arts in Dublin Business School I have been 
fortunate to enjoy the intellectual benefits of daily conversations with many pas-
sionate academics, including Dr David Slattery, Matthew Nolan, Janice Gaffey, 
Vivienne O’Kelly, J.J. Harrington, Dr Paul Hollywood, Dr Barnaby Taylor, Dr Neil 
O’Connor, and Dr Esperanza Collado, all of whom have helped me, directly or 
indirectly, with my research.
It also gives me pleasure to thank Professor Olga Fischer from the University 
of Amsterdam for encouraging my interests in linguistic iconicity, which was in-
deed what started my work on the present book. Together with Professor Christina 
Ljungberg from the University of Zürich, Olga also rendered the manuscript of my 
book invaluable service by carefully reading through it, suggesting the kinds of 
clarifications and corrections that authors, too enamoured of their own work, of-
ten overlook. For the faults and weaknesses of argument that still remain in my 
book I alone am responsible. I am also grateful to Kees Vaes from John Benjamins 
for his professional handling of my manuscript, and in particular for spotting a 
number of potentially embarrassing editorial mistakes which, I admit, I should 
have corrected before submitting the manuscript to Benjamins.
I would also like to thank Trinity College Dublin for granting me the status of 
Research Associate in the School of English, which among other things gave me 
full access to the College’s superb library resources, without which I would not 
have completed my book in the time I did.
On a more personal note, I want to say a warm “thank you” to my wife, Ewa, 
my life-long companion and fellow traveller on the road of intellectual pursuits, 
with whom I have shared over three decades of inspiring daily conversations on 
various matters relating to history, philosophy, religion, literature, science and art 
– generally, to the mystery of things.
I affectionately dedicate my book to my younger son Adaś and his wife Tanya, 
wishing them a happy life together and plenty of satisfaction from their own aca-
demic pursuits.


Preface
To say that we are constantly bombarded by sensory stimuli, and that to be able to 
receive stimuli, make sense of them and respond to them is tantamount to being 
alive, is more or less stating the obvious. But as the biologist Richard Dawkins has 
perceptively noted in the sentence I chose for the motto of my book (Dawkins 
2006c: 6), we tend to ignore the obvious out of habituation and over-familiarity, 
often forgetting that trying to explain what seems obvious can reveal a wonderful 
and intricate physical and biological design, which we overlook precisely because 
it works so well. Both the sensory apparatus that receives inputs and the nervous 
system that processes and interprets them play a crucial role in the survival of all 
living creatures, from single-celled organisms to complex human beings, by ena-
bling them to communicate with one another and to negotiate their living envi-
ronment when searching for food and mating opportunities, or when protecting 
their bodies against injuries and death. For example, fireflies communicate by 
means of blinking lights, crickets rub legs or wing cases together to send charac-
teristic chirping sounds to other crickets, ants exude chemical signals (pherom-
ones), and bats use echolocation to “see” in dark caves. No living organism exists 
in total isolation from its surroundings, and no organism can afford to ignore ex-
ternal stimuli likely either to enhance or jeopardize its existence. This is what all 
organisms do as long as they live: they interact with other organisms and with in-
animate elements of the environment, absorbing the needed resources and useful 
information while avoiding potentially harmful situations, thus optimalizing their 
existence, which in biological, Darwinian terms means increasing their chances of 
surviving and reproducing.
A special case can be made for the human species, by arguing that it is unique 
in the animal kingdom by having its sensory and nervous systems tuned to other 
kinds of information than that directly contributing to survival and reproduction. 
It is not immediately obvious, for example, how religious devotion, passion for art, 
music, fictional narratives or sport, scientific curiosity, philosophic speculation, 
personal introspection, a sense of humour, celebrity cult, interest in family history, 
gossip and so on should serve the same “primitive” biological functions as fighting 
over food, territory or mating partners, or running away from predators. Even if 
many things that humans do or think about can be, on closer inspection, directly 
or indirectly related to the basic biological needs of survival and reproduction, it 

 From Interaction to Symbol
can be argued that unlike all other animals humans are also aware that they do and 
think these things; that they possess a unique mental capacity called conscious-
ness; that they are not totally subordinated to automatic, instinctive responses, but 
can voluntarily choose whether to act upon instincts or not; and that in addition 
to reacting to the physical, external environment humans have created, uniquely 
in the animal world, an alternative, seemingly non-biological, language-mediated 
virtual reality subsumed under the term symbolic or spiritual culture.
The present book is basically about human interactions with the natural and 
social environments, seen in a broader context of animal communication from 
which human sensory perception and the brain have evolved. My interests in com-
munication theory go back to a paper I gave at the Third Symposium on Iconicity in 
Language and Literature, held at the University of Jena in Germany in 2001, called 
“From signal to symbol: towards a systems typology of linguistic signs” (Sadowski 
2003: 411–424). The object of my paper was to offer an exhaustive classification of 
linguistic signs within the framework of systems theory of information, supported 
by certain claims concerning the origin and evolution of human language. Starting 
with the general premises of systems theory (see Chapter 1) I generated, by way of 
logical deduction, what looked like a complete set of basic types of linguistic signs, 
including signal, emotive sign, iconic sign, and arbitrary, or symbolic sign, which 
turned out to be related in some respects to Charles Sanders Peirce’s celebrated 
semiotic triad of icon-index-symbol. The rather broad scope of my paper was, 
unfortunately, out of sync with the modest twenty-minute format of my presenta-
tion, leaving my audience, as well as myself, quite dissatisfied as to the closer char-
acteristics of the distinguished signs, to say nothing of their exemplifications. In 
the following years, between one research project and another I continued my 
work on systems theory of signs, which I eventually extended beyond language to 
other forms of communication, from animal communication in defined biological 
contexts to iconic and symbolic communication, mainly auditory and visual, un-
derlying human behaviour. In the process I have both expanded and modified the 
basic set of signs distinguished in my initial paper, and accumulated more actual 
instances of animal and human communication as an empirical validation and 
support of the deductive theory of signs, now presented in book form.
As I explain in more detail in Chapters 1 and 2, systems theory presents itself as 
an attractive alternative to mainstream theoretical formulations within contempo-
rary humanistic disciplines, including semiotics as a study of signs and communi-
cation. Modern semiotics derives originally from Peirce’s philosophic pragmatism 
on the one hand, and from structuralist linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure on the 
other hand. These early formulations (especially Saussure’s) were merged in the 
course of the twentieth century with other intellectual trends and schools, includ-
ing Marxism, psychoanalysis, deconstruction etc., to produce what is now known 

	
Preface	
as postmodern theory—an eclectic, confused, anti-scientific and pseudo-philo-
sophic (in my view) way of thinking, talking, and writing about the human mind, 
language, and culture, which by now has more or less monopolized intellectual life 
in the arts departments of Western universities. In Chapters 1 and 11 I give some 
reasons why I think postmodern theory is inadequate to explain reliably the work-
ing of the mind, language, and culture, and why we need to look for alternative, 
more science-based theories to address these crucial human phenomena.
The deductive method of systems approach involves moving from general 
premises to specific theoretical formulations, and then to actual examples, in our 
case of communication, as found in the empirical world. Basically, I begin with 
two definitions: one in which system is understood as a set of interrelated ele-
ments, and the other in which interactions between systems are defined in terms 
of exchanges of information and energy. This is the starting point of the systems 
model of communication, which subsequently leads us to two main kinds of com-
munication: (1) direct, or contiguous communication, which accounts for most 
instances of interactions between living systems; and (2) indirect communication, 
including the following types: indexical, iconic, and symbolic. The distinguished 
types of communication thus determine the structure of the present book, in that 
the successive chapters proceed from most simple (contiguous) to most complex 
(symbolic) forms of communication, corresponding roughly with the progressive 
evolution of animal and human cognitive mechanisms.
Thus in contiguous communication empirical systems interact by receiving 
and responding to physical stimuli occurring there and then, directly affecting the 
systems’ existential situation and physical condition, and requiring immediate 
adaptive response, as in fleeing from a predator or approaching a mate. Most ani-
mal interactions with the environment, as in exchanging warning signals with 
conspecifics or reacting to danger signals produced by enemies, rely on contigu-
ous, or simultaneous communication, which largely depends on inborn, automat-
ic reactions to certain typical, adaptively significant situations, mainly concerned 
with survival and reproduction. Much of human behaviour also consists of con-
tiguous interactions with the social and natural environments, facilitated by innate 
psychological mechanisms (cognitive modules) prompting spontaneous, emotive 
and physiological reactions especially in situations of emergency. The nature of 
these reactions is in turn determined by needs, here understood as temporary dis-
turbances in the system’s functional equilibrium in relations with the environment. 
The exhaustive set of needs as motivators of behaviour is accordingly discussed in 
Chapter 3. They include, on the scale from most energic (or physiological) to most 
cognitive (or “spiritual”), the following types of needs: procreative, nutritional, 
protective, social, exploratory, aesthetic, and teleological.  Of all seven types of 
needs only the last one, teleological, is found exclusively among humans. It is the 

 From Interaction to Symbol
“highest,” most sophisticated of the cognitive needs, concerned with an often com-
pulsive search for the purpose and meaning in one’s own life, in the life of one’s 
community, of humanity in general, and in the existence of the universe. I relate 
the origin of the teleological need to the specifically human extended perception 
of the passage of time, or working memory, which is also a psychological prereq-
uisite for consciousness and the ability to communicate by means of signs refer-
ring to temporally displaced objects and events. Religion, philosophy, and art are 
the most obvious historical examples of symbolic systems invented in response to 
the specifically human need to find purpose and meaning in life.
As I argue in Chapters 4–6, in indexical communication systems do not inter-
act directly with one another but by means of an intermediary system (index), 
created as a physical change in the environment by the reacting system. For exam-
ple, a fingerprint is an index left behind on objects upon touch by a person as a 
reacting system. Other typical examples of indexes include a shadow, a voice, a 
smell, a written signature, or a photograph. Indexes are either fully contiguous 
with the systems that produced them, as in the case of a shadow, a mirror reflec-
tion, and voice, or they are spatio-temporally displaced from their creators, as in 
the case of a footprint remaining in the soft ground after it was impressed by a 
passing person or animal, or in the case of a photograph or a film showing a per-
son now much older or dead. Due to its indirect nature indexical communication 
marks the beginning of reference and spatio-temporal separation between sender 
and receiver. To be able to register and interpret indexical signals usually requires 
higher cognitive faculties than those involved in simple contiguous communica-
tion, in that a receiver has to infer the past presence of an invisible sender on the 
basis of a trace, or subtle change in the environment, left behind by the latter. For 
instance, it appears that only humans can read footprints as evidence of animals 
that made them; other primates, intelligent as they may be in many other respects, 
appear incapable of noticing, let alone interpreting footprints as visual cues of 
other animals.
An interesting case of indexical communication is photography, discussed in 
Chapter 5, which additionally involves a principle of resemblance between sign 
and its referent—a situation more typical for iconic communication. Photography 
is indexical in so far as the represented object is mechanically “imprinted” on the 
photographic image by means of a photo-chemical or electronic process operating 
largely outside the photographer’s control. At the same time the resulting image 
also bears a strong visual resemblance to the represented object, which accounts 
for the iconic character of photography. The degree of accuracy and truthfulness 
of the photographic image achieved by its indexicality is unique in the history of 
human iconic representations of the world, the fact that explains the compelling 
psychological effects of photography, unattainable by even the best executed 

	
Preface	 
paintings. This is why in my discussion of photography and the social significance 
of the photographic media such as film and television (Chapters 5 and 6) I use 
psychological categories normally reserved for the emotive and irrational effects 
produced by magic, with its objectively wrong but psychologically compelling 
sense of direct, causal connection between objects once physically connected but 
later separated (as in sympathetic magic), or between objects that appear similar 
to one another (as in homeopathic magic). The unique psychological power of the 
photographic media is thus due to their iconic indexicality, which combines and 
intensifies the psychological effects produced in traditional societies by sympa-
thetic and homeopathic magic.
Perceived similarity or analogy between otherwise different and physically un-
connected objects is the basis of iconic communication, discussed in Chapters 7 
and 8. Iconicity is by no means limited to interactions between humans, but can be 
found among other animals which likewise interpret received stimuli following the 
principle of structural resemblance between the perceived object and a generalized 
concept of that object which the animal holds in its brain. For instance, the innate 
concept of a snake enables an ape to react in its adaptive interest (by running away 
for instance) to any elongated object on the ground moving in a wavy, snake-like 
manner. Associating objects through perceived similarity is also the basis of mim-
icry, a widespread form of deception practised by many species of insects for exam-
ple, which have developed often uncanny resemblance to other objects found in 
their environment, such as twigs or leaves, to avoid being eaten by predators.
Among humans the tendency to notice similarities between different objects 
and to interpret the world in terms of analogies and correspondences between 
often unrelated domains are among the most pervasive and persistent cognitive 
habits, as evidenced by the perennial and universal tendency to personify elements 
of non-human environment, that is, to attribute human traits to animals or even 
plants and inanimate objects. The analogizing tendency underlies much of human 
culture, as evidenced by the visual representations of art, including more or less 
realistic depictions of animals found in the Upper Palaeolithic cave paintings, the 
naturalistic renditions of the human body found in European art in the Greeko-
Roman period and later from the Renaissance onwards, and the quasi-realistic 
representations of non-existent objects such as religious deities and fantastic crea-
tures found in visual art around the globe. The actual or residual homeopathic 
magic, that is, a tendency to identify an artistic representation of an object with the 
object itself, explains human fascination and in some cases religious awe at the act 
of creation and contemplation of works of art, which are subconsciously perceived 
as possessing an invisible but “real” connection with the represented object, there-
by permitting an illusory but psychologically compelling sense of communication 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
with and control over that object, be it a fierce animal, a deity, or a person from a 
painted portrait.
Because of its roots in structural linguistics mainstream semiotics is primarily 
concerned with symbolic signs, that is, with signs whose outward form is related 
to their referents in an arbitrary, conventional way. Symbolic signs are best exem-
plified by syntactic language, a system of communication and representation of 
the world found uniquely among humans and accordingly regarded as the prime 
marker of humanity. Indeed, while communicating by means of contiguous inter-
actions, indexes, and icons is found both among humans and other animal species, 
nothing remotely resembling the combinatorial nature of syntactic speech and the 
widespread use of arbitrary linguistic signs can be attested in the natural world 
outside the human domain. Having said that, I must stress that the transition from 
indexical, or symptomatic, and iconic, or mimetic communication to a fully devel-
oped symbolic system of human language appears to have occurred gradually in 
the course of human evolution, initially through a hypothetical proto-language 
with rudimentary combinatorial syntax, which also retained a range of iconic fea-
tures, as evidenced today by emotive sounds and intonation, by onomatopoeia, 
synaesthesia, as well as by morphological and syntactic iconicity. As I argue in 
Chapters 9 and 10, the celebrated arbitrariness of the linguistic sign appears in fact 
to form only a part of language’s communicative function, which also includes the 
more archaic, symptomatic, emotive, and iconic features, still performing their 
communicative role at a largely unconscious level and outside the system of lan-
guage as studied by structural linguistics. The holistic character of systems theory 
thus allows for a fuller and therefore probably truer view of language, just as the 
evolutionary perspective provides persuasive explanations of the benefits that 
symbolic communication conferred on early humans. Both the arbitrary linguistic 
signs and the combinatorial syntax appear to have emerged gradually in the course 
of human evolution as more effective communicative solutions to the ever-grow-
ing complexity and demands of social life, coupled with the ever-increasing so-
phistication of human brain circuitry and behaviour.
I end my book (Chapter 11) with a hypothesis concerning the origin and per-
sistence of a universal human phenomenon of faith, that is, unquestioning and 
strong conviction about the existence of empirically unverifiable entities, such as 
those described by religions, myths, superstitions, philosophic systems, pseudo-
scientific theories, political ideologies, or private delusions and fantasies. The 
source of what is both most noble and most pernicious in humans, the susceptibil-
ity to form strong beliefs in objectively non-existent entities appears to be rooted 
on the one hand in the human need to find purpose and meaning in life, and as 
such it forms a part of human nature, together with consciousness and the ability 
to acquire language. On the other hand I am inclined to seek reasons for the 

	
Preface	 
specifically human propensity to form uncritical beliefs in certain by-products of 
the combinatorial nature of language, and in related cognitive modules responsi-
ble for combinatorial thinking. By combining and re-combining words and men-
tal concepts it is possible to generate whole systems of virtual, symbolic reality, 
often (as in the case of religion) unconnected with the empirical world in any vis-
ible or rationally acceptable way. For reasons that still await further psychological 
explanation, the virtual realities produced by the combinatorial mind exert a pow-
erful, almost enslaving influence on human thinking and understanding of the 
world, often by completely blocking out scepticism, common sense, rational judg-
ment, and simple acceptance of the evidence of the senses. The fact that combina-
torial language for the most part uses arbitrary signs, with no physical or percep-
tual connection with their referents, also contributes to the process of distancing 
the concepts and images produced by the mind from the physical, empirical real-
ity. Uniquely in the animal kingdom therefore humans live partly in an alternative, 
virtual reality, under the pressure of what I call symbolic compulsion, which cre-
ates empirically distorted, false, but psychologically often irresistible models of the 
world. Of all kinds of symbolic systems produced by human combinatorial mind, 
only scientific theories appear to maintain a programmatic connection with the 
empirical reality, by having their claims and propositions tested and verified 
through observation and experimentation as a matter of principle. Because of the 
greater reliability of science-based approaches over more speculative, philosophic 
theories, I close my book promoting closer links between the humanities and the 
sciences, by adopting the evolutionary paradigm of biology to the study of the hu-
man mind and its products such as art and literature.


chapter 1
Systems theory
Between philosophy and science, 
but more science than philosophy
The words “symbol,” “signs,” and “communication” used in the title of the present 
book immediately call to mind the discipline known as semiotics, that is, a study 
of signs and symbols, whose modern origin is associated on the one hand with the 
American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914) and on the other hand, 
quite independently from Peirce, with the father of structural linguistics, the Swiss 
Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913). While it is not my primary intention to reca-
pitulate the original formulations of these pioneering scholars (their contributions 
are routinely discussed in readily available textbooks, anthologies, and introduc-
tions to semiotics), the understanding of what signs are and how they convey 
meaning lies at the heart of my present, of necessity “semiotic” undertaking 
(Sebeok 1976, 1994; Silverman 1983; Blonsky 1985; Sless 1986; Nöth 1995; Chan-
dler 2002). The problem of the definition of sign will be addressed in the next 
chapter, which will also explain why I think it is methodologically unsound to in-
troduce definitions of crucial terms at the beginning of inquiry, before the theo-
retical foundations on which these definitions are based are first laid down.
The theoretical framework within which I intend to discuss the nature of signs 
and communication is denoted in the title of my book by the word “systems.” His-
torically, systems approach relates to an integrative scientific methodology initi-
ated by the pioneering studies of the Vienna biologist Ludwig von Bertalanffy 
(1901–1972), who in the 1930s formulated a theory of self-organizational dynam-
ics in biological organisms, also referred to as organismic system theory. Origi-
nally developed as a methodological framework within natural sciences, the theo-
ry was later transformed by Bertalanffy into the General System Theory, a study of 
self-regulation in open systems (that is, systems interacting with their environ-
ment), for which Bertalanffy encompassed the classical concept of the system and 
the modern cybernetic theory of feedback (Bertalanffy 1973, 1981; Capra 
1996: 46–50). For Bertalanffy the General System Theory was a sort of meta-theo-
ry, a new, overarching paradigm to be used in the construction of theoretical mod-
els in all sciences, and designed primarily to investigate so-called isomorphisms, 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
that is, functional analogies across different empirical domains, including living 
organisms, social systems, and cybernetic machines.
After Bertalanffy’s original formulations, the movement towards a more inte-
grative methodology in sciences acquired momentum in the post-war period, as a 
multidisciplinary effort of scholars adopting the systems methods from their re-
spective, often disparate disciplines, such as cybernetics, mathematics, philosophy, 
psychology, biology, computer science, anthropology, and literary studies (Ackoff 
and Emery 1972; Laszlo 1969, 1972a, 1972b, 1983, 1993; Mazur 1966, 1970, 1976; 
Sadowski 1992, 1999a; Schmidt 1982; Rapaport 1986; Weinberg 1975; Wiener 
1948; Wilden 1980; Wilson 1990). The integrative methods of systems approach 
were initially seen as a possible remedy against the increasing fragmentation of 
science into narrow, specialized fields with their separate objects of investigation 
and different methodologies. Despite the general tendency towards multiplication 
of academic disciplines, it was becoming increasingly obvious to many scholars 
that empirical reality did not present itself as fragmented and compartmentalized, 
and that natural, social, and psychological phenomena were not to be explained in 
terms of exclusive dichotomies of natural versus cultural, physical versus biologi-
cal, psychological versus somatic and so on.
The basic change in approach to empirical reality involved viewing it as an 
integrated whole, in contrast to the properties of its parts studied analytically in 
isolation according to the mechanistic paradigm of classical science (Capra 
1983: 93–117). According to the integrative systems view, as espoused by the phys-
icist Fritjof Capra for example, the essential properties of an organism are proper-
ties of the whole, which none of the parts possess in themselves. The holistic prop-
erties arise from the interactions and relationships between the parts, while the 
properties of the parts can be understood only from the organization of the whole 
(Capra 1996: 29–30). A classic example of an integrated whole is the organic cell, 
in which none of the organelles, that is, specialized subunits within a cell, works 
alone but all interact and co-operate to form a larger unified entity of the cell 
(Campbell 1996: 136). Biologists routinely recognize that plants and animals are 
co-ordinated wholes rather than colonies of tissues and organs. As Richard 
Dawkins explains, this is because natural selection has favoured genes that co-
operate with others, so that in the struggle for survival nature must have put a 
premium on central co-ordination rather than anarchy within the living organism 
(Dawkins 2006a: 46–47). Systems scholars also perceive that not only individual 
organisms but also entire domains of the empirical world: physical, biological, so-
cial, and psychological reveal structural and functional parallelisms, which can be 
usefully integrated and illuminated within the same methodological framework 
(Laszlo 1983: 4–5). As argued by Bertalanffy and the philosopher Ervin Laszlo, the 
general character of systems theory can help integrate both the physical and 

	
Chapter 1.  Systems theory	

non-physical disciplines into a unified scientific vision, to bring about a much-
needed integration of scientific and humanistic methodologies and education.
Why we need a theory
The assumption that reality consists of integrated and interconnected wholes is 
thus the main tenet of the systems understanding of the world. In that the systems 
approach follows other explanatory models devised by philosophy and science, 
which are all based on certain initial assumptions as well as logical, observational, 
and experimental procedures that differ from non-scientific, metaphysical, or 
commonsensical thinking about the world. At the same time it should be added 
that creating models of reality is not confined to philosophers and scientists, or 
even to humans. As the evolutionary linguist Derek Bickerton reminds us, all liv-
ing creatures have internal representations, or models, of the external world, not 
so much that they should contemplate the structure of the world, but so that they 
should be able to survive and function effectively in their environment (Bickerton 
1990: 250). Humans too negotiate their living space by developing internal models 
of the outside world, modified and adjusted by sense data, models so constructed 
as to be useful in dealing with problems typically arising in our interactions with 
our natural and social environments. However, of all animals only humans possess 
brains that appear to be able to probe the world at a depth greater than is needed 
to survive, and it is the task of scientists to diagnose and correct this uniquely hu-
man cognitive misalignment (Wilson 1998: 65).
Philosophic and scientific theories usually assume the form of explicit concep-
tual models of a fragment of reality under investigation, expressed typically 
through verbal language (as in philosophy), in sciences aided also by mathemati-
cal symbols, diagrams, graphs and so on. These models are not substitutes of real, 
physical situations, but merely their descriptive analogues—what the philosopher 
of science Karl Popper calls the “verisimilitude” of a theory; that is, a theory’s ap-
proximation to what it is devised to explain, or its correspondence to the empirical 
facts (Popper 1979: 59, 318). For instance, Einstein’s theory of relativity is a better 
approximation to the facts of physics than is Newton’s gravitation theory, just as 
the latter is a better approximation to the facts than was Kepler’s theory of plane-
tary motion. The systems scholar Brian Wilson sums up what creating interpretive 
models of reality is about:
A model is the explicit interpretation of one’s understanding of a situation, or 
merely of one’s ideas about that situation. It can be expressed in mathematics, 
symbols or words, but it is essentially a description of entities and the relationships 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
between them. It may be prescriptive or illustrative, but above all, it must be useful 
(Wilson 1990: 8).
The external, phenomenal world may appear to the observer as almost unbeliev-
ably complicated and ultimately beyond comprehension. On the other hand the 
explanatory models, whether philosophic, religious, scientific, or commonsensical 
are by comparison simplified and therefore more comprehensible than the world 
they are devised to explain: they serve as intellectually accessible, man-made ab-
stract analogues of the empirical world which on its own presents itself as too baf-
fling, elusive, complex, mysterious, and ultimately probably beyond comprehen-
sion (Hawking 1996: 10–11).
But the explanatory models, such as those used in science for instance, are not 
just any descriptions or mental representations of the external world. A haphazard 
accumulation and description of empirical data does not in itself constitute a 
model of the world, because no data make any sense without a theoretical para-
digm explaining what the data mean. In the words of the philosopher of science 
Thomas S. Kuhn: “there is no such thing as research in the absence of any para-
digm” (Kuhn 1970: 79), an observation echoed by Ervin Laszlo: “there is no theory 
without an underlying world view which directs the attention of the scientist. 
There is no experiment without a hypothesis and no science without some expec-
tation as to the nature of its subject matter” (Laszlo 1972a: vi). Karl Popper even 
argued that there is no such thing as impartial and unbiased observation, because 
all perception is predicated on expectations based on innate dispositions or pro-
pensities to react. In this Popper was refuting a naïve empiricist view, espoused by 
such early modern philosophers as Locke, Berkeley, or Hume, according to which 
all knowledge comes to us through experience and observation, and any attempt 
on our part to interfere with the process of receiving this information can only 
lead to distortion and arbitrary imagining. Rather, argues Popper, observation is 
always preceded by expectations, which give rise to hypotheses and theories about 
what it is we observe, although an observation can in its turn refute a particular 
hypothesis and stimulate a new one (Popper 1979: 344, 346).
In science the merits of a theory as an explanatory paradigm are judged by a 
number of formal criteria, including the range of phenomena the theory embrac-
es, the internal consistency of its structure, the precision of the predictions it can 
make, and the practicability of testing them. More specifically, it is possible to 
distinguish the following characteristics of a scientific theory:
–	
parsimony, or economy, following the law of Ockham’s razor (after the phi-
losopher William Ockham, 1285–1347). The law states that in explaining 
something assumptions must not be needlessly multiplied, because “what can 
be done with fewer assumptions is done in vain with more” (Wilson 1998: 56). 

	
Chapter 1.  Systems theory	

The object of science is therefore to explain more and more with less and less; 
in other words, the ever-greater numbers of phenomena in the world should 
be understood by the smallest possible number of scientific laws or princi-
ples—what the biologist Edward O. Wilson calls “the completest presentation 
of facts with the least possible expenditure of thought” (Wilson 1978:  10; 
Plotkin 1994: 78–79);
–	
consistency, that is, stipulating the logical rules to transform the assumptions 
into valid conclusions, and to ensure the internal coherence of propositions 
and absence of contradictions within the theory;
–	
repeatability, stating that the same phenomenon must be analysed separately 
by independent investigators;
–	
testability, that is, checking the model against relevant empirical evidence, but 
– interestingly – not so much to validate a theory as ultimately to falsify it. This 
is because, according to Karl Popper, “the method of science is the method of 
bold conjectures and ingenious and severe attempts to refute them,” as only 
through the falsification of theories progress in science can be accomplished 
(Popper 1979: 81, 361). A theory that cannot be falsified does not belong to 
science but to the realm of dogma, as exemplified by religious myth, theology, 
much of philosophy, pseudo-scientific systems such as Marxism or Freudism, 
and political ideology – systems of thought containing claims that can be nei-
ther proved nor disproved, but are instead put forward to be accepted on 
faith;
–	
predictive power, relating to the ability of a scientific theory to transform a 
small number of axiomatic ideas into detailed predictions that can hypotheti-
cally account for phenomena not yet discovered. For example, even before 
Galileo discovered the phases of Venus using a telescope, his former disciple 
Benedetto Castelli had predicted theoretically that if the Copernican model of 
the solar system was correct, then Venus must show phases, like the Moon 
(Gribbin 2003: 89);
–	
validation, which states that the strength of a theory is measured by the extent 
to which its predictions successfully compete with other theories in account-
ing for the same phenomena, as when the Copernican heliocentric cosmology 
provided a scientifically more valid description of the solar system than the 
earlier Ptolemaic geocentric theory.
As Karl Popper repeatedly emphasizes, the principle of testability, despite its seem-
ing purpose to verify a theory by demonstrating its correspondence with the em-
pirical facts, leads in fact ultimately to the falsification of the theory, since only by 
rejecting current theories can science make progress (Popper 1979: 81, 361). This 
means that scientific laws, although never fully verifiable, must ultimately be 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
falsifiable, and that means that they can be tested. For the philosopher Bryan Magee 
this is a crucial point, because if a theory (such as the religious doctrine of Divine 
Providence) can explain anything that happens, no matter what, this must mean 
that all possible observations are inevitably consistent with the theory. But in that 
case no actual observations can ever be cited as evidence in the theory’s favour, 
which means that not only can the theory not be falsified, but that it consequently 
cannot be corroborated either. No such theory can count as scientific. To be scien-
tific, a theory must be justified by evidence, that is, it must be empirically testable, 
and since the only form of testing that is logically possible is falsification, this 
means that only statements that are empirically falsifiable can have scientific status 
(Magee 1998: 62–63). Despite science’s professed theoretical and procedural rigour 
therefore, its description of the world always remains partial, provisional, and in-
complete. Scientific knowledge is thus not a revelation of something objectively 
and timelessly true, an assured grasp of something existing “out there” independ-
ently of ourselves. Knowledge is, in Popper’s phrase, “justified belief;” it is what we 
have the best grounds at any given time for accepting as true (Popper 1979: 76). For 
all its tentativeness, however, a scientific description of the world still remains, 
generally speaking, more reliable than philosophic or religious one for example, in 
presenting us with a truer, because falsifiable, picture of the world.
Problems with philosophy
Philosophy too is concerned with an understanding of the world gained through 
thought and language, expressed in (usually) coherent logical argument and lack 
of contradiction (except perhaps in postmodern philosophy which, in Noam 
Chomsky’s assessment, seems to thrive on fallacies, ambiguities and self-contra-
dictions [Chomsky 1992; Nagel 1998]). Unlike science, however, what philosophy 
does not normally require is empirical validation of its findings, as philosophers 
do not conduct experiments and need no observational proofs to support their 
claims (Plotkin 1994: 230; Tooby and Cosmides 1992a: 22). Philosophic argu-
ments can be intellectually stimulating, but at the same time they cannot be ac-
cepted as valid and reliable tools in explaining and controlling the physical world, 
which are the main intellectual and practical goals of science. According to The 
Oxford Companion to Philosophy, for instance, philosophy is not even about our 
understanding of the world, but is defined as “thinking about thinking”—a sec-
ond–order cognitive activity about formation of beliefs and about logic underly-
ing our claims to knowledge (Honderich 1995: 666). Philosophy thus understood 
is not limited in its propositions, as is science, by the physical parameters of the 
empirical world, but can develop by its own internal logic, independently of factual 

	
Chapter 1.  Systems theory	

reality. In this sense philosophy can be described as a form of mental gymnastics, 
an abstract intellectual activity conducted for its own sake, which keeps the mind 
busy but does not necessarily contribute to the understanding of things or the ex-
pansion of knowledge. Philosophy’s frequent disregard for facts and empirical 
verification also means that its propositions, even those about the nature of the 
world, can often be simply wrong, or at best probable but unverifiable and there-
fore unreliable. While science provides a description of the laws of the world and 
how they can be applied, philosophy, according to the neuroscientist Gerald M. 
Edelman, has in fact no proper subject matter of its own, because it usually de-
scribes entities that simply do not exist outside the philosopher’s mind. Each phil-
osophic system is complete with a particular philosopher, who does not just de-
scribe an environment but constructs a whole conceptual world. Every time a 
philosophical construct is attempted, there is a world view behind it, and a per-
sonal one at that, labelled with various “isms,” each of which is likely to spell the 
rejection of the last, as each philosopher constructs his own unique point of view 
(Edelman 1992: 158).
In this light it is difficult, for example, to make sense or assess the real impor-
tance of a philosophic text such as Ludwig Wittgenstein’s celebrated Tractatus 
Logico-Philosophicus (1921), one of the most influential texts in twentieth-century 
philosophy, regarded as a masterpiece which revolutionized contemporary philo-
sophical thought. The eighty-nine-page long Tractatus consists entirely of cryptic, 
sibylline, epigrammatic and elusive claims about the alleged nature of thought, 
language, and the world, expressed in boldly assertive and authoritative tone, but 
without a shred of proof or evidence that what the philosopher is saying is actu-
ally true. The text starts off by introducing certain key but vague and undefined 
terms such as “facts,” “things,” “logical space,” “the world,” “status of affairs,” “state 
of things,” “objects” and so on, and proceeds by prophesying ex cathedra rather 
than by demonstrating how valid conclusions about the nature of thought and 
language can be derived from particular premises. It is also difficult to take seri-
ously a philosopher, no matter how famous and influential, who introduces his 
work with almost unbelievable certitude and self-congratulation, saying things 
like “the truth of the thoughts that are here communicated seems to me unassail-
able and definitive. I therefore believe myself to have found, on all essential points, 
the final solution to the problems” (Wittgenstein 2001: 4). Equally frivolous is 
Wittgenstein’s disclaimer towards the end of the Tractatus, when he states that 
“anyone who understands me eventually recognizes [my propositions] as nonsen-
sical” (Wittgenstein 2001:  89), supposedly because talking about language is 
meaningless. The Tractatus established Wittgenstein’s international reputation as 
the leading twentieth-century philosopher, despite the fact that during the years of 
the treatise’s greatest influence he deepened his conclusion that his work was 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
fundamentally mistaken (not that it discouraged his ardent if uncritical followers). 
Wittgenstein ultimately demolished his own earlier philosophy in the posthu-
mously published Philosophical Investigations (1953).
If philosophy is indeed “thinking about thinking,” then perhaps abstract spec-
ulation divorced from real life can have some accidental intellectual merit, if only 
to demonstrate the power of the mind and language to engage in such speculation, 
despite the aura of so-what-ness, or irrelevance, inevitably forming over such ac-
tivity. In Chapter 11 I discuss what I call symbolic compulsion as a by-product of 
the combinatorial nature of thinking and language—faculties that have arisen as 
cognitive adaptations over the course of human evolution, and which produced, as 
an adaptively neutral side effect, a psychologically compelling tendency to create 
and believe in non-empirical symbolic systems, as exemplified by religion, art, and 
philosophy. Science too is a symbolic system, but it is the only one to validate its 
symbolic constructs with observational data; hence its success in providing a rela-
tively accurate explanation of the world, and in translating its theories into practi-
cal applications. On the other hand, abstract philosophizing is all too often con-
ducted for its own sake rather than as an aid in understanding the world, still less 
to improve the material conditions of life. Philosophic thinking about thinking is 
like a car in idle gear: the engine is running but the car is not moving, that is, it is 
not performing any useful work.
Even philosophy of science seems to have limited impact, to say the least, on 
scientific theory and practice, despite the fact that some of the greatest modern 
philosophers, such as Descartes, Leibniz, Pascal, Russell, and Popper were also 
mathematicians, and that some of the greatest modern scientists: Einstein, Max 
Born, Niels Bohr, Heisenberg, and Schrödinger also wrote books of philosophical 
reflection. Philosophy of science can be every bit as technical and esoteric as math-
ematics, physics, and formal logic, and its main concern is, as in science, the na-
ture of truth and of the scientific method (Lange 2007). But as the philosopher 
Hilary Putnam admits, philosophers of science are conducting their abstract spec-
ulations largely for other philosophers rather than for scientists, the bulk of whom 
are simply not interested in philosophic matters and do not consider them relevant 
to their work (Magee 1978: 203–204).
If philosophy is of limited use to contemporary science, an even stronger case 
of irrelevance can be made in relation to religion, which is quintessentially an ir-
rational, unempirical mode of thinking, in that its dogmas are by definition un-
supported by any evidence other than the faith and conviction of the religion’s 
founders and followers. Paradoxically, however, it is philosophy and religion, with 
their disregard for empirical proofs and, in the case of religion, for logic, that gen-
erate all the dogmatic certainties and absolute “truths” about the world, while sci-
ence, for all its insistence on both logic and evidence, remains cautious and 

	
Chapter 1.  Systems theory	

provisional in its claims. Scientific theories are, in the words of the psychologist 
Robin Dunbar, merely our current best guesses: “they act like a crutch to help us 
struggle a little further down the road of exploration in the hope that a more pre-
cise theory will be encountered along the way” (Dunbar 1995: 97). But it is pre-
cisely this tentativeness of scientific theories that makes them relatively truer, 
nearer the facts, and therefore more reliable in explaining the world than the non-
scientific theories. As Bertrand Russell conceded sceptically but encouragingly: 
“Science is at no moment quite right, but it is seldom quite wrong, and has, as a 
rule, a better chance of being right than the theories of the unscientific. It is, there-
fore, rational to accept it hypothetically” (Russell 1975: 13).
Indeed, the scientific form of inquiry would not have been born if scepticism, 
doubt, and the critical attitude – these philosophic but very unreligious disposi-
tions – had not been accepted as a legitimate part of intellectual life for the first 
time in ancient Greece. The great historical significance of Greek philosophy from 
the sixth to fourth century BCE (Before Common Era) lay in this new attitude 
towards religious myths—the attitude of critical debate introduced in the place of 
a dogmatic handing on of a doctrine in which the whole interest lies in the preser-
vation of unchanging tradition. For the first time in history doubt and criticism 
became an integral part of intellectual, educational, and public life, when in the 
place of myth and dogma we find the tradition of institutionalized criticism, open 
analysis and debate. Such were the historical beginnings of rational thought and 
scientific method. In this way the ancient philosophers and their post-Renaissance 
successors were directly responsible for the growth of knowledge and scientific 
progress in the whole of Western culture.
On the other hand religion as a traditional repository of unchanging dog-
matic certainties and divine truths does not encourage (in fact, it strongly discour-
ages: by intimidation, imprisonment, and death) creative and independent think-
ing, because any original thought must necessarily be different from, and therefore 
unacceptable to religious doctrine. In this context philosophic scepticism and the 
critical attitude it fostered can be viewed as a transitional mode of thinking on the 
way from religious dogmatism to scientific empiricism: once thought was released 
from the constraints of dogma in ancient Greece and later again in post-Reformation 
Europe, free philosophic speculation became possible, eventually to be channelled 
into a more rigorous and empirically valid scientific inquiry. And just as modern 
philosophy rendered medieval theology and scholasticism redundant as forms of 
intellectual inquiry, so the advances in physics and biology, made especially in the 
second half of the twentieth century, have in turn invalidated most of traditional 
philosophy as a tool to understand the world. This means that it perhaps matters 
less what today’s philosophers actually say than that they are allowed to say it, that 
they can speculate freely, even if their speculations are, often on their own 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
admission, wrong and nonsensical. Like their ancient Greek predecessors contem-
porary philosophers can still openly debate, criticize and contest official ideolo-
gies, for which they are not only left unharassed by those in power but they actu-
ally enjoy a great deal of social respect and prestige—a sign that Western liberal 
and open societies welcome and support institutionalized critical debate.
Scientific claims have as a rule greater empirical validity than theological or 
philosophic propositions, but they are also limited when compared with the latter, 
precisely due to science’s insistence on empirical evidence and practical applicabil-
ity. The scientific description of the world is at any stage confined to what can be 
physically demonstrated through observation or experimentation, whereas philo-
sophic propositions can be broader and more far-reaching, precisely because they 
are not limited to what can be empirically shown to be true. Philosophers can 
therefore speculate more freely than scientists, and while many philosophic claims 
ultimately turn out to be false, some can imaginatively reach further than the cur-
rent state of empirical research, eventually paving the way for new developments 
in science. Philosophic speculation and a more down-to-earth scientific research 
are therefore not mutually opposing forms of knowledge, but they complement 
one another. After all, the philosophic inquiry into the nature of the world his-
torically preceded science, and the latter would not have been born if certain phil-
osophic schools, such as rationalism, empiricism, and pragmatism had not risen 
in prominence and influence in the last few hundred years.
Indeed, the traditional division of intellectual inquiry into philosophy and sci-
ence, of the investigations into the mental and spiritual dimension of human life 
on the one hand, and into the physical and biological phenomena on the one hand, 
may well soon become obsolete, as new developments in science appear to be 
bringing the two cultures closer together. For the astrophysicist John D. Barrow, 
for instance, the sciences and the humanities are not alternative responses to the 
complexity of the world, but two views that are intimately entwined. From a phys-
ical and biological perspective it becomes clear that humans have evolved in a 
particular type of universe which constrains what and how they think, why they 
like certain types of narratives, visual arts, music and so on (Barrow 1995: 2–4). In 
the late 1970s Edward O. Wilson, the founder of sociobiology, also advocated that 
human culture should be studied as part of the natural sciences, which should be 
integrated with the social sciences and humanities (Wilson 1978: 6, 9). More re-
cently, Wilson conceived of the future of human intellectual enterprise in terms of 
what he calls “consilience,” that is, “the ’jumping together’ of knowledge by the 
linking of facts and fact-based theory across disciplines to create a common 
groundwork of explanation” (Wilson 1998: 6). Speaking of the rapprochement be-
tween the arts and the sciences Wilson stated that “the momentum is overwhelm-
ingly towards conceptual unity,” in which “the humanities... will draw closer to the 

	
Chapter 1.  Systems theory	

sciences and partly fuse with them” (Wilson 1998: 9). In a similar spirit of multi-
disciplinary integration the anthropologists Jerome H. Barkow, Leda Cosmides, 
and John Tooby, the editors of the seminal book The Adapted Mind (1992), call for 
a long overdue theoretical amalgamation between biology, psychology, and sociol-
ogy, the merger that “would seem too obvious to discuss were it not for the bold 
claims of autonomy made for the social sciences, accompanied by institutionalized 
neglect of neighbouring disciplines.” It is one of the astonishing features of con-
temporary intellectual life, say the authors of this landmark publication, that cross-
disciplinary consistency should be treated as a radical claim in need of defence, 
rather than as a routine tool of inference (Barkow, Cosmides, Tooby 1992: 13).
Among the most interesting and promising scientific developments of recent 
decades aimed at bringing the two cultures together is evolutionary psychology, 
which applies the Darwinian theory of evolution by natural selection not just to 
the question of the diversity of life, but to problems traditionally reserved for soci-
ology, anthropology, psychology, linguistics, as well as art and literary criticism 
(Lopreato 1984; Barkow, Cosmides, Tooby 1992; Knight, Dunbar & Power 1999, 
Buss 2004; Cartwright 2000; Cummins 1998; Pinker 1998; Ridley 2003). The liter-
ary scholar Nancy Easterlin, for instance, sees the convergence of psychology and 
biological evolutionary theory, or what she calls bioepistemology, as a way to re-
solve the contradictions between theory and practice now besetting literary stud-
ies. In her view, “humanists and social scientists, including literary theorists, who 
ignore the implications of evolutionary theory and biology do so at the cost of the 
increasing irrelevance of their disciplines” (Easterlin 2005: 621, 625). Notwith-
standing the continuing prestige of traditional, philosophy-based humanistic dis-
ciplines in academia, arts scholars will, hopefully, come to appreciate eventually 
that there are only two “solid” sciences able to offer reliable methodologies for all 
other disciplines: physics, in relation to matter and the history of the universe, and 
biology, in relation to the evolution and structure of living organisms, including 
humans with their consciousness and culture. What happens in physical and bio-
logical sciences matters if only because it translates directly into practical domains, 
engineering and technology on the one hand, and medicine, chemistry, pharma-
cology, and food industry on the other hand. Research in these areas cannot be 
conducted entirely according to any philosophic or ideological views arbitrarily 
chosen by the researcher, as often happens in the humanities or social sciences. In 
physics and biology no one can afford to make mistakes without ultimately endan-
gering people’s lives, safety, health and well being. Compared with the serious 
practical implications of physical and natural sciences many other academic disci-
plines often appear as little more than intellectual self-indulgence and social work 
designed to allow the undergraduate students to come peacefully of age in a rela-
tively civilized, academic environment. Nearly thirty years ago Edward O. Wilson 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
and Richard Dawkins independently deplored the fact that humanists still acted as 
if the scientific revolution had not taken place (Dawkins 2006a: 1), and even today 
publications in humanities and social sciences still read as if most of basic science 
had halted during the nineteenth century. In Wilson’s words: “their content con-
sists largely of historical anecdotes, diachronic collating of outdated, verbalized 
theories of human behaviour, and judgments of current events according to per-
sonal ideology – all enlivened by the pleasant but frustrating techniques of effer-
vescence” (Wilson 1978: 194).
In this context systems theory can be viewed as one of the ways to bridge the 
two intellectual traditions, by borrowing what I think is best in both philosophic 
and scientific types of inquiry. From philosophy the systems approach borrows the 
deductive method of reasoning, which basically consists in formulating a set of ini-
tial assumptions, and then speculatively transforming them into propositions rele-
vant to the problem in hand, here: communication, signs, and production of mean-
ing. From science in turn systems theory derives its insistence on internal coherence, 
empirical validity and general usefulness in explaining aspects of human behaviour 
related to communication. In other words, my design is to present a theory of signs 
and communication that can be both internally coherent and useful in explaining 
the origin, evolution, and function of systems of communication found in the em-
pirical world. However, my initial approach is primarily theoretical rather than em-
pirical, hence the use of deduction in the construction of the theory.
Logical deduction
The traditional division of scientific disciplines into empirical and theoretical, and 
the related inductive and deductive modes of thought underlying the two types of 
inquiry, respectively, still underpin the division of science into empirical disciplines 
such as experimental physics and biology, and theoretical disciplines, or pure sci-
ences, such as theoretical physics, mathematics, and logic. However relevant the 
historic division of science into empirical and theoretical, it is clear that no type of 
inquiry is only empirical or only theoretical, and that the two methods are in fact 
inextricably linked. Induction as the main method of inquiry in empirical studies 
cannot exist without some a priori theoretical assumptions as to what constitutes 
empirical evidence and what the ultimate purpose of the research is. Likewise, de-
duction as the main method of reasoning in philosophy, mathematics, and logic 
cannot proceed without assumptions about the world that are, ultimately, of em-
pirical nature (Johnson-Laird, Byrne 1991: 2; Gregory 1981: 232–233).
To begin with, all theoretical speculation about the world must rest on the 
realistic premise that both the world as the object of inquiry and the person of the 

	
Chapter 1.  Systems theory	

inquirer exist in the physical and biological sense. For all its seemingly immaterial 
and ethereal nature, intellectual speculation is the product of the very material and 
empirically accessible human brain, itself a biological organ devised by evolution 
to process information coming to the brain from the environment and generated 
by the brain itself (Plotkin 1994, 1997). Once the existence of the world, of the hu-
man observer, and of the cognitive processes underlying the inquiry are accepted 
as the necessary empirical premise, speculation about the nature of the world is 
never a question of either solely generalizing from observation (empirical induc-
tion), or of deriving logical conclusions from premises (theoretical deduction). 
One can at best talk about the domination of observation, experimentation, and 
manipulation of empirical data in inductive sciences, and about the domination of 
logical procedures in transforming premises into conclusions in deductive theo-
rizing. Both methods have, like everything, their advantages and disadvantages, 
but interestingly philosophers of science appear to be inclined towards the view 
that the more reliable knowledge, one that offers us a better sense of what the 
world is “really like,” is achieved not through inductive generalizations but through 
deductive inferences (Popper 2002: 3; Magee 1998: 429).
Notwithstanding its seeming nearness to the hard facts of life, a strictly em-
pirical investigation is disadvantaged both by the limitations of human sensory 
apparatus and by the imperfections of inductive logic. In Plato’s famous allegory of 
the cave from The Republic our knowledge of the world, as it comes to us through 
the senses, is equivalent to the shadows of objects cast upon a cave wall, giving us 
an incomplete or misleading idea of the objects themselves (Plato 2003: 275). Also, 
as Karl Popper points out, any generalizations drawn from observational data may 
always turn out to be false: for example, no matter how many instances of white 
swans we may have observed, it does no justify the conclusion that all swans are 
white (Popper 2002: 3–4). (Indeed, black swans have been discovered in Austral-
ia.) The problem with induction is that one is never certain just how much evi-
dence is necessary to justify a conclusion, and how many instances of a particular 
phenomenon are needed to create a reliable general model, one that would explain 
instances not yet discovered, or predict new ones. A good example of a relative 
weakness of inductive reasoning is Umberto Eco’s semiotic theory (Eco 1976), in 
which an elaborate speculative model is built from a single, isolated example of 
communication. Eco describes a floating buoy signalling to the control panel of a 
car the level reached by the gasoline, and uses this situation to construct a compli-
cated and rather confused abstract model of signification and communication of 
allegedly general application. One wonders whether a different example (out of an 
extremely large number of types of situations involving communication and 
signification) would yield a different theoretical model, or whether a different 
scholar would arrive at a similar or different model starting with Eco’ example. In 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
other words, Eco’s semiotic theory simply begs too many serious methodological 
questions right from the start (in addition to employing a rather alienating struc-
turalist jargon), to be accepted as a reliable and helpful tool in explaining how 
signs actually function in social communication.
By comparison, the deductive method has always been the preferred one by 
philosophers and logicians. It basically relies on setting up a hypothesis as a work-
ing tool and then tracking it down to see whether it works in experience. In the 
process of “creative deduction” (Ervin Laszlo’s expression) we formulate axiomatic 
constructions to consider the set of all conceivable possibilities in the behaviour of 
particular systems under investigation, and then apply this construction to an em-
pirical situation (Laszlo 1972a: 26; 1972b: 16–18). For the philosopher of science 
Arturo Rosenbleuth this is how the most important theories, such as Einstein’s 
theory of relativity, were created: “The theory of physics is neither a mere descrip-
tion of experimental facts nor something deducible from such a description;... the 
physical scientist only arrives at his theory by speculative means” (Rosenbleuth 
1970: 80). Speculation refers here to the practice of imaginative, creative theoriz-
ing to formulate a hypothetical general law that will fit the specific set of observa-
tional or experimental data, and if the fit is not found, the hypothesis can always 
be modified (Magee 1998: 429). So while the usefulness of a theory is ultimately 
measured by its power to explain the empirical data, the data alone cannot dictate 
the shape of the theory, as often happens in inductive thinking: theories are cre-
ated speculatively by their propounders rather than induced on the basis of a large 
number of consistent observations and experiments.
Postmodern “theory”
Incidentally, one cannot help noticing that the characteristics of scientific theory 
as outlined earlier, including the explicitness of initial premises, internal logical 
coherence and empirical verifiability, do not appear to apply to much of what has 
come to be called “critical theory” within the humanities and social science de-
partments during the last thirty years or so. Critical theory spread originally from 
France in the 1960s, initially among the literary scholars at the Anglophone uni-
versities, where many academics hitherto engaged in the otherwise useful work of 
interpreting literary texts suddenly took to writing incomprehensible, pseudo-
philosophic prose, henceforth referred to simply as “theory.” Often used with the 
adjective “postmodern” or “poststructuralist,” theory was at its inception inspired 
by an eclectic mix of Marxist sociology, Freudian psychoanalysis, Saussurean 
structural linguistics, political feminism, and Derridean deconstruction, to men-
tion just the main influences, and has with time presented itself as an all-embracing 

	
Chapter 1.  Systems theory	

critical method to analyse the ideological underpinnings of culture and society in 
general. It lies beyond the scope of my book to offer a comprehensive exposition 
and critique of postmodern theory, except to say that the conscious rejection of 
logic, of clarity of argument, and of respect for evidence displayed by many post-
modern theorists, make theory, despite its continuing influence within academia, 
less than a reliable tool to address the fundamental problems of the mind, lan-
guage, and culture (Ellis 1997; Gross and Levitt 1998; Nagel 1998; Patai and Corral 
2005; Sokal and Bricmont 1998; Tallis 1995b, 1999b).
In literary studies, for example, the critic Valentine Cunningham observes 
that “much of what comes under this title [theory] is not, of course, strictly speak-
ing, theoretical – at least not in a scientific sense of a proposition, a model, a theo-
rem, a description telling you in a testable, provable-disprovable fashion what lit-
erature and the literary are and how they or one or other of their branches function” 
(Cunningham 2005: 25). The critic John M. Ellis also notes that “what now passes 
for theory is a degraded and corrupt shadow of what theory should be” (Ellis 
2005: 106), not least because of the befuddled and unintelligible style of writing 
adopted by many postmodern theorists. The American author Barbara Ehrenreich 
for example complains that “students taking courses in literature, film, cultural 
studies, and even, in some cases, anthropology and political science, are taught 
that the world is just a socially constructed ‘text,’ about which you can say just 
about anything you want, provided you say it murkily enough” (Wheen 
2004: 81–82). The depressing phenomenon of pretentious nonsense that passes as 
scholarly writing is largely due, ironically, to some professors of English, who reg-
ularly win prizes in the Bad Writing Contest run by the journal Philosophy and 
Literature (Myers 2005: 354).
Semiotic literature too has not escaped the unfortunate linguistic habits of 
postmodern discourse, and indeed for many critics semiotics is practically syn-
onymous with postmodern theory (Blonsky 1985: ix). The semiotician David Sless 
deplores the ironic fact that a subject so profoundly concerned with communica-
tion should have managed to produce so many incommunicative works, full of 
what he identifies as loose reasoning, absence of method, sweeping generaliza-
tions, tortured neologisms, and obfuscatory and esoteric jargon (Sless 1986: 2). 
Likewise Daniel Chandler, the author of a useful, coherent, and blessedly readable 
account of contemporary semiotics shares his own frustrations and disappoint-
ment with semiotic literature, which he finds for the most part almost impossible 
to understand, confusing, dull and deeply obscure (Chandler 2002: xv).
A classic case in point are the semiotic studies of Roland Barthes, the prime 
representative of the French School of Semiology. Supposedly inspired by the 
structural linguistics of Saussure but in fact, as Raymond Tallis demonstrates, bla-
tantly inverting Saussure’s ideas, Barthes’ theoretical work, described by the author 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
himself as “scientific,” is “muddled and grotesquely overvalued” in Tallis’s judg-
ment, devoid of any clearly defined method or substantiated arguments (Barthes 
1967: 11; Tallis 1995b: 95). In another, not untypical example, the conceptual con-
fusion of postmodernism has produced such investigations into semiotic theory 
as Floyd Merrell’s book Sensing Semiosis: Toward the Possibility of Complementary 
Cultural “Logics” (1998). The book sets out to integrate, in an incomprehensible 
mix, Peirce’s theory of signs, “the non-Euclidean geometry of Bernhard Riemann,” 
the Indian philosophy of Nagarjuna, the Buddhist “five skandhas” (which alleg-
edly “substantiate Peirce’s variation of classical logic”), the philosophy of William 
James, the physics of John Archibald Wheeler, information theory, and the phi-
losophy of Jean Baudrillard – all to reflect “the vast, intractable, and ever transient 
rush of semiosis,” in a world which “must include a sense of both-and and neither-
nor, contradiction, inconsistency, and incompleteness” (Merrell 1998: ix-xiii). 
Nothing in Merrell’s book justifies just such an exotic combination of inspirations, 
and one wonders why for instance Neo-Platonism, the Cabbala, Native American 
mythology, Taoism, astrology, quantum mechanics, chaos theory or any other 
equally incompatible system of thought has not been thrown into the semiotic mix 
as well. In the postmodern climate in which practically anything goes as long as it 
makes no sense, some intellectuals seem to have abandoned the duty to try and 
explain to others, as clearly as the subject permits, the world in which we live, 
preferring instead to beguile their readers with tedious poetic prose that passes as 
“theory.” In Merrell’s book, for example,
the concluding sense of semiosis is that we are, ourselves, our arrogant, pompous, 
imperious selves, no more than signs among signs, signs incompletely knowing 
themselves. The implication is: our universe is many yet one; it is what it is, yet it 
is always already something other than what it is/was/will be (Merrell 1998: xiii).
Admittedly, early semiotic literature, as illustrated by the writings of Peirce and 
Saussure, appears by contrast to be much more methodologically sound and reader 
friendly. Still, some of its claims too remain speculative and vague, no doubt due to 
the indebtedness of early semiotics to philosophic inquiry rather than to science. 
For instance, Peirce’s well-known classification of signs into icons, indexes, and 
symbols remains valid, mainly because subsequent independent research has con-
firmed the empirical relevance of this semiotic triad. However, Peirce’s further ex-
pansion of his classification into sixty-six types of signs is simply too abstract and 
speculative to be of much practical use to a semiotician investigating how signs 
actually work in real life (Peirce 1998: 142–143). Also, notwithstanding one’s admi-
ration for Peirce’s intellectual achievement and his historic role as the founding fa-
ther of modern semiotics, his writings still await to be closely scrutinized and if 
necessary corrected, instead of being quoted uncritically and accepted on the sheer 

	
Chapter 1.  Systems theory	

strength of Peirce’s historic authority as a philosopher (Sebeok 1976; 1994). Much 
of what Peirce and Saussure said in their original contributions is hypothetical rath-
er than empirically proven, and continuing uncritical admiration for these thinkers 
has the inevitable effect of slowing down progress in semiotic studies. While in sci-
ence progress is measured by the speed with which old theories are revised or dis-
carded, in philosophy-related humanistic disciplines uncritical reiteration of the 
original pronouncements often takes the place of new and fresh argument.
A systems view
What I am effectively advocating is a divorce between semiotics and philosophy 
and pseudo-science, and a subsequent re-marriage of semiotics with real science, 
to ensure that the same kind of methodological rigour, logic, and verifiability nor-
mally expected in scientific inquiry can also be applied to the study of signs. I also 
see the systems approach as a possible methodological alternative that attractively 
blends deductive logic with empirical validity and general usefulness. Indeed, one 
of my objectives is to demonstrate how the deductive methods of systems theory 
of signs can produce general statements that can be corroborated with relevant 
instances of communication from the empirical world.
It needs to be said, however, that systems theory does not exist as a single and 
unified method shared by all who use it, but varies considerably from author to 
author. To some, it is strictly a logico-mathematical method used to solve practical 
problems of organizational management or control in cybernetic machines, while 
to others it is another tool of abstract philosophic speculation conducted for its 
own sake, or even an extension of postmodern theory (Rapaport 1986; Reinfandt 
2001: 280). In between these extremes are systems scholars who use the deductive 
formulations of the theory to address problems normally dealt with by such disci-
plines as economics, biology, sociology, psychology, and communication or liter-
ary studies (Bateson 1979; Knapp and Womack 2003; Mazur 1966, 1970, 1976; 
Oyama 2000; Sadowski 1999a; Schmidt 1982). What the present application of 
systems theory to the study of signs shares with these formulations is the basic 
definition of a system, although a full set of initial premises now needs to be pre-
sented and discussed in appropriate detail. The premises as the main building 
blocks of the theory are presented below in descending order, from most general 
to more specific, followed by brief, explanatory discussions:
–	
the world exists in the physical sense, independently from the human observer;
–	
the world is intelligibly ordered, and open to rational inquiry;
–	
the world consists of systems, which interact with one another by exchanging 
information and energy. A system is a set of interrelated elements;

 
From Interaction to Symbol
–	
some systems have the capacity to maintain internal equilibrium with regard 
to information and energy exchanged with the environment. Such systems 
will be referred to as self-regulating or autonomous (Mazur 1966).
The assumption of the existence of things independently from the mind is one of 
commonsense realism, a position probably shared by most people but occasion-
ally challenged by philosophers, as for example by the subjective idealism of 
George Berkeley (1685–1753), for whom objects existed only when perceived, or 
more recently by the “linguistic turn” of postmodern philosophy, with its claim 
that all perceptions, concepts, and truth-claims are constructed by language rather 
than by empirical observation (Popper 1979: 32–33, 323). According to the latter 
view, what we know and what we are able to think or imagine has been generated 
outside the mind in the meta-sphere of culture communicated through language, 
here perceived as a closed semiotic system with no reference to external reality 
(Tallis 1995a). Things do not exist independently from the observer, we are led to 
believe, but are instead magically called into being by language, not even by the 
mind as the subjective idealists of the past maintained. However, if we accept that 
both the human mind and language have come into being at some point in human 
evolution, it is probably saner to accept that the world existed prior to the emer-
gence of our species with its cognitive and linguistic faculties, and that most bio-
physical facts are essentially non-linguistic phenomena, although we need of 
course a language if we wish to talk about them (Popper 1979: 315).
Another premise of systems approach speaks of the world as intelligibly or-
dered and open to rational inquiry, which is another way of saying that the world 
does not present itself as a chaotic and random conglomeration of objects, forces, 
and processes, but reveals itself to the human observer as a partly structured sys-
tem based on more or less predictable physical and biological laws. Faced with an 
array of heterogeneous phenomena, the normal human impulse is to look for reg-
ularity and order, not only out of a spirit of disinterested inquiry, but primarily for 
survival, as seeking order in the environment appears to be innate and adaptive 
(Bickerton 1990: 221). The realistic (as opposed to idealistic) position requires also 
that the world possesses properties independent from human perception and cog-
nitive processes, although the models of the world are of course primarily mental 
and linguistic constructs. The world as described by physics, from electrons and 
atoms up to galaxies, and the world of biology, from single-celled organisms to the 
complexities of the human brain and body, are indeed primarily cultural con-
structs, but the categories of perception and thought used by science, determined 
as they are by the bio-physiological organization of our species, cannot be com-
pletely arbitrary and fortuitous. Rather, human perception and cognition must in 
some measure correspond with external reality to enable humans to react 

	
Chapter 1.  Systems theory	

appropriately to relevant features of environment. No animal would survive if its 
categories of experience, such as space, time, substance, and causality were en-
tirely deceptive. Without the correspondence between the mental categories of 
experience and the bio-physical reality, adaptively appropriate reactions would be 
impossible, and an organism would quickly be eliminated by natural selection. So 
while Plato’s prisoners in the cave may not be seeing the real things but only their 
shadows, the shadows must be (as they are in real life) in some way representative 
of the objects (in semiotic terms, shadows are indexes of the objects that cast 
them). The intelligible order of the world, as it presents itself to the senses and the 
brain, cannot therefore be an arbitrary imposition of the internal working of the 
mind, or of the structure of language, because both the brain, the sensory appara-
tus, and language are themselves evolutionary products of the world, which they 
were designed to represent in a limited but to some extent accurate measure. What 
we can know about reality results therefore from a transaction between the mind, 
language, and the universe, in which the properties of these three domains interact 
with one another to produce not total fictions but varying models of what might 
be thought to be actually there (Bickerton 1990: 233; Plotkin 1994: 11–12).
However, the question of the role of language in creating models of the world 
is inescapable, because any intellectual inquiry, whether theological, philosophic, 
or scientific, is practically always (as is obvious in the present case) conducted 
through the medium of language. Devising explanatory models just by silently 
contemplating the world but without communicating one’s thoughts to other peo-
ple is theoretically possible, but nearly all intellectual inquiry on historical record 
has been a social activity, expressed and shared mainly through verbal language, 
occasionally aided by visual signs such as pictures and diagrams. This means that 
the properties of language as a medium of communication affect what is being 
communicated, here the model of the world resulting from an inquiry that uses 
language as its tool. I address the question of the origin of language in Chapter 10, 
where I also discuss to what extent a linguistic description reflects the objective 
properties of the world, to what extent the structure of language affects the verac-
ity of that description, and to what extent language can even generate non-existent 
entities. It is probably naïve to think of language as a medium that reflects the 
world simply as it is, but it would also be too extreme and unreasonable to deny 
language its communicative and mediating function altogether, and to regard it as 
a self-reflexive generator of meaning totally unrelated to any extra-linguistic real-
ity. The latter is, notoriously, the position of Derridean deconstructionists, but as 
the novelist Walker Percy quipped, a deconstructionist is an academic who claims 
that the linguistic meaning is radically indeterminate and communication is there-
fore impossible, but who leaves a message on his wife’s answering machine re-
questing pepperoni pizza for dinner (The Sokal Hoax: 91).

 
From Interaction to Symbol
A holistic approach
If we accept that the world reveals partial order or non-randomness rather than 
chaos and total unpredictability, the premise about the existence of systems can be 
the first step towards describing this order. A system is accordingly defined as a set 
of interrelated elements, with emphasis on interrelatedness, which precludes a 
situation in which different elements are thrown together at random (Bertalanffy 
1973: 2, 19, 63). In other words, systems are wholes with properties of their own, 
where a whole is an entity larger than the sum of its parts, which means that the 
constitutive characteristics of a system cannot be explained by the characteristics 
of isolated parts (Bertalanffy 1973: 54). For example, a heap of rubbish, a junk 
yard, a pile of bricks, a rain shower, or a casual crowd in a public place form loose 
sets rather than organized systems. Adding or subtracting elements from such a 
set does not change the characteristics of the set as a whole (Angyal 1981: 37). On 
the other hand, an eco-system, a living organism, the mind, a family, a business 
company, an ethnic group, an artistic movement, a car, a TV set and so on each 
form integrated systems, in which constituent elements are interrelated and inter-
dependent, so that removing or adding one element changes the functioning of 
the system as a whole. Similarly, a sequence of words picked up at random from a 
dictionary does not constitute a system in this understanding, whereas a group of 
words forming a grammatical sentence does: here the syntactic and semantic rules 
bind all the lexical elements of a sentence into an integrated, meaningful whole. 
Another familiar example of a whole irreducible to its constituent elements is the 
phenomenon of face recognition, which is based on global impression of many 
physiognomic factors working together. Many of us would be unable to describe 
the individual features of our closest friends, the colour of their eyes, the exact 
shapes of their noses and so on, but this uncertainty does not impair our feeling of 
familiarity with their features, which we would pick out of thousands because we 
respond to their characteristic, holistic expression (Gombrich 1982: 108). Holistic 
systems thus defined can refer to any sphere of empirical reality traditionally la-
belled as physical, biological, social, or psychological, because in systems analysis 
it is not so much the physical nature of the constituent elements that is important 
as the nature of the relations binding the elements together, and these can be 
shown to be analogous in different types of systems.
In the history of science a spectacular example of the advantages of holistic 
thinking as a reflection of holistic reality is Dmitri Mendeleev’s (1834–1907) peri-
odic table of elements. Prior to him, the elements were only understood in piece-
meal fashion, and by 1860 sixty elements were known out of the existing ninety. 
What Mendeleev did with the elements known in his time was to arrange them by 
atomic weight and by suits of properties. In other words, he looked at the elements 

	
Chapter 1.  Systems theory	

not as separate, isolated components of matter, but as parts of a larger whole, pos-
sibly connected by shared properties. By arranging the elements together 
Mendeleev eventually formulated the Periodic Law, whereby elements placed in 
accordance with the value of their atomic weights present a clear periodicity of 
properties. Following this law, Mendeleev was able to predict the existence of yet 
undiscovered elements and their properties, simply by examining the gaps in the 
periodic table. In this way a theoretician applying holistic thinking was able to be 
ahead of the empirical research. Mendeleev’s periodic table is still accepted as the 
basis for the chemical classification of matter (Hudson 1992: 196).
No empirical system ever exists in total isolation, because it always interacts 
with its environment, which in turn consists of other systems. In this sense all 
natural systems, inanimate or animate, are open systems (Bertalanffy 1973: 38). 
Interaction basically means that systems exchange information and energy with 
their environment. The concept of information is crucial in semiotics and com-
munication studies, and will be dealt with more closely in the next chapter. For the 
moment let it suffice to say that information has to do with the nature of relations 
binding the elements of a system together, that is, with the system’s structure. As 
systems interact, their structures change as a result of redistribution of informa-
tion and energy. For instance, trees draw water and nutrients from the soil, their 
leaves exchange carbon dioxide for oxygen in the air, while dump leaves and fallen 
trees litter and fertilize the soil in return. In other words, interaction between sys-
tems (here the tree and soil) is a two-way, dynamic and holistic process, which 
affects and changes the structure of both systems involved. When a hole is drilled 
in a piece of wood the two systems involved, the drill and the piece of wood, also 
alter their structure with regard to information and energy: the hole becomes big-
ger and bigger while the drill is slowly becoming blunted (structural change), and 
at the same time both the wood and the drill become hot during drilling (dy-
namic change). To use yet another example: in love and friendship the partners do 
not individually posses all the properties of their relationship, because it is some-
thing more than what each partner brings into it. The interactive phenomenon 
also lies behind Plato’s dialectic method of philosophical debate: two interlocutors, 
by challenging and responding to each other, can come closer to solving a philo-
sophic problem than either could by himself. The outcome of such a dialectic de-
bate is not merely the knowledge of one added to the knowledge of the other: 
verbal interaction constitutes a dynamic whole which has properties irreducible to 
those of each individual involved in the dialogue (Laszlo 1972a: 28).
Finally, the last premise of systems approach spoke of so-called autonomous 
systems, that is, systems able to maintain functional equilibrium with regard to 
information and energy exchanged with the environment (Mazur 1966). An au-
tonomous system is able to control the input and the output both of information 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
and energy to ensure the stability of its internal structure, which effectively means 
that it is able to counteract either excess or deficiency of information and energy 
inputs. As said earlier, a system interacting with the environment affects that envi-
ronment, but it is also affected itself in the process. The resulting changes in the 
system must neither be too small nor too large, but should be of such level and 
intensity as to preserve the system’s internal structure and its ability to continue 
interacting with the environment in its own interest. (Without wishing to sound 
tautological, by “its own interest” I mean the system’s ability to maintain its inter-
nal structure regardless of the character of changes occurring in the system’s envi-
ronment.) A state in which the system maintains this ability will be called func-
tional equilibrium. Ervin Laszlo uses an analogous term of the “steady-state” in a 
system—a state in which energies of the system maintain the relationship of the 
system’s parts and keep them from collapsing in decay (Laszlo 1972a: 37). Richard 
Dawkins also talks about “the survival of the stable,” of which Darwin’s “survival of 
the fittest” is only a special case, as a general law of organizing matter in the uni-
verse. A stable thing can be a collection of atoms that link up together in chemical 
reaction to form molecules, which may be more or less stable. The earliest form of 
natural selection in this sense was simply a selection of stable forms and a rejection 
of unstable ones (Dawkins 2006a: 13). Whether we are dealing with a simple mol-
ecule or a highly complex living organism, the principle of the survival of the sta-
ble remains the same: to maintain stability, or functional equilibrium, means ef-
fectively to remove or minimize the disturbances to that equilibrium.
To be able to maintain its functional equilibrium an autonomous system is 
equipped with an internal homeostatic mechanism, coupled negatively with infor-
mation and energy inputs. The term “homeostasis” was coined by the physiologist 
Walter B. Cannon in 1932, and originally it referred to the self-regulating mecha-
nisms of warm-blooded creatures, whose body temperature is maintained con-
stant notwithstanding the variations in the surrounding medium (Koehler 
1981: 73; Fiske 2001: 21). The same homeostatic mechanism controls the levels of 
blood pressure, of sugar and iron concentration, and of many other essential sub-
stances and conditions in the body. A highly developed organism thus regulates its 
own internal environment much as a thermostat regulates the temperature of a 
refrigerator.
To perform its regulating function homeostasis must be based on the principle 
of negative feedback, which the systems biologists Peter B. and Jean S. Medawar 
describe as one of the fundamental stratagems in the self-regulation of living or-
ganisms (Medawar and Medawar 1977: 15). Negative feedback between system 
and environment means that a strong stimulus meets with a weak response from 
the system, while a weak stimulus is amplified by the system. For example, over-
heating of the body by sunlight (excess of energy) will cause a warm-blooded 

	
Chapter 1.  Systems theory	

organism to perspire, to look for shade, to drink more water and so on to reduce 
body temperature. On the other hand a starving organism (energy deficiency) is 
emotionally motivated to search or hunt for food to restore the necessary nutri-
tional balance. Examples of excessive informational stimuli in humans include 
loud noise, intensive social contacts, dazzling light, mental stress – any stimulus 
considered excessive and therefore intolerable by the system. On the other hand, 
deficiency of information includes silence, solitude, darkness, monotony of sur-
roundings and so on, likewise considered intolerable and prompting appropriate 
reactions to restore the disturbed functional equilibrium. In this way the homeo-
static, self-regulating mechanism oscillates between excess and deficiency, be-
tween the desirable and the undesirable, ensuring a state of near-equilibrium and 
continuity of the system’s internal structure and in consequence of its existence, 
despite the changes in the environment (Lieberman 1984: 59; Bertalanffy 1973: 42). 
All plants, animals, and humans live in a potentially hostile environment, and 
therefore they must guard themselves against inputs causing damage to their deli-
cately balanced structures. Excessive quantities, even of needed energies and in-
formational stimuli, can be dangerous, and in the interest of survival the organism 
must be able to reduce or avoid deviations from the required level of interactions 
with the environment. The particular level of interactions, as well as the type and 
quantity of required energy and information differ from species to species, de-
pending on the generic characteristics and the environmental niche occupied by 
the organism. In all cases, however, the fundamental principle of deviation-reduc-
ing negative feedback of the homeostat is the way in which living organisms in-
crease their chances of survival and maximize their existence by satisfying their 
manifold needs.
Homeostatic self-regulation based on negative feedback is also a short-term 
equivalent to what is known in natural sciences as (long-term) adaptation. The 
latter is a macro-feature of the organization of living systems, formed by a very 
long process of interaction between the environment and succession of organisms 
extending ultimately over millions of years of organic evolution. Biological adap-
tations come in various forms: physiological, structural, and behavioural, and they 
are a result of natural selection acting upon heritable variation, the most adaptive 
variants being those that either reduce the energy costs of the organism, or in-
crease its energy intake, or in some other way enhance its likelihood of surviving 
and reproducing (Plotkin 1994: xiv, 51).
In the next chapter I will use the assumptions of systems theory introduced in 
this section to develop a deductive theory of signs consistent with these assump-
tions. In other words, after accepting the basic premises of systems theory as axi-
omatic, that is, not requiring separate proofs, the next step would be to deduce 
further, more specific propositions from these premises, applicable to the problems 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
under investigation: here signs, communication, and production of meaning. 
Once the premises are accepted the subsequent transformations of the systems 
model should also be accepted as logically and, hopefully, empirically valid. If for 
some reasons some or all of the systems premises (such as that the world exists 
independently from the observer, or that mental models interpret rather than con-
struct the world) cannot be accepted by some readers, it is always possible to treat 
the rest of the book as a consequence of a procedure “let’s assume that...”, and see 
where the argument will lead us. In other words, by employing logical deduction I 
claim tentativeness of argument rather than certainty, in accordance with the hy-
pothetical nature of scientific inquiry in general.

chapter 2
Towards a systems model of communication
What is a definition?
Investigations into semiotic theory usually begin with the fundamental question: 
what is a sign? Similarly, a systems theory of signs as presented in this book should 
start with some definition, either borrowed or newly formulated, of what a sign is. 
Indeed, since I undertook to write a book on signs and communication, and have 
used the word “sign” several times already, it should indicate that I know what a 
sign is. The thing is that I do not, but I intend to find out, using the systems ap-
proach as outlined in Chapter 1 as the starting point. To be more precise, I have a 
vague idea that signs have to do with interactions between systems and with ex-
change of information, but I cannot claim any certainty about the nature of signs 
at this early stage, because discovering what signs are and how they work should 
be the goal of the inquiry, not its starting point. Therefore rather than beginning 
with a ready-made but largely unexplained definition of a sign, it is probably more 
methodologically sound to begin by asking cautiously: how can we arrive at a use-
ful understanding of signs using, as in the present case, an independent concep-
tual framework of systems theory as an instrument of inquiry? This means that we 
have to start with the general assumptions of the theory rather than with specific 
definitions, and also that any proposed definitions should be shown to be logically 
consistent with the theory by being deductively traced back to its initial premises.
Formal definitions such as those used in philosophy and science are expres-
sions of one of the functions of language treated as a tool in describing and ex-
plaining the world: to give verbal equivalents to objects and phenomena discov-
ered in the world. In systems terms this means that empirical systems are provided 
with linguistic labels to facilitate identification, description and classification of 
these systems. In science as in everyday life there seems to be little problem in at-
taching linguistic labels to systems that can be perceived, measured, and examined: 
the material and solid objects such as minerals, plants, man-made objects, animals, 
or people. Physical objects have perceivable and easily identifiable parameters and 
properties, which can also be given linguistic labels, making the problem of rela-
tionship between language and the empirical world relatively unproblematic.
Problems begin, however, when language is used to refer to systems of physi-
cally less tangible status, such as functional relations between empirical systems, 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
abstract concepts generated by the mind, or elusive mental and emotional states. 
For instance, most languages seem to possess in abundance words referring to 
concepts such as “god,” “evil,” “good,” “sin,” “love,” “soul,” “beauty,” “truth,” “fate,” 
“morality,” “happiness” and so on. A particularly fertile source of abstract concepts 
is religion, and given its universal character all known languages possess vocabu-
lary for metaphysical concepts of one kind or another – concepts whose referents, 
that is, non-linguistic empirical equivalents, are either indeterminate or in many 
cases probably non-existent. This is not to say that abstract concepts never have 
any external referents, but that the indefinite nature of these referents, combined 
with human tendency to believe in the empirical validity of some abstract con-
cepts may account for the persistence and strange attractiveness of metaphysical 
vocabulary in language.
The persistence of abstract concepts is also due to the fact that they are diffi-
cult, if not impossible, to disprove. For example, it may be argued that while it is 
perhaps impossible to prove the existence of god empirically, it is also impossible 
to provide proofs that god does not exist, which in itself may be one of the reasons 
for the perpetuity of the concept itself. (By the same token it is impossible to dis-
prove the idea that our pets are listening to out daily conversations and transmit-
ting them telepathically to their headquarters on the planet Zog.) Modern human-
istic disciplines, historically the heirs of theological and philosophical debates, 
appear to have inherited this penchant for metaphysical vocabulary of uncertain 
referential validity, while contemporary postmodern discourse has even gone a 
step further by openly denying that language has any relevance outside the dis-
course itself (the idea of sense without reference [Tallis 1995b: 84]). When reading 
postmodern criticism (including that on semiotics) one gets the impression that 
rather than addressing real problems existing in the outside world the critics in-
vent abstract vocabulary just to perpetuate the discourse itself, which makes one 
think that if certain words have not been invented, these critics would have noth-
ing to write about. As I argue in Chapter 11, human language appears to be a 
mixed blessing, in that it can be used as a tool to negotiate and explain the world, 
to exchange useful ideas, but also as an instrument for generating self-reflexively 
words and concepts of no discernible empirical validity. In other words, the mere 
presence of a word in a dictionary does not mean that it necessarily has to refer to 
something definite in the real world.
This preoccupation with language conceived as an object of study in its own 
right rather than as an instrument of inquiry and communication often leads to a 
situation in which every time a new word is introduced, its meaning is not deter-
mined in terms of external referents but in terms of other words, which is not the 
same thing. For example, in some writings of Thomas A. Sebeok semiotics emerg-
es as a self-referential discipline, whose specialized vocabulary is explained in 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

terms of abstract semantic analyses rather than in terms of its usefulness in study-
ing instances of communication found in the empirical world. Sebeok’s Contribu-
tions to the Doctrine of Signs, for instance, contains page after page of detailed 
discussion of the semantic differences between the term “semiotics” and its cog-
nates found in different European languages, including semeiotiké, semiosis, Semi-
otik, semiotic versus semeiotic, sem(e)iotic(s), Semasiologie, sematology, Sematolo-
gie, semology, semiotics, szemiotika (Hungarian), sémiologie, semiotica, semiology 
etc. (Sebeok 1976: 47–58). It is as if the question posed was not how semiotics ex-
plains the working of signs in different communication systems found in the em-
pirical world, but something like: “what are the received meanings of the word 
‘semiotics’ in different languages?” One is reminded on this occasion of Karl 
Popper’s warning that
we should altogether avoid, like the plague, discussing the meaning of words. Dis-
cussing the meaning of words is a favourite game of philosophy, past and present: 
philosophers seem to be addicted to the idea that words and their meaning are 
important, and are the special concern of philosophy.
Instead, argues Popper, philosophy and science should be concerned with state-
ments, propositions, and theories that are truthful, in the sense of corresponding 
with facts, because “what we are really interested in, our real problems, are factu-
al... problems of theories and their truth” (Popper 1979: 309). Bryan Magee echoes 
Popper by stating that “the only thing that discussion of the meanings of words 
extends our understanding of is the meanings of words: it does nothing, or next to 
nothing, to extend our understanding of non-linguistic reality.” The preoccupation 
with the meanings of words is for Magee “a disastrous error” of twentieth-century 
philosophy, one that was bound to lead to “interminable word-spinning, logic-
chopping, and in the end scholasticism” (Magee 1998: 61).
Still, creating a theory requires using language, which includes, among other 
things, the need to formulate definitions as concise descriptions of the objects of 
inquiry and as a way of discriminating and classifying these objects. The main 
object of investigation in semiotics is, naturally, the sign, and understandably 
books on semiotics usually begin with some definition of the sign. A definition 
normally assumes the form of an affirmative, explanatory statement which sounds 
like an answer to the question “what is x?”, here: “what is a sign?” Thus, to use an 
early classic example, C. S. Peirce defines a sign as follows:
A sign, or representamen, is something which stands to somebody for something 
in some respect or capacity. It addresses somebody, that is, creates in the mind of 
that person an equivalent sign, or perhaps a more developed sign. That sign which 
it creates I call the interpretant of the first sign. The sign stands for something, its 
object. It stands for that object, not in all respects, but in reference to a sort of idea, 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
which I have sometimes called the ground of the representamen. “Idea” is here to 
be understood in a sort of Platonic sense, very familiar in everyday talk... etc 
(Peirce 1998: 135).
I have quoted Peirce’s well-known definition not to query it or to use it as a launch 
pad for my own discussion of the nature of signs, but to illustrate a logical proce-
dure which I suspect lies behind formulating such definitions. When reading sem-
iotic literature one gets the impression that definitions of certain key concepts, 
such as Peirce’s definition of a sign quoted above, are often spun from thin air, 
without any proof that what the writer says is indeed true. In other words, my 
question is: how does Peirce know that a sign is what his definition says it is? He 
may well be right, but he gives us no proof of that. The above quotation is taken out 
of context, but nothing in what precedes it in Peirce’s original text justifies its af-
firmative and authoritative tone. A definition such as this is more of a statement of 
the author’s intellectual opinion, conviction, or intuition put forward before the 
reader to be accepted on faith, rather than a logical conclusion resulting from 
clearly stated premises or from observation.
The same logical objection can be raised against other definitions routinely 
formulated within semiotics. For example, the Dictionary of Semiotics, edited by 
Bronwen Martin and Felizitas Ringham and inspired by the Paris school of semi-
otics as represented by A. J. Greimas, consists entirely of arbitrary, ex-cathedra 
definitions of equally arbitrary, abstract, “technical” semiotic terms of unclear ori-
gin. When asked in 1985 about the development of his semiotic theory, Greimas is 
reported to have said: “My theoretical genius, if I can so call it, was a form of ‘bri-
colage.’ I took a little Lévi-Strauss and added some Propp.” He also said that he was 
inspired by Dumézil, Saussure, and Hjelmslev (Martin and Ringham 2000: 4). 
Such an eclectic, impressionistic “bricolage” of ideas picked ad hoc from different 
authors may have some accidental merit, but it hardly bespeaks a “theoretical gen-
ius,” or makes the resulting theory “scientific,” which is what Martin and Ringham 
call Greimas’s contribution to semiotics. Greimas’s eclectic method is rather like 
taking pieces from different jigsaw puzzles and forcing them together to create a 
new picture. Even if the pieces somehow “fit” into one another, the resulting pic-
ture is far from coherent: an abstract patchwork of colourful spots rather than a 
meaningful image. The “colourful spots” of a semiotic theory thus created are the 
entries in Martin and Ringham’s Dictionary of Semiotics: we neither know how 
these terms and their definitions have been arrived at, nor what logic or evidence 
justifies their affirmative, authoritative tone. It is similar with Umberto Eco’s sem-
iotic theory, with its “technical,” pseudo-scientific terminology and equally arbi-
trary, inexplicable definitions, obscure diagrams and schemas, designed more to 
beguile and mystify rather than to clarify and elucidate what signs are and how 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

they work in the real world (Eco 1976). By contrast, entries in dictionaries and 
textbooks of chemistry, biology or any other scientific discipline include technical 
terms and precise definitions reflecting current state of knowledge about the re-
spective empirical domains, shared and agreed upon by all scientists working in 
the area. In semiotics on the other hand, despite the authors’ frequent insistence 
on the “scientific” nature of their theories, definitions are often dictated by indi-
vidual, often idiosyncratic, intellectual temperaments and opinions rather than by 
generally agreed, logical and verifiable assumptions and observations.
Information as difference
Let me therefore initiate a process that will hopefully lead us eventually to a useful 
definition of a sign in the light of systems theory. Let us start by returning to the 
third premise introduced in Chapter 1, that about systems interacting with one 
another by exchanging information and energy. In the simplest case we are dealing 
with two interacting systems X and Y, as shown in Figure 1.
The schema describes the reaction (output) of system X providing a stimulus 
(input) to system Y; this input in turn causes system Y to react, thus providing an 
input to system X. System X reacts to this input by producing another output to 
system Y, and so on. Any system’s reaction is thus always a part of an interactive 
loop, because no empirical system exists in a vacuum, without interacting with its 
environment, which in practice consists of other systems. As I also said earlier, inter-
action is always a two-way, give-and-take, feedback process that changes the struc-
tures of both systems involved, as each system internally transforms stimuli into 
reactions. A change within a system can be defined in terms of a difference between 
physical states, as shown in Figure 2 (Mazur 1970: 12; Sadowski 1999a: 45).
X
Y
Figure 1.  Interaction between two systems

 
From Interaction to Symbol
system x
medium
system y
environment
x1
x2
y1
y2
Ix
Iy
Figure 2.  Information as a difference between physical states
The schema describes more closely what happens in interacting systems X and Y. 
(To obtain a full picture we would have to include the feedback reaction of system 
Y, but for the sake of clarity of presentation it is sufficient to concentrate on one re-
action at a time.) The little boxes marked x1 and x2 in system X represent two phys-
ical states; more precisely, a transformation of state x1 into state x2. Transformation 
also involves energy, since transforming one state into another means creating a 
potential difference between these states. Following the cyberneticist Marian Mazur 
let me introduce a definition, whereby a difference between physical states in a sys-
tem will be called information, here marked Ix in system X (Mazur 1970: 13).
When interacting with system Y, system X causes a corresponding difference 
between physical states in system Y, represented by a transformation of state y1 
into state y2 in Figure 2. This transformation is also information, here marked Iy. 
This is basically what is meant by interaction understood as an exchange of infor-
mation. For instance, when a meteor crashes onto the earth it breaks up on impact, 
creating also a crater in the earth. During the interaction (crash) a 
change/information is caused both in the structure of the meteor (system X) and 
in the surface of the earth (system Y). The resulting changes/information in sys-
tem X and system Y correspond to one another: from a mechanical point of view 
the force causing the meteor to break up is proportional with the force creating the 
crater in the earth. This is of course due to Newton’s Third Law of Motion, where-
by whenever one object exerts a force on a second object, the second exerts an 
equal and opposite force on the first (Giancoli 1995: 80).
As said above, interaction is a two-way process, involving systems whose be-
haviour alternates between receiving stimuli from other systems and producing 
reactions directed at other systems. It is also clear that every interaction must start 
with the first reaction produced by one system, followed by the first stimulus 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

received by another system. In a conversation, for example, there is always the first 
utterance produced by one of the communicators (an introduction, a question, a 
greeting and so on), heard and possibly responded to by the other communicator. 
Let me therefore introduce a definition, whereby the first reaction of system X will 
be called original, whereas the first stimulus received by system Y will be called 
image. In may also be useful to introduce related definitions, whereby system X 
producing the original will be called reacting system, or sender, whereas system Y 
producing the image will be called receiving system, or simply receiver.
Thus in addition to transformations of physical states occurring within inter-
acting systems (original Ix and image Iy), there also occurs a transformation of 
states between the systems. This is indeed what happens when systems interact 
with one another: they exchange information. Let me therefore introduce another 
definition, whereby a transformation of physical states (that is, exchange of infor-
mation) between interacting systems will be called communication. In other words, 
communication means transforming originals produced by sender into images 
produced by receiver. On the other hand the particular physical or technical chan-
nel through which originals are transformed into images will be called medium. 
The received definition of medium in communication studies is, similarly, “the 
technical or physical means of converting the message into a signal capable of be-
ing transmitted along the channel” (Fiske 2001: 18). The physical media may refer 
to the sensory channels used by living organisms in their interactions with envi-
ronment: the visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, and tactile senses. The man-
made media in turn refer to the cultural extensions of these senses, including 
painting, sculpture, film, photography, writing, print, architecture, theatre, voice, 
music, perfume and so on.
To define information in terms of a difference between physical states is an-
other way of saying that information is anything that is different from something 
else. Derek Bickerton offers a similar definition of information from an adaptive, 
biological viewpoint, calling it “news of some change in some dimension of the 
environment that has a potential effect, life-threatening or life-enhancing, on some 
particular creature” (Bickerton 1990: 77). In this sense, for example, a difference 
between light and darkness is information, as is a difference between an empty 
page and a written page, or between one speech sound and another, or between 
two letters, between two gestures, two different smells, facial expressions and so 
on. Absence of a stimulus as compared with its presence is also information, as 
exemplified by an empty page as compared with a printed one, or by silence as 
compared with speech. For instance, the African elephant’s alarm call is silence, 
what Thomas Sebeok calls a “zero sign” (Sebeok 1994: 18). Similarly, any physical 
movement automatically creates information, since a moving object constantly 
changes its position in relation to its surroundings. Indeed, for evolutionary 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
reasons our visual perception appears to be geared towards moving objects rather 
than static ones, as movement is one of the main behavioural characteristics of 
animals, the “quick,” that is, alive creatures, which are important from the point of 
view of human survival and adaptation, either as sources of potential danger or of 
potential food. Receiving information understood as difference in the environ-
ment thus corresponds to what psychologists call “perception,” defined by the 
physiologist Derek Denton as “the discrimination of an object or event through 
one or more sensory modalities, and separating them from the background in-
flow” (Denton 2005: 102).
Interacting systems, information, and media are not the only elements of com-
munication: the exchange of information can also be affected by external, environ-
mental factors existing independently from the interacting systems and the par-
ticular medium of communication. The use of a medium (visual, auditory and so 
on) depends on the presence of specific environmental conditions, so that for in-
stance a system able to react to visual stimuli will not perceive objects in the dark, 
just as large distance, extraneous interfering sounds, or physical obstacles will 
hinder or distort audition and consequently the understanding of verbal utter-
ances between two speakers. In his model of animal communication the biologist 
Marc D. Hauser lists the following, more specific environmental factors likely to 
cause loss or distortion of information between sender and receiver: (1) general 
spreading effect due to lack of complete directionality; (2) attenuation due to envi-
ronmental influence such as vegetation or climate; (3)reduction in strength of sig-
nal due to background noise; and (4) the initial intensity of the signal and the 
sensory threshold of the perceiver (Hauser 1998: 73). Background noise includes 
accidental physical side-effects interfering with information that are not intended 
by sender, such as visual or sound distortion, “grain” on a photograph, crackling in 
a telephone wire, static in a radio signal, or “snow” on a television screen. The 
manifold influences external to communication but affecting the accuracy of 
transmitted information are subsumed in Figure 2 under the general category of 
environment.
Contiguous communication
In various ways therefore noise and other environmental factors affect the accu-
racy of communicated information, not unlike in the telephone game, also known 
as Chinese whispers, in which a phrase or sentence is passed on from one player 
to another, becoming subtly altered in transit. Without the environmental inter-
ferences information is communicated accurately between interacting systems, in 
the sense that information in the original (sender) will correspond with information 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

in the image (receiver). Let us call the exchange of information between interact-
ing systems direct communication. Given the possible spatio-temporal relations 
likely to occur between interacting systems in the empirical world, direct com-
munication will involve the following types of situation:
–	
Image and original co-exist within the same spatio-temporal context, as in the 
earlier example of the meteor on impact with the earth. Two animals fighting 
or mating with one another, or two people looking at or talking to one an-
other face to face are also cases of interaction between systems co-existing 
within the same time and space, and remaining within the range of each oth-
er’s sensory field and attention. This type of direct interaction illustrates what 
can accordingly be called contiguous communication. It is by far the most com-
mon type of communication, found as a prerequisite for more advanced forms 
of communication used by organisms equipped with the nervous system and 
capable of using displaced reference (see sections on indexical, iconic, and 
symbolic communication below). Systems that do not process information in-
ternally, as is the case with inanimate objects, “communicate” only contigu-
ously by exchanging physical states in the form of mechanical forces and 
chemical substances. Contiguous communication is also the foundation of 
animal and human communication, where it defines the very spatio-temporal 
co-presence of the communicators, before the exchanged information is even 
processed and interpreted;
–	
Image and original exist within the same spatial context, but not within the 
same temporal context, as when a piece of rock formed millions of years ago is 
examined by a geologist, or when an ancient vase is unearthed by an archae-
ologist, or when an old document is examined by a historian. A direct interac-
tion between an image that is temporally separated from original is the basis 
of what can be called spatially contiguous communication. Academic disci-
plines such as geology, palaeontology, archaeology and history are accord-
ingly institutionalized ways of engaging in spatially contiguous communica-
tion with the natural and social environments. In addition to these scientific 
disciplines designed to investigate the past directly by examining both natural 
and man-made objects produced a long time ago, human desire for spatially 
contiguous communication extending beyond the immediate experience has 
found an outlet in elements of fantasy and fiction such as time travel, in which 
individuals (shamans, magicians, or mad scientists) are able to transport 
themselves bodily to some chosen place and time either in the past or in the 
future. It is also interesting to note that while contiguous communication is 
shared by both humans and animals, spatially contiguous communication 
seems to remain an exclusively human domain as a function of memory 
(see Chapter 4): for all we know, non-human animals have no concept of the 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
past or the future, and henceforth they have no interest in engaging in com-
munication with anything other than the immediate here-and-now.
	
Spatially contiguous connection with objects removed in time is also the basis 
of such widespread cultural phenomena as the cult of relics, fetishism, or sym-
pathetic magic, in which an object is invested with special emotional signifi-
cance deriving from its earlier physical contact with another object or person: 
a saint’s bone, a lover’s lock of hair, water from a holy well, a phial supposedly 
containing the blood of Christ, an alleged splinter from the Cross, Elvis 
Presley’s handkerchief, Marilyn Monroe’s dress, Eric Clapton’s guitar and so 
on. Spatially contiguous communication underlies human fascination and al-
most “magical” obsession, found today in collectors of memorabilia for exam-
ple, with material objects that have been either a part of or in physical contact 
with culturally significant persons or other objects;
–	
Image and original exist within the same temporal context, but not within the 
same spatial context, as when two people talk over the phone. Before the in-
vention of the telephone the theoretical possibility of interacting directly with 
a spatially displaced communicator found an outlet in beliefs in telepathy or in 
communication with spirits. Elements of magic and fantasy, in which magi-
cians wearing hats of invisibility change locations instantly at will, or where 
space crew members from futuristic science fiction films are beamed up in-
stantly to another location and back again, also exploit a desire to communi-
cate directly with distant, normally inaccessible locations. A direct interaction 
between spatially separated images and originals will be called simultaneous 
communication.
Indexical communication
As I stated earlier, by interacting with their environment systems transform that 
environment by causing physical changes in it. Let me introduce a definition 
whereby a physical change in the environment produced by reacting system X 
(sender) will be called an index of that system. For example, a crater in the ground 
caused by an exploded bomb is an index of that bomb, a footprint left in soft 
ground is an index of a person who stepped in that spot, a smell left behind by a 
passing animal is an index of that animal, loud music audible from an adjacent 
apartment is an index of a stereo system located in that apartment, a recorded 
voice or handwriting is an index of a person and so on. In these examples an image 
(perception of a smell, footprint, or noise) refers to an original, here index (smell, 
footprint, noise), which in turn is an image of another original that physically 
produced the index in the first place. Thus an animal is the original that produces

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

X
original
index
image
Y
Figure 3.  Indirect communication (here: indexical) between systems
a hoof print as an image (index), which in turn becomes an original for a hunter 
who notices (image) the hoof print. When information is exchanged between sys-
tems by means of another system (here: index), we are dealing with indirect com-
munication, as represented graphically in Figure 3.
In the schema systems X and Y exchange information not by means of direct 
interaction, as in contiguous communication, but indirectly by means of a change, 
or index, produced by reacting system X in the environment. This type of ex-
change of information will accordingly be called indexical communication.
As with direct communication discussed earlier, given the possible spatio-
temporal relations likely to occur between interacting systems, indexical commu-
nication can involve the following types of situation:
–	
Original, index, and image co-exist within the same spatio-temporal context, 
as always happens for instance with a shadow (index) cast by an object (origi-
nal), or with the voice produced by a person one is directly talking to. Smell 
and body heat are also indexes that a person or an animal always carries around 
with them. Likewise, smoke rising above the trees is an index of the fire blazing 
underneath and so on. Interacting with an index that is fully contiguous with 
its original means in most cases interacting with the original itself, but in the 
dark, for instance, the proximate presence of an invisible person (original) can 
be inferred from the heat emanating from the body, or from the sound of 
breathing, that is, from an index of that person. This type of indirect interac-
tion illustrates what can accordingly be called contiguous indexical communi-
cation, which in practice is very close to fully contiguous, that is, direct com-
munication, because here the index forms an immediate physical extension of 
the original. However, it still makes practical sense to distinguish between 
contiguous (that is, direct) communication and contiguous indexical (that is, 
indirect) communication. For example, a shadow (index) can betray the pres-
ence of the invisible person (original) hiding behind a corner of a house: here 
despite the contiguous nature of the situation we are already dealing here with 
indirect rather that with fully contiguous, direct communication;
–	
Original, index, and image exist within the same temporal context, except that 
image is spatially displaced from original, as exemplified by tom-tom signalling 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
in tribal Africa, or by a telephone conversation, where the voice (index) can be 
heard (image) over the phone a long distance away from the caller (original). 
The same type of communication occurs during a live audio-visual satellite 
link in TV news bulletins, when a presenter in the TV studio can actually see 
(image) on the screen (index) an interviewee (original) situated in another 
place of the globe. This type of indirect interaction illustrates what can conse-
quently be called simultaneous indexical communication. A full realization of 
simultaneous but spatially displaced communication has only become possi-
ble in recent times, thanks to the technological inventions of the last century 
such as the telephone, live television, and to some extent electronic mail and 
mobile phone text messaging;
–	
Image and index exist in the same spatio-temporal context, that is, they are 
fully contiguous, but index is spatio-temporally removed from original, as 
when a hunter perceives (image) a hoof print (index) of an animal (original) 
that has moved from the spot some time ago. Similarly, an old photograph, an 
archive voice recording, a documentary film, an old manuscript are all in-
dexes that are spatio-temporally displaced from their originals. A wax cylin-
der, a vinyl record, a cassette tape or a compact disk are also indexes of an ac-
tual musical performance (original) from some time past. In fact, most 
indexes found in the empirical world are spatio-temporally displaced from 
their originals. Consequently, this type of indirect interaction illustrates what 
can be called displaced indexical communication.
Iconic communication
Indexical communication is still relatively close to direct, contiguous communica-
tion, in the sense that image indirectly interacts with original through index, 
which in the case of contiguous indexical communication for example is practi-
cally indistinguishable from direct interaction with original. But it is also possible 
to imagine a relation between image and original that is not based on physical in-
teraction, direct or indirect, but on correspondence of information contained in 
original and image. In this situation it is the receiver, and not the sender as in in-
dexical communication, which produces a change in the environment. This change 
corresponds with information contained in the original, but it is not physically 
caused by the original. It is as if, in the absence of any physical interaction with the 
sender (original), the receiver produced an image of the original to create a sem-
blance of an interaction that does not exist. A physical change corresponding with 
original produced by the receiver in the environment will accordingly be called 
icon. In this situation sender and receiver do not exchange information by means

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

X
original
icon
image
Y
Figure 4.  Correspondence of information (iconic communication) between original and 
image
of direct or indirect interaction, but only remain related to one another by means 
of a representation (icon) of original produced by receiver in the environment. 
This type of relation between systems will accordingly be called iconic communica-
tion, as represented graphically in Figure 4.
The relationship between original and icon is represented in Figure 4 by a dot-
ted line to indicate that an icon is related to the original not through physical in-
teraction, as in contiguous or indexical communication, but through correspond-
ence of information, here defined as a structural equivalency between systems. For 
instance, in respect of external appearance a souvenir plastic model of the Eiffel 
Tower is structurally equivalent to the real Eiffel Tower, despite the difference in 
size and the material between the two objects. Structural equivalency is here 
achieved by a strong similarity (or identity) in the proportions of the parts in the 
toy model and in the real tower. The model is an icon of the Eiffel Tower also be-
cause – according to the definition – the model is not physically caused by the 
tower (original), but by receiver (here: a human being), who produces a model 
(icon) that is structurally equivalent with the original. When a structurally equiva-
lent object is physically caused by original it is not an icon but an index, as when a 
new organism is created by partly copying the genetic material of its parents dur-
ing sexual reproduction, or when a person has his or her photograph taken.
As I will discuss in greater detail in Chapter 5, the difference in origin between 
index and icon explains our differing responses to photography and painting (or 
drawing). In popular perception even a poor quality, black-and-white portrait 
photograph, badly framed, scratchy, grainy, and out of focus, is recognized as a 
more accurate and a more “real” visual representation than a well executed painted 
colour portrait of that person. This is because a photograph, being primarily an 
index, is physically if inadvertently caused by the photographed person (sender), 
while a painting, being primarily an icon, is caused by the artist (receiver), and it 
has no direct, physical connection with the represented object. This is why Oscar 
Wilde could write that “every portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the 
artist, not of the sitter. The sitter is merely the accident, the occasion. It is not he 
who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on the coloured canvas, 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
reveals himself” (Wilde 1994: 20). In other words, a photographic portrait is an 
index of the photographed person, while a painted portrait is an index of the paint-
er. Index’s physical connection with sender rather than with receiver also explains 
why images of crime caught on CCTV cameras can be used as reliable evidence in 
court, whereas verbal reports or an artist’s drawn impressions of the same event do 
not constitute legal evidence and still require independent corroboration.
On the other hand when an icon is mistakenly regarded as an index of the 
object or person it depicts, it illustrates the phenomenon of idolatry, or homeo-
pathic magic – a belief that an iconic representation, a painting or a sculpture for 
example, is somehow directly linked with the represented object. Idolatry in this 
sense can be found in the cult of religious images practised in Catholicism or in 
Eastern Orthodox Church, in which the deity represented in a picture or statue is 
thought to be connected with the deity believed to exist in the outside world. From 
a physical point of view, however, icon (unlike index) has no physical connection 
with original, existing independently from it in space and time. However, it may 
still be useful to distinguish the possible types of spatio-temporal relations be-
tween original and icon:
–	
Original and icon co-exist within the same spatio-temporal context, as is the 
case with a model sitting to have his or her portrait painted, or when a road 
sign with a schematic image of a roundabout is situated at the roundabout it-
self. This type of relation between original and icon illustrates what can ac-
cordingly be called contiguous iconic communication;
–	
Original and icon co-exist within the same temporal context, but not within 
the same spatial context, as when a person represented on a painted portrait is 
situated somewhere else than the portrait. All realistic art, beginning with the 
Upper Palaeolithic cave paintings, consists of icons that are spatially displaced 
from the original objects they represent. This type of relation between original 
and icon can be accordingly called simultaneous iconic communication;
–	
Original and icon are separated from one another in both time and place, as 
when a portrait painted years ago depicts a person who is now correspond-
ingly older and is living in a place situated far from the portrait, or is no long-
er living. Most icons, such as those studied by art history for example, are 
spatio-temporally displaced from their originals. Consequently, this type of 
relation between icon and original illustrates what can be called displaced 
iconic communication.

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

Symbolic communication
It is also possible to imagine another kind of relation between original and image, 
again one not based on physical interaction, as in contiguous or indexical com-
munication, and one not even based on correspondence of information between 
image and original, as is the case with iconic communication. In this new type of 
relation between original and image it is again a receiver that produces a change in 
the environment, except that this change does not correspond with information 
contained in original, as happens in iconic communication, but bears no formal or 
structural equivalency with original. In other words, here the relation between 
original and image is purely arbitrary, based on no physical or structural corre-
spondence or similarity. For example, while in iconic communication a painted 
portrait (icon) can bear recognizable resemblance to the sitter (original), in the 
new type of relation information contained in the image would be totally unre-
lated to information contained in the original. Human verbal language and its ex-
ternal referents constitute probably the best example of this kind of relationship 
between original and image: a person’s name, either in its spoken or written form, 
bears no formal or physical resemblance to the appearance or character of the 
person it is referring to. That is to say, a name is not an icon, still less is it a physical 
part of or an index of the person or object it denotes (barring occasional irrational, 
magical beliefs to the contrary, in which by manipulating the name one can sup-
posedly manipulate the object). Consequently, a physical change structurally un-
related to but referring to original, produced by receiver in the environment will 
be called symbol. In this situation sender and receiver do not exchange informa-
tion by means of physical interaction (as in contiguous or indexical communica-
tion), but only remain related to one another by means of a symbol produced by 
receiver, which refers to original in an arbitrary, structurally non-equivalent way. 
This type of relation between systems will accordingly be called symbolic commu-
nication, as represented graphically in Figure 5.
symbol
original
image
Y
arbitrary
code
arbitrary
code
X
Figure 5.  Arbitrary relationship (symbolic communication) between original and image

 
From Interaction to Symbol
In Figure 5 the relationship between original and symbol is marked, as in Figure 4, 
by a dotted line to indicate that symbol is related to the original not through phys-
ical interaction, as in contiguous and indexical communication, and not even 
through correspondence of information, as in iconic communication, but in a 
purely arbitrary and unmotivated way. (In Figures 4 and 5 the dotted line connect-
ing the intermediary system, icon or symbol, with original simply means that there 
exists no physical, causal connection between the two.) Thus symbol only refers to 
original in a conventional manner by means of an arbitrary code employed by re-
ceiver to connect original with image. Code is here understood as a method used 
internally by receiver to transform information contained in original into infor-
mation contained in image. The most complex and most universal (among hu-
mans) arbitrary code is the verbal language, both in its spoken and, as in phonetic 
alphabets, written form. (To be more precise, speech is based primarily on arbi-
trary code, but with a strong admixture of iconic and indexical elements, as will be 
discussed in Chapter 9.) Other examples of predominantly arbitrary codes used in 
human communication include mathematical, chemical, and musical notations.
As with the earlier types of communication, it is possible to distinguish the 
following situations depending on spatio-temporal relations between original, 
symbol, and image:
–	
Original, symbol, and image co-exist within the same spatio-temporal con-
text, as when two people are talking face to face. This type of interaction will 
accordingly be called contiguous symbolic communication;
–	
Original, symbol, and image exist within the same temporal context, except 
that image and symbol are spatially displaced from original, as exemplified by 
a telephone conversation. This situation was referred to earlier as an example 
of simultaneous indexical communication, but because speech as a person’s 
index uses an arbitrary code this type of interaction can also be called simulta-
neous symbolic communication;
–	
Image and symbol exist within the same spatio-temporal context, that is, they 
are fully contiguous, but symbol is spatio-temporally removed from original, 
which is what happens when we are reading someone’s letter, or listening to a 
voice recording. Consequently, this type of indirect interaction will be called 
displaced symbolic communication.
In the chapters that follow I intend to demonstrate that the distinguished types of 
communication: contiguous, indexical, iconic, and symbolic (in that order) broad-
ly reflect the evolutionary sequence of communication systems found among liv-
ing organisms, and are correlated with increasing levels of organization of the 
nervous system, from plants through animals to humans.

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

Parainformation as meaning
So far I have been describing theoretically the mechanics of interaction between 
systems in terms of exchange of information understood as a difference between 
physical states. The emphasis has been on how information is communicated be-
tween interacting systems, whether directly as in contiguous communication, or 
indirectly by means of indexes, icons, or symbols. But communication is as much 
about what happens between interacting systems, as about what happens within 
systems that exchange information. Indeed, it would appear that the type of com-
munication involved (contiguous, indexical, iconic, or symbolic) depends on the 
internal structure and complexity of interacting systems, including not only the 
ability to produce and receive information, but also the ability to process that in-
formation internally, to interpret it, and to choose an appropriate reaction based 
on that information.
To account for the possibility of processing information internally by the sys-
tem, let us extend the model of information as presented earlier in Figure 2. In this 
simple model information was defined as a difference between physical states (in-
formation Ix, or original, in reacting system X; and information Iy, or image, in 
receiving system Y). On the other hand communication was defined as a transfor-
mation of information between interacting systems; in other words, as a process of 
transforming originals into images. An interaction between contiguously co-
present systems is the simplest type of communication, as illustrated by innumer-
able instances of direct interactions between particles and material objects in the 
universe, which constantly collide with one another exchanging information and 
energy. But let us assume that the structure of at least one of the systems involved, 
say that of receiving system Y, allows it to process the received information inter-
nally, as shown in Figure 6 (below).
In the schema system Y receives information Iy from system X, and it can re-
act to this information not only through external feedback directed at system X, as 
in Figure 2, but also internally, by transforming image y2 into image y3. This inter-
nal transformation of images also constitutes information, except that this new 
information is not communicated between systems X and Y, but is generated in-
side the receiver. To be more precise, this new information is prompted by the in-
formation received by system Y from system X, but it is not communicated be-
tween these systems, as Figure 6 illustrates. To account for this expanded version 
of the communication model, let us introduce a definition, whereby image that is 
not generated by original will be called paraimage (here: y3), while information 
contained in images of which one is a paraimage will be called parainformation 
(Mazur 1970: 35; Sadowski 1999a: 52).

 
From Interaction to Symbol
system X
medium
system Y
environment
x1
x2
y1
Ix
Iy
y3
pIy
y2
Figure 6.  Parainformation as a reaction to information
Parainformation can therefore be understood as an internal association related to 
communicated information; in other words, as the meaning of information. Con-
sequently, information with parainformation attached to it will be called meaning-
ful information, while information on its own, with no parainformation attached 
to it, will be called meaningless information. For example, when a tree falls in the 
forest without any information-processing system such as a human observer 
present there to notice and interpret the fact, the event constitutes meaningless 
information. On the other hand when a forester finds a fallen tree and ponders 
what caused its fall, the event becomes meaningful information. In practice, infor-
mation communicated between systems relates to the perception of some change 
occurring in the environment, whereas parainformation (meaning) generated 
within reacting or receiving system relates to the interpretation of that informa-
tion. Thus for example a text written in Japanese characters presents meaningful 
information to a person able to read Japanese script, while for someone unable to 
understand written Japanese the same information is meaningless.
It is clear that not all empirical systems are capable of having associations 
about information; for this purpose a system must be equipped with an internal 
organ designed to receive, process, possibly store, and interpret information. For 
instance, inanimate objects such as minerals, while subject to internal chemical 
reactions and external mechanical forces, do not appear to purposefully transform 
or act upon received environmental inputs. Inorganic objects such as stones exist 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

inertly exposed to elements, with heat and frost eventually crumbling them into 
dust. On the other hand living organisms (that is, autonomous systems), even as 
relatively simple as bacteria or amoebas, react actively to received information to 
maximize their chances of survival and reproduction. Only autonomous systems, 
that is, systems capable of maintaining functional equilibrium in their interactions 
with the environment, are able to react to received information in their own adap-
tive interest, and are for this reason equipped with organs, such as the brain, for 
registering, storing, processing, and accessing desired information as the basis for 
adaptive behaviour. From relatively simple single-celled organisms right up to hu-
mans with their complex brains, autonomous systems in the empirical world are 
capable of using parainformation, that is, internal associations attached to per-
ceived information, to interpret and appropriately respond to that information.
Plants for example possess specialized cells to perceive sunlight, temperature, 
moisture, or physical obstacles, and they can interpret and react to these inputs by 
modifying their behaviour: they can respond to the changes in the direction of 
sunlight by movement or by putting forth more leaves in sunny areas, they can put 
down roots to reach for moisture and other nourishment in the soil, or they can 
grow around obstacles that block their way to sunlight. However, as far as can be 
determined plants lack any means of storing information during their lifetime, 
and therefore they cannot learn. In animals in turn the ability to perceive relevant 
elements in the environment, especially those relating to nourishment, danger 
from predators, or mating opportunities, to interpret them correctly and to react 
to them in adaptively advantageous ways is correspondingly more sophisticated, 
supremely so in humans, whose brain, the most complex organ in the known uni-
verse, is specially designed by evolution to generate extensive and multifarious 
parainformation as the basis of socio-cultural behaviour.
Communicating meaningful information
Producing parainformation is not necessarily confined to the receiver, but can occur 
in the sender as well. In this situation the sender communicates information with 
parainformation already attached to it, as shown in Figure 7 (Mazur 1970: 47).
In this modified schema two autonomous systems interact by transforming 
original Ix in the sender into image Iy in the receiver. In addition to the informa-
tion thus communicated between the two systems, both sender and receiver pos-
sess parainformation (pIx and pIy respectively), which is attached to information 
but is not communicated between the systems. In other words, while information 
is what systems exchange in the course of interaction, parainformation, or mean-
ing, is the systems’ internal reaction to the exchanged information.

 
From Interaction to Symbol
system X
medium
system Y
environment
x1
x2
y1
Ix
Iy
y3
pIy
x3
pIx
y2
Figure 7.  Parainformation in direct communication between autonomous systems
The situation described in Figure 7 is best illustrated by cases of direct, contiguous 
communication between autonomous systems, as when two animals face one an-
other in the context of sexual or territorial rivalry. In such an interaction informa-
tion relates to the animals’ external, physical appearance and manifested behav-
iour: body size, movement and posture; the bristling of the hair; the size of mane, 
antlers, or teeth; grunting and growling sounds, and so on. On the other hand 
parainformation refers here to the animals’ instinctive interpretation of the ob-
served displays in the rival (as threat, aggression, or submission, as the case may 
be), to be used as the basis for adaptively appropriate behaviour (staying on guard, 
self-defence, attack, submission or escape). Much of human social interaction 
likewise consists of contiguous visual, auditory and other sensory communication 
involving perceiving and acting upon other people’s bodily displays and signals.
To account for cases of indirect communication, including indexical, iconic, 
and symbolic types, we need to expand the model of communication from Figure 
7 by adding an intermediary system, corresponding with the change in the envi-
ronment produced either by sender (as in indexical communication), or by re-
ceiver (as in iconic and symbolic communication), as shown in Figures 3–5. This 
intermediary system (index, icon, or symbol) contains information that is often 
spatio-temporally displaced from the sender, while its meaning is determined by 
parainformation contained both in the sender and in the receiver. The full set of 
relations between information and parainformation involved in two autonomous 
systems engaged in indirect communication is shown in Figure 8.

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

medium
medium
system Y
(receiver)
system Z
(index/icon/symbol)
system X
(sender)
environment
y1
Iz
Iy
y3
pIy
y2
x1
Ix
x3
pIx
x2
z1
z2
Figure 8.  Information and parainformation in direct communication between autono-
mous systems
As the schema illustrates, in indirect communication information is in fact coded 
twice: firstly, when information Ix in the sender is coded into information Iz in the 
intermediary system Z (index, icon, or symbol); and secondly, when information 
Iz in the intermediary system Z is coded into information Iy in the receiver. It is 
this double coding that is responsible for the spatio-temporal displacement often 
occurring between original and image in indirect communication. More specifi-
cally, in indirect communication original Ix is first coded into image Iz, and then 
image Iz becomes an original coded into image Iy. Thus for instance in indexical 
communication an animal’s hoof (original Ix) leaves an impression in the ground 
(image Iz), which later becomes an original (Iz) perceived as image (Iy) by a hunter. 
If the hunter possesses the relevant parainformation relating to this index, he is able 
to identify the species, possibly the size and weight of the animal, and other features 
such as the time that has elapsed since the animal made the hoof print in the ground 
and so on. A person without the right kind of parainformation would either misin-
terpret the hoof print, by relating it to the wrong species for example, or would even 
miss the mark left by the animal in the ground altogether.
In iconic communication, to use another example, an artist (for instance 
Canaletto) produces a realistic painting of, say, the Basilica of San Marco in Venice, 
and a viewer familiar with this building (that is, possessing the relevant, specific 
parainformation) will be able to recognize it correctly from the painting. On the 
other hand, a viewer unfamiliar with the Basilica of San Marco in Venice but famil-
iar with the design of Christian basilicas in general (less specific parainformation) 
may still identify the painting as representing a church of some description. Fi-

 
From Interaction to Symbol
nally, a person completely unfamiliar with the appearance of Christian churches 
(no relevant parainformation) will not recognize the painted building as a reli-
gious structure at all. In all cases the information presented in the icon is the same, 
while the meaning of that information varies depending on the type and extent of 
the individual viewers’ parainformation associated with that information.
In symbolic communication, best represented by human verbal language, a 
speaker’s/writer’s meaning (parainformation) is first coded into an utterance/written 
text, which is then decoded by a hearer/reader possessing the right kind of parain-
formation. Linguistic communication cannot take place without both communi-
cators sharing the same ethnic language, that is, having the same basic knowledge 
of the grammatical rules combining specific patterns of articulated sounds with 
specific conceptual associations (parainformation). A person unfamiliar with a 
particular ethnic language (that is, without the right kind of parainformation) will 
perceive the speech sounds only as meaningless acoustic sensations, without being 
able to identify the meaning coded into those sounds by the speaker.
The systems model of communication involving information and parainfor-
mation can also help clarify some of the traditional problems related to meaning 
produced not only in spoken language but also in literary texts and visual arts. 
One question is what constitutes meaning in a particular case, and another is 
where that meaning is to be found: in the acoustic features of a spoken utterance; 
in the graphic form of letters of a written text; in the shapes, colours, and lines of a 
visual image; in the mind of the speaker, writer, or painter; in the mind of the lis-
tener, reader, or viewer; or outside all these in the sphere of language or culture 
understood as a collective generator of all meaning. For example, nineteenth-cen-
tury criticism tended to regard the artist’s mind and unique life circumstances as 
solely responsible for the ultimately elusive (because inaccessible to the receiver) 
meaning of a work of art, while the work itself was perceived mainly as an outward 
expression and a vehicle of the author’s mind, which existed largely independently 
from the historical moment and socio-cultural conditions of life. Neither was the 
receiver’s personal response regarded as relevant to the meaning of the work under 
scrutiny – the latter was determined solely by the author’s unique, elusive, mysteri-
ous and ahistorical genius.
As a reaction to this author-oriented, or biographical approach to art and lit-
erature, the early twentieth-century school later known as the New Criticism shift-
ed the emphasis from the author’s mind to the properties of the work itself (the 
intermediary system), now regarded as the sole carrier of meaning (aesthetic, phil-
osophic and so on), quite independently from the author’s possible intentions or 
the receivers’ personal interpretations. The New Critics thus focused on the liter-
ary texts’ organic form, their imagery, style, characterization, patterns of meta-
phor, diction and so on. Later in the century, as a reaction to this text-oriented 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

criticism, the postmodern interpretive schools shifted their attention both from 
the author and from the text onto the receiver, whose own associations, as defined 
by the socio-cultural determinants of gender, class, race, or by the unconscious, 
were now deemed solely responsible for the work’s meaning. In postmodern criti-
cism authorial intention considerably diminishes in importance while the author, 
although not completely “dead,” is seen merely as one link in a much larger context 
of social exchange of meaning – a transmitter of meaning rather than its generator. 
Nor is the artistic work itself treated now as the source of its own meaning, but 
more as a kind of black hole inviting and accommodating any kind of meaning 
imposed upon it by the receiver (Dickstein 1992). How can these divergent views, 
one seeking the meaning in the sender, another in the work as the intermediary 
system, and still another in the receiver, be reconciled?
As is clear in Figure 8, the intermediary system Z (a spoken utterance, a liter-
ary text, a painting etc.) on its own represents information, while the meaning of 
that information is determined by parainformation, that is, by internal associa-
tions attached to perceived information by sender and receiver (Sadowski 
1999a: 54–57; 2000b). If meaning is equivalent, as I propose it, with parainforma-
tion, then it must exist outside information (literary text or painting) in sender’s 
and receiver’s minds, although it is prompted by that information, because the na-
ture of parainformation is such that it cannot exist independently from informa-
tion. Rather, parainformation is a reaction to information, and in this sense it is 
partly influenced by it. That is to say, meaning is neither to be found in informa-
tion itself (which means that a written text, a spoken utterance, a painting and so 
on do not contain meaning), nor does meaning exist independently from informa-
tion, in the sender’s and receiver’s brains, without being triggered and in 
consequence affected by information, that is, by the physical properties of an ut-
terance, of a literary text, a work of art and so on.
For example, a reader generous and patient enough to have read my book this 
far will probably agree that it deals with communication, and not for instance with 
migration of birds, prevention of cancer, or Italian cuisine. What narrows the 
reader’s interpretation of my book down to the problem of communication is my 
specific choice of words and syntactic structures, because a different selection of 
words and syntax would provoke different semantic associations (parainforma-
tion) in the reader’s mind. It is another way of saying that information (here: words 
printed on a page) is not a kind of black hole that will absorb and accommodate 
any interpretation imposed upon it, as deconstructive critics for example appear 
to imply, because the physical properties of information as selected by sender con-
strain the possible choice of meaning, limiting it to what is consistent with autho-
rial intention. Thus neither the old biographical criticism nor the aesthetically-
oriented New Criticism were completely right, although the two schools were both 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
partly right: the meaning of a work of art exists neither solely in the author’s mind 
nor solely in the work itself, but results from an interaction between the two. In 
other words, beauty is neither an exclusive attribute of a work of art, nor does it 
depend solely on the author’s intention, nor does it exist only in the eye of the be-
holder; rather, a sense of beauty (or any other relevant meaning) is negotiated in 
the course of an interaction between the physical properties of the work (informa-
tion) and the receiver’s perception and thought processes (parainformation), in-
formed by such internal factors as aesthetic sensitivity, knowledge of artistic con-
ventions, and assumptions about the author’s possible intention.
Meaning and significance
Since in the simplest case communication always involves at least two systems, 
sender and receiver, we are effectively dealing with two types of meaning: one 
generated by the sender’s parainformation, the other by the receiver’s. Let us ac-
knowledge this distinction by introducing a definition, whereby parainformation 
in the sender will be called meaning, while the corresponding parainformation in 
the receiver will be called significance (Sadowski 2001a). The distinction is analo-
gous to the one made in 1967 by the literary critic E. D. Hirsch, Jr., who spoke of 
meaning as a determinate and permanent aspect of the text, corresponding ulti-
mately with the author’s original design, and of significance as a changeable, rela-
tive dimension of the text, defined in terms of critical response (Hirsch 1967: 57, 
62; 1976: 79). Hirsch’s distinction in turn corresponds with Karl Bühler’s influen-
tial organon model of language formulated in 1934, in which meaning (the sender’s 
parainformation) refers to the expressive function of communication, whereas 
significance (the receiver’s parainformation) relates to the “appeal” function of 
communication (Bühler 1978: 24). It remains up to the student of communication, 
be it a linguist, a literary, cultural, or art critic to decide which of the two types of 
meaning is to be regarded as the more important: the problem ultimately boils 
down to the traditional dilemma of weighing one’s own individual response (sig-
nificance) against the speaker’s/author’s possible intention (meaning). The systems 
model of communication does not postulate in favour of either type of interpreta-
tion, although it makes it clear that the two kinds of meaning are of necessity al-
ways there. In other words, the sender, or author, can only be “dead” for a critic 
interested primarily in the significance rather than in the meaning of a work under 
investigation. The one important practical thing that can be said for the receiver-
oriented, subjective response is that the receiver’s own parainformation is for obvi-
ous reasons directly accessible and clearly identifiable while the sender’s is not, and 
therefore significance is the only type of meaning that a critic can say anything 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

credible and direct about. At the same time exclusive preoccupation with signifi-
cance, that is, with one’s subjective response, at the expense of the author’s possible 
if elusive meaning often leads to idiosyncratic and not always relevant interpreta-
tions, as evidenced for example by deconstructive analyses of literary works 
(Abrams 1977: 429).
Someone else’s parainformation may for obvious reasons be inaccessible, and 
any speculation about its nature and extent will always remain conjectural, but it 
does not automatically follow that all meaning is unstable and indeterminate, and 
that communication based on mutual understanding is therefore impossible, as 
argued again by deconstructive critics. In fact, deconstruction appears to be caught 
up in what Raymond Tallis calls pragmatic self-refutation, in that the claim about 
the instability of meaning is automatically undermined by the very fact of making 
such a claim, that is, of positively communicating it to the readers and hoping that 
it would be understood as intended by a critic making the claim (Tallis 1995a: 
x-xii). Notwithstanding the unduly pessimistic and in fact illogical claims regard-
ing the alleged indeterminacy of meaning, in most cases of direct and indirect 
communication we are always dealing with at least a partial overlap of parainfor-
mation between interacting systems, that is, with a considerable degree of mutual 
understanding. Indeed, without some degree of compatibility of parainformation 
and the resulting level of predictability of reactions between interacting systems, 
communication as part of a purposeful, adaptive behaviour of autonomous sys-
tems would make no practical sense, and would simply have never been invented. 
For instance, to find a mate an animal must send the right signals of sexual display 
to be correctly interpreted and appropriately responded to by a prospective part-
ner to insure eventual reproductive success. In the human world too social rela-
tions, relying so much on mutual understanding and co-operation between inter-
acting people, would simply disintegrate and collapse if no one ever understood 
what everyone else meant in their spoken, written, or visual communication. But 
since full compatibility of parainformation in communication is clearly not always 
the case, let us enumerate the types of situations theoretically possible between 
interacting systems:
–	
Parainformation in the sender (meaning) and parainformation in the receiver 
(significance) are identical. A full overlap of parainformation occurs for exam-
ple when two conversing persons share the same ethnic language and agree 
upon the basic denotations of the words and phrases they are using. Or when 
the meaning of road signs as stipulated by traffic authorities is precisely the 
one adopted by the road users. Identity of parainformation in interacting sys-
tems will accordingly be called an understanding between those systems;
–	
Parainformation in the sender (meaning) and parainformation in the receiver 
(significance) are different, involving the following possible situations:

 
From Interaction to Symbol
–	
the sender possesses parainformation, but the receiver does not possess 
parainformation relating to communicated information. This happens for 
example when a person is confronted with an unfamiliar language, or 
when the denotations of some words in one’s native language are unknown 
to the hearer/reader (due to gaps in education for instance), or when a 
person unfamiliar with road signs is unable to interpret the meaning of 
those signs. Lack of parainformation in the receiver to match the parain-
formation in the sender will be called incomprehension;
–	
the sender does not possess parainformation relating to communicated 
information, but the receiver does. This occurs when someone uses for-
eign words without understanding their meaning, to impress others for 
example (vide the malapropisms of Del Boy’s French phrases in the BBC 
sitcom Only Fools and Horses), while the hearer is able to correctly iden-
tify the meaning of these words. Or when someone’s unintentional behav-
iour (an accidental gesture, facial expression, or bodily posture) is inter-
preted by an observer as carrying some specific intentional meaning. Lack 
of parainformation in the sender to match the parainformation in the re-
ceiver will be called overinterpretation (or what Raymond Tallis calls 
“overstanding”);
–	
 both the sender and the receiver possess parainformation relating to com-
municated information, but it is in each case different. For instance, in 
some cultures a nod of the head means “yes,” and in other cultures it means 
“no.” A word spelled “but” is a co-ordinating conjunction in English, 
whereas in Polish it means “a shoe.” Lack of correspondence in parainfor-
mation between interacting systems will be called misunderstanding.
A single instance of communication (a single index, icon, or symbol) will always il-
lustrate one of the above situations, that is, it will either represent understanding, 
incomprehension, overinterpretation, or misunderstanding. On the other hand a 
series of interactions between two systems sustained over time may involve one, 
more than one, or all of the above-mentioned communicative situations. It is also 
possible to reserve the term “communication” for instances of understanding, that is, 
for situations of full compatibility of parainformation between interacting systems, 
and to use the term “miscommunication” in relation to instances of incomprehen-
sion, overinterpretation, and misunderstanding, that is, to situations of incompati-
bility of parainformation between interacting systems (Sadowski 2001a: 295–300).

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

Deception
Autonomous systems in the empirical world nearly always exist in the context of 
limited resources needed for survival, the fact that necessitates both co-operative 
behaviour based on communication, and competitive behaviour based on inten-
tional avoidance of communication, on suppression of information, as well as on 
misrepresentation of information, especially that relating to the access to such vi-
tal resources as food and mating opportunities. As Marc D. Hauser points out, 
conveying accurate information can sometimes work against the animal’s fitness, 
so in competitive situations signals can be designed to manipulate the behaviour 
of receivers by concealing information or by falsifying it (Hauser 1998: 28; Trivers 
1990: 45). In the human world the possibilities and opportunities for withholding 
or misrepresenting information in competitive social situations are – as we know 
– much broader, and our extraordinary skills at lying and deceiving are simply all-
too-familiar facts of life.
Deception can be an advantageous strategy from an adaptive point of view 
also because dishonest, or meaningless, information is often less costly to produce 
than honest, meaningful information. Lying for example involves practically no 
cost at all (provided one is not found out), whereas truthful information always 
requires factual or material evidence to back it, which may be difficult to procure. 
One would also expect, especially in a cognitively sophisticated species such as 
ours, a strong selective pressure to recognize cues of dishonesty, simply as a way of 
avoiding being cheated and taken advantage of. In other words, our minds may be 
designed both to communicate meaningful information and to cheat (on occa-
sion), as well as to be able to detect cheating in others (Hauser 1998: 604, 607). As 
the anthropologist Terrence Deacon also points out, the complementary pressures 
cause both deception and detection adaptations to escalate over the course of evo-
lution. Where the potential for inaccurate assessment of the competitors’ 
phenotypic quality such as strength or reproductive fitness is high, and the poten-
tial costs of misjudgement or the advantages of deception are also high in repro-
ductive terms, the evolutionary dynamic will tend to produce increasingly more 
elaborate and more complex forms of communication. Pair-bonding species, such 
as higher mammals, apes, and humans, are therefore under pressure to be able to 
assess accurately each other’s physical condition, resource defence capabilities, 
care-giving abilities, likely fidelity and so on (Deacon 1997: 383). In view of these 
selective pressures let me introduce a definition, whereby the behaviour of a sys-
tem designed to present miscommunication as communication to another system 
will be called deception. Deception is not the same as miscommunication, because 
the latter relates to a lack of communication (due to incompatibility in parainfor-
mation) between systems intending to communicate, whereas deception refers to 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
a lack of communication between systems of which at least one does not intend to 
communicate, that is, to convey meaningful information. It is consequently pos-
sible to distinguish the following types of deception:
–	
Sender (deceiver) produces information with no parainformation attached to 
it (meaningless information), in such a way as to provoke the desired parain-
formation in the receiver. The most common example of this kind of decep-
tion in human communication is lying, that is, making positive statements 
about non-existent state of affairs relating either to the external world (as in 
describing objects and events that do not exist), or to the system’s internal 
states (as in signalling absent emotions or intentions). Deception of this type 
presupposes a certain level of cognitive flexibility, found already in primates, 
and involves highly intentional behaviour and the ability to read others’ minds 
to manipulate their behaviour. Research on animal deception suggests, how-
ever, that physiological reactions rather than high cognitive faculties dictate 
most animals’ deceptive behaviour (Hauser 1998: 586; Dunbar 2005: 62). For 
instance, some mammals and primates cheat by instinctively bristling their 
hair when they are aggressive, to increase their apparent body size and to scare 
the opponent. Similarly, vervet monkeys and other primate species have been 
reported to use alarm calls in the absence of any predator – a deceptive behav-
iour designed to distract other monkeys from aggressive intentions or to re-
move potential competitors from a source of food (Bickerton 1990: 14). Using 
false alarm calls has also been observed among birds: for example, in mixed-
flocks members of a sentinel species would sometimes emit an alarm call 
when in direct competition with birds of other species for a particular prey 
item. In many cases there was no predator present, and when the other birds 
took anti-predatory action, the individuals who gave the spurious alarm calls 
were able to catch the insects for which there were competing. These “false 
alarms” work because the costs of ignoring a threat far outweigh the benefits 
of eating a bug (Allen and Saidel 1998: 194). To sum up: a form of deception 
in which the sender provokes parainformation in the receiver by means of 
information that has no parainformation attached to it will be called fabrica-
tion. Put simply, fabrication is presenting meaningless information as mean-
ingful information;
–	
Sender (deceiver) produces information with parainformation attached to it 
(meaningful information), but does not communicate this information to the 
receiver. A common example of this kind of deception in the animal world is 
camouflage (also used by humans in warfare), which is designed as a way of 
escaping the notice of predators/enemies by making the deceiver blend visu-
ally with the surroundings. Failing to produce relevant documents, concealing 
evidence, keeping silent about important facts and so on are familiar examples 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

of this kind of deception practised among humans. Animals too can inten-
tionally “keep silent”: in some bird and mammalian species individual ani-
mals have been observed to call other group members in the context of food 
less often than one would expect, suggesting the possibility that intentional 
suppression of calls is taking place to reduce feeding competition (Hauser 
1998:  571). Consequently, failure to communicate meaningful information 
will be called suppression. This kind of deception can take simple forms such 
as hiding to avoid predation, a behaviour practised by most animals, or it can 
assume more sophisticated expressions: among gorillas, for instance, individ-
ual females have been observed on occasion to copulate secretly with a young 
male, hidden from the view of the dominant male. The clandestine gorilla lov-
ers can even suppress the cries that normally accompany the sexual act. Sub-
ordinate males also hide their erections behind their hands when their court-
ships are interrupted by dominant males (Mithen 1999a:  83; Cartwright 
2000: 180; Cummins 1998: 37);
–	
Sender (deceiver) produces both meaningful information without communi-
cating it to the receiver, and meaningless information which it does commu-
nicate to the receiver. In other words, in this communicative situation the 
sender manipulates the receiver into accepting meaningless information in 
the place of meaningful information. For example, some wasp species lay their 
eggs in anthills, and despite the fact that the wasps’ eggs are larger and of a 
different colour than the ant eggs, the wasps’ eggs deceptively secrete the same 
pheromone (smell) as the ant eggs, and are looked after by the ants as if they 
were their own eggs. When the wasps’ eggs hatch, the larvae feed on the ants’ 
eggs. A similar deceptive behaviour is practised by the cuckoo, which prover-
bially lays its eggs in the nests of other birds. A variety of species, including 
snakes, can also mislead potential predators by playing dead. Here the sup-
pressed meaningful information is the fact that the snake is alive, while the 
communicated meaningless information is the pretence that the snake is dead. 
As is vividly illustrated by David Attenborough’s wonderful BBC nature pro-
grammes, deception and exploitation are simply the order of the day in the 
animal kingdom.
Combining suppression and fabrication in one communicative act is abundantly 
illustrated by human deceptive behaviour, as in using decoys in espionage and 
warfare, forging documents or works of art, playing confidence tricks, creating 
diversions, bluffing and so on. This kind of deception (combination of suppression 
and fabrication) will accordingly be called substitution. The archaeologist Steven 
Mithen hypothesizes that the white-skinned Neanderthals, our human relatives 
who became extinct some thirty thousand years ago, used natural pigments to 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
camouflage their bodies while hunting big game (Mithen 2005: 223). A spectacu-
lar example of substitutive deception from more recent times are the proverbial 
Potemkin’s villages. In 1787 Field Marshal Prince Gregory Potemkin organized a 
river journey down the Dnieper for the Russian Empress Catherine and her court. 
His aim was to prove his success in colonizing the province, recently wrested from 
the Turkish Ottoman Empire. Potemkin assembled a number of mobile “villages,” 
each located at a strategic spot on the river bank. As soon as the imperial barge 
hove into sight Potemkin’s men, all dressed up as jolly peasants, raised a hearty 
cheer for the Empress and the foreign ambassadors. As soon as the barge turned 
the bend, they stripped off their caps and smocks, dismantled the sets, and rebuilt 
them overnight further downstream (Davies 1997:  658). The communicated 
meaningless information was the pretence that the region along the Dnieper was 
fully Russified, whereas the suppressed meaningful information was that the re-
gion was in fact ethnically Ukrainian.
It might appear that deception presupposes more advanced cognitive faculties 
than those needed for “honest” communication, as it assumes a system’s awareness 
of other system’s internal states, what psychologists call “theory of mind” (Workman 
and Reader 2004: 126, 360). On the other hand in most animals deceptive behav-
iour may be due simply to trials and errors of natural selection, whereby an organ-
ism, such as a stick insect for example, stands better chances of surviving and re-
producing by developing an ability to blend with its surrounding rather than 
remaining visible to potential predators. A higher survival rate of camouflaged 
insects will ensure that their “camouflaging” genes will be passed on to the next 
generations, thereby increasing their chances of survival. Deceptive suppression of 
meaningful information does not therefore require advanced cognitive faculties; 
indeed hiding for instance is a universal adaptive behaviour in all species, from 
insects to humans, as an instinctive reaction to avoid danger.
Self-deception
While deception is often advantageous as a strategy to outwit competitors or ene-
mies, it is also possible to imagine situations, especially those involving systems with 
advanced cognitive faculties such as humans, where not only deceiving others but 
also deceiving oneself can be a viable adaptive strategy. This seems paradoxical, be-
cause if internal representations of the world are to aid in the system’s survival, they 
clearly should reflect the world accurately, allowing for correct assessment of possi-
ble dangers and/or opportunities to prompt appropriate, adaptive reactions. In oth-
er words, requirements of homeostatic self-regulation would indicate that the sys-
tem’s internal representations reflect the world as it is, while false representations, by 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

virtue of their possible counter-survival value, should be selected out in the course 
of the system’s evolution. This indeed may be the case in the animal kingdom, where 
any mistake, any wrong assessment of impending danger usually has immediate 
fatal consequences, eliminating the careless animal from the genetic pool forever, 
thus reducing the risk of similar mistakes occurring in the future. The evolutionary 
process rewards therefore faithful representations of reality with survival, while 
eliminating unfaithful images of reality because of their low survival value.
In this context the human species is probably unique in the natural world in 
possessing an extraordinary capacity for self-deception, by producing in abun-
dance descriptions and explanations of the world that evidently do not reflect what 
the world is like from an empirical point of view. What is widely regarded as the 
most important distinction between humans and other animals – the presence of 
reflective consciousness, language, and culture – appears to be responsible for rep-
resentations of the world, as exemplified by religion, mythology, philosophy, art 
and literature – the so-called “spiritual culture” – which, interestingly, for the most 
part appears to represent the external world not as it is, but as it evidently is not. 
The supernatural beings that populate religions: gods, spirits, angels and demons; 
the fantastic creatures of myths and fairy tales: hobgoblins, nymphs, satyrs, uni-
corns and so on; stories of magic describing events and phenomena that defy 
physical laws: flying carpets, shape-shifting magicians, caps of invisibility, weight-
less angels and so on; religious cosmologies with their fantastic paradises and hells; 
the speculative and unproven explanations of the world devised by philosophers; 
myths of national destiny concocted by political demagogues; and the idiosyn-
cratic, subjective world-visions spun by poets, writers of fiction, and other creative 
artists – for all their stimulating, emotive and entertaining quality are nonetheless 
remote from the empirically verifiable representations of the universe such as 
those produced by scientific observation. The persistence and universality of these 
fictitious descriptions in human culture no doubt testify to some deeply seated 
psychological and social needs for individual and collective supra-realistic 
representations of the world, but that need in itself is no proof of the objective 
veracity of these self-deceiving representations.
Another word for self-deception as a peculiarly human phenomenon is faith, 
understood as a strong and unshakeable conviction, unsupported by any proof or 
evidence, in the existence of non-empirical systems. In view of the likely counter-
survival value of false representations of the world an important question arises 
concerning the origin and reasons for the persistence of faith in the above sense in 
human psychology and social behaviour, not just in numerous small self-delusions 
that individual people live by but more significantly in the grand illusions of reli-
gions, philosophies, and political ideologies produced by human societies through-
out history. The problem of human false representations of the world is fascinating 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
from an evolutionary point of view, because on the face of it such representations 
should contribute nothing to human survival. Among animals any inappropriate 
reaction to an important environmental stimulus, caused by a freak genetic muta-
tion for example, in most cases leads to immediate fatal consequences, preventing 
the non-adaptive mutation to be inherited by subsequent generations. In other 
words, while there seems to be room for some degree of behavioural flexibility in 
the ever-changing circumstances of life, nature basically does not encourage un-
bridled creativity, inventiveness, and experimentation in animal responses to the 
environment. Why humans generally have not only got away with their unique 
imaginativeness but are actually thriving by it is a problem that will be addressed 
separately in Chapters 10 and 11: it would appear that human fictions and fanta-
sies do produce some benefits after all that outweigh the disadvantages that false 
representations of the world otherwise incur.
As was the case with deception, self-deception can assume the form of fabrica-
tion, when a self-deceiver produces meaningless information, convincing himself 
that it is meaningful (as in paranoia, delusions, and hallucinations); suppression, 
when a self-deceiver convinces himself that meaningful information does not exist 
(as in self-denial); and substitution, when a self-deceiver suppresses meaningful 
information and produces meaningless information in its place (for instance, as in 
refusing to accept the death of a beloved person, believing that the person is still 
alive; or in dismissing empirical evidence that contradicts one’s religious beliefs).
Metainformation as implied meaning
The model of communication involving information and parainformation as pre-
sented in Figure 8 is general enough to account for interactions between autono-
mous systems of varying structural complexity, from single-celled organisms to 
humans. It might appear therefore that differences between autonomous systems 
in the natural world are only quantitative, so that in principle both the amoeba and 
the chimpanzee for example are capable of interpreting environmental stimuli by 
activating their parainformation, except that in the chimpanzee the sensory ap-
paratus and cognitive associations attached to perceived information are compar-
atively more varied and more extensive. As I also suggested earlier, it is possible to 
grade the distinguished types of communication following the progression from 
contiguous, through indexical, iconic, to symbolic types, on the assumption that 
this progression reflects the evolutionary sequence from simpler to more complex 
living systems. Thus it could be argued that it takes a more sophisticated nervous 
system to perceive and interpret iconic or symbolic information than indexical or 
contiguous information, just as it may require a more complex nervous system to 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

use deception or resort to self-deception in certain situations. Still, the differences 
in the types of communication involved and in the corresponding complexities of 
the nervous systems may appear at first sight to be ones of degree rather than of 
quality, suggesting among other things that human culture may represent a quan-
titative extension of animal behaviour rather than a qualitatively different and en-
tirely new phenomenon. I will address the problem of the possible uniqueness of 
human consciousness and culture in Chapter 4.
Let us return to the earlier model of communication involving information and 
parainformation (Figure 8). According to the schema the meaning of information is 
generated both in the sender and in the receiver in the form of associations (parain-
formation) that both systems produce as reactions to information. But let us assume 
that at least one or both of the interacting systems are capable of producing associa-
tions attached not just to perceived information, as in parainformation, but to parain-
formation itself, that is, to internal associations, as illustrated in Figure 9 (below).
In this new situation the sender is able to transform paraoriginal x3 into a new 
original x4, while the receiver is able to transform paraimage y3 into a new image 
y4. These internal transformations of originals and images create a new type of 
information which, similarly to parainformation, is not coded between the two 
systems. To account for this expanded version of the communication model let
code
code
system Y
(receiver)
system Z
(index/icon/symbol)
system X
(sender)
environment
y1
Iz
Iy
pIy
y2
x1
Ix
pIx
mIy
mIx
x2
z1
z2
y3
x3
y4
x4
Figure 9.  Information, parainformation, and metainformation in indirect communica-
tion between autonomous systems

 
From Interaction to Symbol
me introduce a definition, whereby an original created in the sender by a transfor-
mation of paraoriginal will be called metaoriginal (x4), while information created 
in originals of which one is a metaoriginal will be called metainformation (mIx). 
Similarly, an image created in the receiver by a transformation of paraimage will 
be called metaimage (y4), while information created in images of which one is a 
metaimage will also be called metainformation (mIy). Or, to take account of pos-
sible differences in metainformation in interacting systems, metainformation in 
the sender will be called metameaning, while metainformation in the receiver will 
be called metasignificance. Also, both parainformation and metainformation will 
accordingly be referred to as levels of meaning.
If metainformation is to constitute a new type of meaning and not just a quan-
titative extension of parainformation, it has to be related to parainformation 
through negative feedback, that is, through opposition, as is indeed marked in 
Figure 9 by feedback loops linking paraoriginal x3 with metaoriginal x4 in system 
X, and paraimage y3 with metaimage y4 in system Y. This means that metainforma-
tion can be prompted both by parainformation, and therefore indirectly by re-
ceived information, and homeostatically by the system itself, quite independently 
from any external information, as a result of the system’s internal self-regulation. 
In the former case metainformation can be said to be referential, in the sense of 
relating indirectly to some environmental input, while in the latter case metainfor-
mation can be said to be representative only of the system’s own inner states, as in 
dreams, creative imagination, delusions or hallucinations. In the case of hallucina-
tions the internal stimulus is so strong that it turns images into supposed originals 
– the reverse of the usual perceptual process. In other words, in hallucinations 
mental impressions are subjectively converted into external perceptions.
While parainformation must always accompany perceived information as an 
immediate reaction to it, metainformation does not therefore require any external 
impulse because – as said above – it can be prompted from within the system itself. 
That is to say, if parainformation is an association evoked by perceived informa-
tion, metainformation is an association prompted by another association. Or if 
parainformation is the meaning of information, metainformation is the system’s 
reaction to that meaning in the form of reflection, commentary, self-analysis, iro-
ny and so on. Also, by virtue of being prompted internally rather than by an exter-
nal stimulus, metainformation is not as constrained as is parainformation by the 
physical properties of perceived information, but can be freer, less predictable, 
more elusive and subjective. The distinction between parainformation and metain-
formation is thus analogous to what is often referred to as literal and metaphorical 
meaning, explicit and implicit meaning, or denotation and connotation, respec-
tively. Derek Bickerton also uses the expression “on-line thinking,” or primary rep-
resentations, practised by animals, here corresponding with parainformation, and 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

“off-line thinking,” or secondary representations, characteristic of human lan-
guage, speculative thought, fantasy, and so on, here corresponding with metain-
formation (Bickerton 1990: 58).
The three main levels of human interaction with the environment denoted by 
the terms “information,” “parainformation,” and “metainformation” also appear to 
be compatible in the main with Karl Popper’s theory of the “three worlds.” For 
Popper “world 1” is the world of physical facts existing independently from but 
perceivable by the mind (information); “world 2” refers to our conscious experi-
ence of world 1 (parainformation); while “world 3” consists of “the logical con-
tents of books, libraries, computer memories, and suchlike” (i.e. metainformation 
coded in permanent linguistic artefacts). All animals belong to world 1 and 2, 
whereas humans also partake of world 3, which includes theoretical systems such 
as science, philosophy, or myth. Popper’s world 3 is largely autonomous, but it 
feeds back on world 2, and even indirectly on world 1, because human conscious 
subjective knowledge (world 2 knowledge) depends on world 3, that is, on linguis-
tically formulated theories. Language as used in every-day communication is ac-
cordingly a world 2-phenomenon, while the argumentative (meta-) function of 
language belongs to world 3 – both are for Popper “the most important functions 
or dimensions of the human knowledge, which animal languages do not posses” 
(Popper 1979: 74, 106, 119, 122; Altman 1967: 356).
In Popper’s formulation the three worlds are related in such a way that the first 
two can interact, and the last two can interact: “Thus the second world, the world 
of subjective or personal experiences, interacts with each of the other two worlds. 
The first world and the third world cannot interact, save through the intervention 
of the second world.” The second world of subjective and personal experience, cor-
responding with parainformation, is thus the mediator between the first (informa-
tion) and the third (metainformation), so that
the human mind can see a physical body in the literal sense of “see” in which the 
eyes participate in the process. It can also “see” or “grasp” an arithmetical or a geo-
metrical object; a number, or a geometrical figure. But although in this sense “see” 
or “grasp” is used in a metaphorical way, it nevertheless denotes a real relationship 
between the mind and its intelligible object, the arithmetical or geometrical ob-
ject; and the relationship is closely analogous to “seeing” in the literal sense. Thus 
the mind can be linked with objects of both the first world and the third world 
(Popper 1979: 155).
In this way the third world of metainformation can exert an impact on the first 
world of perceived material things, not only in changing it, as evidenced by the 
transformation of the natural environment through farming over ten thousand 
years ago, but also by creating it, as evidenced by the influence of construction 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
industry and science-based engineering on creating an entirely artificial living en-
vironment of modern cities.
Parainformation, that is, literal, explicit, denotative meaning is used in practi-
cally all forms of communication, especially when exact and unambiguous under-
standing is required, as in animal communication, where clear, automatic (instinc-
tive) understanding of environmental inputs relating to adaptively important 
situations is obviously critical for survival. Much of what constitutes human com-
munication also relies on parainformation because, as said earlier, without clear 
understanding of specific intended meanings in defined social contexts co-opera-
tion over collective tasks and consequently social cohesion would be impossible. 
Office memos, instruction manuals, scientific and medical reports, legal docu-
ments, telephone directories, cookery books, bank records, purchase receipts, 
tourist guidebooks, road signs, military commands and so on are all examples of 
human communication based on parainformation, that is, on denotative, explicit, 
literal meaning shared by all people involved in situations where mutual under-
standing and agreement are necessary, and without which the social fabric would 
quickly disintegrate and human co-operation over even the simplest undertakings 
would be impossible.
On the other hand metainformation, that is, the metaphoric, implicit, and 
connotative meaning involves a mental capacity to generate spontaneous associa-
tions not necessarily tied to external information, and therefore free from the 
physiological constraints of perception and from the physical properties of the 
observed empirical world (Holyoak and Thagart 1995). Unlike parainformation 
therefore, metainformation is often characterized by suggestiveness, elusive in-
definiteness, and vagueness. As in John Keats’s poem, “Heard melodies [parainfor-
mation] are sweet, but those unheard [metainformation] are sweeter” (Keats 
1992: 203). Also, because of its detachment both from perception and from the 
requirements of direct, immediate communication, metainformation can be 
spatio-temporally unrelated to adaptively relevant problems and situations that it 
is the role of parainformation to deal with. The elusiveness of metainformation is 
also caused by its highly individual and subjective character, not always linked to 
socially agreed meanings, the fact that often makes mutual understanding difficult 
or impossible. While the probability of a full overlap of parainformation in sys-
tems communicating in certain stereotypical social contexts can be high, commu-
nicating one’s subjective and highly individualized metameaning to other people 
is often frustratingly difficult. Thus for example a factual, matter-of-fact biography, 
or a professional CV are meant to provoke clear and unambiguous understanding 
of the relevant facts from one’s life (parainformation), while a poetic, literary ac-
count of one’s life experience, as in the Bildungsroman, full of hints, suggestions, 
metaphors, and allusions to one’s subjective perceptions, impressions, and 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

emotions relies too much on the author’s elusive and personal metainformation to 
be fully understood by the receiver.
While having associations about perceived information is what all autonomous 
systems equipped with a nervous system are capable of, to be able to entertain as-
sociations about associations; in other words, to formulate views, opinions, and 
judgements about one’s perceptions and responses presupposes a more advanced 
information-processing organ, in the natural world probably found only in the hu-
man brain. As Steven Pinker observes, in human linguistic communication the de-
coding of the literal information forms just the first step in a long chain of inference, 
by which we try to guess what the speaker wants us to think he or she is trying to 
say. So, for example, when Marsha says “I’m leaving,” John asks “Who is he?” (Pink-
er 2003: 168). This kind of metacommunication is probably unattainable to non-
human animals. While some of them are capable of using vocal signals to warn one 
another about an approaching predator for example, for all we know animals can-
not use such signals outside the immediate adaptive context. Even the earlier quoted 
example of the vervet monkeys faking alarm calls to gain access to food illustrates 
utilitarian communication (here: deception) based on parainformation. One some-
how does not expect an animal, even as intelligent as a dolphin, to send a warning 
signal to its conspecific saying something like “Watch out, a shark!”, and then to 
send a disclaiming signal saying something like “Got ya, I was only kidding.”
At the same time the linguist Stuart A. Altmann does suggest the presence of 
rudimentary metacommunication among some nonhuman primates, which appear 
to be able to distinguish between playful and serious situations, as in sending audio-
visual cues indicating status within the group (Altmann 1967: 365). However, only 
the capacity for generating metainformation carrying a meaning opposite to parain-
formation, so far found only in humans, can distance a system both from the im-
mediate adaptive situation and from its own internal thought processes. In this way 
metainformation can create an awareness of one’s responses to external situations, 
and a possibility of a conscious and deliberate manipulation of these responses, in-
cluding thoughtful reflection, self-analysis, ironic distance, humour, or self-decep-
tive denial. The capacity to produce metainformation is also the foundation of self-
reflective consciousness, the ability not only to know but also to be aware of the fact 
of knowing – a mental faculty so far limited, it would seem, to the human species.
Human verbal language alone provides countless instances both of parainfor-
mation, used in most social situations requiring co-operation based on clear un-
derstanding, and of metainformation, used whenever there is a possibility or need 
to establish cognitive distance from experienced reality, as evidenced by irony, 
sarcasm, jokes, hints, allusions, understatements, idiomatic or metaphorical 
expressions, best exemplified by poetic language. In fact, metalanguage abounds 
in human colloquial communication, humour being a particularly good case in 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
point (Deacon 1997: 420; Nesse and Lloyd 1992: 612). A typical joke has a two-
layered structure based on surface parainformation and the underlying metainfor-
mation: it is usually told in such a way that the narrative provokes in the listener 
specific parainformation (literal meaning), which is suspended or reversed in the 
final punch-line by a new and unexpected metameaning. In a good comedy, such 
as John Sullivan’s BBC Only Fools and Horses, practically every verbal exchange is 
capped with an unsuspected metameaning while maintaining the anticipated flow 
of thematic consistency based on parainformation. In one episode Del Boy’s 
former fiancé, just divorced and eager to rekindle the old flame with Del, asks: 
“You never married yourself?”, to which Del replies: “No, I never fancied myself.” 
The anticipated parainformation would include something realistic such as “No, I 
was too busy,” or “No, I haven’t met the right girl,” or something equally prosaic, 
predictable and therefore not funny. On the other hand the implication that Del 
Boy would have married himself if he had fallen in love with himself is funny be-
cause it is surreally improbable and therefore unexpected, while at the same time 
it follows logically both from the reflexive grammatical structure of the question 
and from Del Boy’s good-natured vanity and self-centredness.
In well delivered jokes the reversal of meaning is postponed climactically until 
the end of the narrative, so that the humorous effect is achieved by frustrating or 
surprising the receiver’s expectations. That is to say, the receiver usually expects 
only parainformation (literal meaning), while in a joke the anticipated parainfor-
mation is replaced at the end of the narrative by the opposite and therefore unex-
pected metainformation. Different jokes are funny to different people, depending 
on the character of the implied metainformation. A person without culturally spe-
cific metainformation will not understand a joke, even after understanding the 
surface meaning, which is why an insider joke will be lost on a person from outside 
the exclusive circle. At the same time so-called scatological jokes can be under-
stood by most people, because they rely on fairly universal metainformation relat-
ing to typical bodily functions. A joke may also be ruined if the teller provides 
more information than is necessary to lead the listener to the desired metamean-
ing, or when the teller changes the order of provided information and suggests the 
right metainformation too soon, thus spoiling the climax. (Jokes ruined by “dumb 
blondes” form another humorous genre.) A well-told joke is first understood only 
literally (parainformation), but it only makes full sense with the implied metain-
formation. A successful joke is therefore funny for a person possessing appropriate 
metainformation, whereas for a person without the right metainformation the 
joke will be incomprehensible or confusing.
The ability to engage in meta-associations, as exemplified by humour, irony, 
sarcasm, fantasizing, lying, understatement or double-talk is so much a part of hu-
man communication that its absence is often interpreted as a form of mental 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

impairment or deficiency. One of the symptoms of autism for example is precisely 
the inability to engage in pretend play, to lie, to joke, and to fantasize. Autistic in-
dividuals operate solely on the level of primary representations, that is, of parain-
formation, taking the world exactly as it comes and using words only with their 
literal meaning. A joke or a metaphoric use of words are entirely lost on them. 
There is a reported case of an autistic boy who was told by his mother to “pull the 
door behind” when leaving the house, and he literally removed the door from its 
hinges and dragged it behind him (Dunbar 1995: 129; 2005: 51). Autistic people 
also lack the ability to empathize or speculate about the mental states of other 
people, the fact that has devastating implications for their ability to manage social 
relationships. Such people simply do not understand how to handle the subtleties 
of everyday social diplomacies, which depend so much on understatements, sub-
texts, tactful evasions of sensitive topics, tension-releasing humour and so on.
While some uses of language such as verbal humour, poetry, literary fiction 
and so on are deliberately designed to provoke metameaning in receivers, in strict-
ly non-metaphoric uses of language metainformation is normally avoided, or at 
least is accidental and unintended. Whenever factuality and unambiguous under-
standing are required, communication is restricted to information provoking spe-
cific parainformation, as in scientific reports, instruction manuals, business cor-
respondence, all kinds of directories, traffic regulations and so on. These 
communicative acts are meant to provide accurate descriptions of facts rather than 
convey attitudes, convictions, impressions, emotions, or other metaphoric con-
notations. It can be argued, however, that given the cognitive restlessness of the 
human brain metameaning is practically unavoidable in all human interactions, so 
that even communication primarily designed to be denotative and literal, as in 
traffic signs, can be said to rest on certain implicit, often unconscious cultural 
assumptions. These may include, for instance, the assumption that the society us-
ing traffic signs has a well-developed road infrastructure and is therefore econom-
ically advanced, that it cares for the safety of road users and therefore it protects its 
citizens and so on. However, such implicit meanings, intended or not, are usually 
accidental in communicative situations designed primarily to engage the receivers’ 
parainformation, that is, explicit, denotative meaning, although they can provide 
fruitful field of speculation for social anthropologists and cultural critics.
On the other hand, if factuality is not the primary goal of communication, 
metainformation can be used lavishly to create intentionally (or sometimes unin-
tentionally) elusive and suggestive meanings, as in visual arts, music, mythical fan-
tasies, poetry and literary fiction. Interestingly in this context, of all art forms mu-
sic seems to operate entirely on the level of non-discursive and non-referential 
metainformation, with practically no parainformation involved, unlike literature 
and most visual arts, which are always referential to some extent, relying on more 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
or less recognizable representations of physical facts and situations. In some cases 
a single communicative act can deliberately combine parainformation and metain-
formation in a mixture of representations of objective facts and of subjective, im-
aginative evaluations of these facts, as in representational art or commercial ad-
vertising. For example, a painted portrait of a real person provokes in the painter 
and the viewer both parainformation, relating to the identity and appearance of 
the sitter, and metainformation, provoked by the artistic convention, style and 
technique, which convey the painter’s personal attitude to the sitter as well as his 
interpretation of the sitter’s appearance and personality. By comparison a casual 
photograph, due to the more accurate, indexical nature of the photographic proc-
ess, conveys first of all parainformation, involving very limited intentional metain-
formation. For instance, video footage recorded on CCTV security cameras is 
purely automatic and contains hardly any (intended) metainformational content. 
Only in artistic photography, where the photographer deliberately interferes with 
the technical process (by selecting the object and the lens, composing the frame, 
manipulating colour, lighting conditions and so on), can we talk of the dominance 
of metainformation over parainformation, in other words, of interpreting over in-
forming. Visual commercial advertising too is a good example of mixing para- and 
meta-levels of meaning to ensure communicative effectiveness. In a typical adver-
tisement a commercial product, pictured realistically to aid instant and unequivo-
cal recognition, is provided with a brief verbal description (parainformation), 
again for clear identification, while metainformation is conveyed through various 
accompanying images and jingles stirring different, usually unexpected associa-
tions, often unrelated to the advertised product in any direct way. In some com-
mercials those meta-associations tend to dominate almost entirely, with the adver-
tised product occupying little space and providing no metainformation on its own. 
A success of visual commercials relies therefore on a careful balance between real-
istic representation of the advertised product and the attached, often surprising 
and unexpected meta-associations, whose character depends on the anticipated or 
provoked interests and expectations of the public.
The involvement of metainformation places advertising halfway between 
parainformational, denotative communication, such as that provided by business 
information in the Internet or The Yellow Pages for example, and metainforma-
tional, connotative communication typical for visual arts, whose primary aim is 
not so much to inform the viewers about the physical facts of the world as to 
stimulate varied and often elusive cognitive and emotive associations relating to 
one’s perception and impressions of the physical reality. The presence and range of 
metainformation can thus serve as a gauge of artisticity, whereby explicit, literal 
representations, as in casual snapshot photography or photographic forensic doc-
umentation, would be considered non-artistic, while implicit, suggestive 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

representations, as in stylized photography or in painting, would be more typical 
for art. Thus scenes of explicit, graphic sex and violence in film can be perceived as 
less aesthetically satisfying than representations that only mark or suggest the acts 
in question, leaving more to the imagination, that is, to the viewers’ meta-associa-
tions. For receivers prepared to engage their meta-associations explicit representa-
tions, as in pornography for example, can be banal and offensive to their intelli-
gence and good taste, while implicit, suggestive representations, as in well painted 
nude figures or in subtle erotic poetry, precisely due to their understatement, can 
provide an aesthetic, emotional, and intellectual challenge and satisfaction. Visual 
artefacts relying mostly on predictable parainformation as well as on limited and 
equally predictable metainformation include action films, comic books, cartoons, 
computer games, political placards, and graffiti, whereas artefacts so designed as 
to engage the receivers’ wide-ranging and less predictable aesthetic, emotional, 
and intellectual meta-associations are those that, for that very reason, find their 
way into art history and are on display in galleries and museums.
The distinction between parainformation and metainformation thus corre-
sponds to the division into primarily factual communication and primarily im-
aginative, or fictional communication, respectively. In this way the two associative 
levels underlie the difference between, for example, pornography and erotic art, 
between cooking recipes and food advertisements, between a curriculum vitae 
and a Bildungsroman, between a historical account and an ethnic myth, and fi-
nally between science and religion, with philosophy somewhere in between. At the 
same time it must be said that the division into parainformational and metainfor-
mational forms of communication is never clear-cut, because in most cases a par-
ticular communicative act, whether primarily factual or primarily fictional, will 
always engage both associative levels in varying degrees, with sufficient overlap to 
justify never-ending philosophic and critical debates about the relations between 
science and religion, between history and mythology, between objectivity and 
subjectivity, between fact and fiction. Religion for example, primarily a metainfor-
mational phenomenon, often contains some parainformational references to em-
pirical reality, as evidenced by some ethno-historical elements of the Judeo-Christian 
Bible, corroborated independently by historians and archaeologists. Likewise sci-
ence, primarily a parainformational phenomenon, involves formulating abstract 
models and theories, that is, engaging in metainformational cognitive processes, 
often detached from direct observation, empirical testing and experimentation. 
However, while religions survive on faith alone and do not require any empirical 
proofs to validate their dogmas, in science metainformational, theoretical specula-
tion is constantly being verified against available evidence, and theoretical models 
that are not borne out by facts are rejected as unscientific. When an unscientific 
theory is self-deceptively accepted as scientific it becomes pseudo-science, as was 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
the case with T. D. Lysenko’s crackpot biological theory, which for political reasons 
dominated Soviet science from the late 1920s to mid-1960s (Birstein 2001: 45–51). 
Similarly self-deceptive, ideologically motivated wilful distortions and misrepre-
sentations of scientific concepts can be found in the writings of contemporary 
postmodern philosophers such as Derrida, Lacan, Deleuze, or Guattari (Sokal and 
Bricmont 1998).
More useful definitions
The purpose of this chapter has been to transform the premise about interaction 
between systems, understood as an exchange of information (and energy), to ar-
rive deductively at a number of possible communicative situations likely to occur 
between interacting systems in the empirical world. Once these situations have 
been identified, described and defined, they were given linguistic labels, including 
contiguous, indexical, iconic, and symbolic types of communication. The rest of 
the book will discuss the possible origin and evolution of these types of communi-
cation in the animal and human worlds. Let me first sum up the content of the 
systems model of communication developed so far by introducing the following 
additional definitions:
–	
Information exchanged during interaction between closed, that is, non-auton-
omous systems (as in the example with a meteor crashing onto the earth) will 
be referred to as an exchange of physical states. Physical states can be exchanged 
only during contiguous communication;
–	
Information exchanged during interaction between open, that is, autonomous 
systems capable of using parainformation alone (as in plants and non-human 
animals) can be of two kinds, depending on the involvement of intentionality. 
Intentionality presupposes active behaviour of the sender, rather than passive 
behaviour of the receiver. Also, intentionality can be either motivated genetically, 
as in plants or animals, or both genetically and volitionally, as in humans. Thus
–	
unintentional information exchanged between autonomous systems will 
be referred to as a cue, and
–	
intentional information exchanged between autonomous systems will be 
referred to as a signal.
	
Cues and signals can be exchanged only during contiguous and indexical 
communication;
–	
Information exchanged during interaction between autonomous systems ca-
pable of using both parainformation and metainformation (as in humans) can 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

be of three kinds, depending on the involvement of intentionality and level of 
meaning. Thus
–	
unintentional information exchanged between autonomous systems on 
the level of parainformation will again be referred to as a cue;
–	
intentional information exchanged between autonomous systems on the 
level of parainformation will likewise be referred to as a signal; and
–	
 information, both unintentional and intentional, exchanged between au-
tonomous systems on the level of both para- and metainformation will be 
referred to as a sign (at last!). Signs can be exchanged during contiguous, 
indexical, iconic, and symbolic communication;
–	
Intentional, meaningful sign (that is, a sign produced by sender with para- 
and metainformation attached to it) will be referred to as message. In other 
words, a sign refers to perceived information, while message refers both to 
sign and its meaning.
Let me compare the above systems definition of a sign with Peirce’s definition 
quoted at the beginning of this chapter. It would appear that Peirce reserves the 
use of signs to humans alone, since he speaks of “somebody” and “the mind of a 
person” – a restriction that would coincide with my stipulation that signs relate to 
communication between systems capable of generating metainformation; in prac-
tice, between humans rather than lower animals or machines. Peirce then intro-
duces a concept of the “interpretant” of a sign, which in itself is another kind of 
sign (“an equivalent sign,” “a more developed sign”): this “sign” would appear to 
correspond either with parainformation or metainformation in the systems mod-
el. It is difficult to see, however, whether Peirce refers to “interpretant” as a denota-
tive or connotative meaning. Peirce also speaks of an “object” represented by the 
signs, although he does not specify whether he means an external, empirical object 
denoted by the sign, or an idea of that object in a person’s mind, which is of course 
a different thing. Admittedly, Peirce does evoke the concept of “idea” in the Pla-
tonic sense, although he seems vague about the relations between this “idea” and 
the “object.” Nor is it clear from his definition whether the “object” has objective 
existence outside the mind or is created by the mind. Winfried Nöth helps to clar-
ify the problem by arguing that Peirce’s “object” corresponds to the referent in 
other models of the sign: it is what the sign “represents,” usually something else but 
in the borderline case of self-reference Peirce’s representamen (sign) and object can 
also be the same entity (Nöth 1995: 43).
Peirce also distinguishes between two kinds of objects: the immediate and the 
mediate or dynamical object. The immediate object is the “Object within the Sign,” 
the object “as the Sign itself represents it, and whose Being is thus dependent upon 
the Representation of it in the Sign.” It is thus a mental representation of an object, 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
whether this object actually “exists” or not. In systems terms Peirce’s immediate 
object probably corresponds with parainformation as the sign’s direct, literal 
meaning. On the other hand the mediate, real, or dynamical object is the “Object 
outside of the Sign,” it is “the Reality which by some means contrives to determine 
the Sign to its Representation,” or that “which, from the nature of things, the Sign 
cannot express, which it can only indicate and leave the interpreter to find out by 
collateral experience” (Peirce 1998: 136; Nöth 1995: 43), which may correspond 
with the usually vaguer and more “remote” metainformation as the meaning not 
immediately indicated by the form of the sign nor by its denotative meaning. These 
broad analogies between Peirce’s semiotic formulations and the systems model 
notwithstanding, my main methodological objection, as expressed at the begin-
ning of this chapter, refers to the method behind Peirce’s definitions: the reader 
simply does not see by what steps of argument the philosopher arrived at his defi-
nitions, and in the absence of intermediary reasoning the final definitions have to 
be accepted on faith rather than on the basis of logic or evidence.
It would also appear that the systems model of communication presented here 
has independently validated Peirce’s semiotic triad of icon-index-symbol, with a 
correction, however, of putting index before icon if the sequence is to reflect the 
evolutionary development of types of communication from cognitively simple to 
more advanced. It was also necessary to add contiguous communication as an 
important and ubiquitous form of communication in all empirical systems, and as 
a prerequisite of all other types of communication.
In the light of the systems definitions introduced above particles and mineral 
objects colliding in the universe will be said to exchange physical states rather than 
cues, signals, or signs. Plants will also be said to exchange physical states with the 
environment (when absorbing carbon dioxide and releasing oxygen into the at-
mosphere), but they can also passively reveal cues (for example, in their green 
colour – an accidental colour of chlorophyll, a substance involved in photosynthesis), 
and send active signals (for example, in developing brightly coloured flowers to 
attract pollinating insects or birds). Animals can also use the same types of infor-
mation (physical states, cues, and signals) in their interactions with the environ-
ment. For instance, they exchange physical states in absorbing oxygen and releas-
ing carbon dioxide; they passively reveal phenotypic cues such as body size or 
weaponry (antlers, canine teeth and so on); and they actively send signals in the 
form of warning calls, aggressive grunts, baring of teeth, bristling up and so on. 
Marc D. Hauser makes a similar distinction between cues and signals in animal 
communication: for him cues, like signals, represent potential sources of informa-
tion about an animal’s behaviour and intentions, but unlike signals cues tend to be 
permanently ON, whereas signals are more plastic and can be in an ON and OFF 
state. As a result, signals but not cues are produced in response to socio-ecologically 

	
Chapter 2.  Towards a systems model of communication	

relevant and temporally varying changes in the environment. Cues also typically 
correspond to an individual’s or species’ phenotype, and their expression carries 
no immediate extra cost, whereas emission of signals does involve physiological 
costs (Hauser 1998: 9).
Finally, human interactions with the world involve the full suite of distin-
guished types of information, involving physical states, cues, and signals similarly 
to other animals, as well as intentional, culturally generated signs: indexes, icons, 
and symbols. Thus physical states will involve physiological and metabolic proc-
esses occurring within the human organism; cues will refer to such phenotypic 
traits as manifest bodily anatomy, including sexual dimorphism, skin colour and 
other racial characteristics; signals will include physiological reactions such as per-
spiration, blushing, yawning, coughing, sighing, crying and so on, as well as invol-
untary gestures and bodily postures; while signs will include articulated speech, 
symbolic gestures (as in sign language), bodily adornments and other visual signs 
(as in art). When interacting with the mineral or vegetable world (during a walk in 
the countryside for example) humans will be said to exchange physical states with 
their environment; when interacting with animals humans will exchange both 
physical states and cues as well as signals; whereas when interacting with other 
people humans will exchange both physical states, cues, signals, and signs.
According to the adopted definition, communication based on signs presup-
poses a system capable of producing and receiving metainformation – the capacity 
so far reserved only to humans. Sometimes, however, some reactions produced by 
non-human systems can be interpreted as “signs” by persons who regard certain 
natural phenomena, such as the strike of a thunderbolt, a flood, an earthquake, or 
a pestilence as resulting not just from physical causes but from the actions of some 
purposeful, supernatural intelligence, variously identified as “god,” “providence,” 
or “fate.” Interpreted in this light natural phenomena begin to assume human-like 
characteristics, as when the prophet Elijah’s prayer for rain is answered with 
“Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man’s hand” (1 Kings 
18:44). Because having a purposeful design about things presupposes an autono-
mous system equipped with metainformational cognitive faculties, for religious 
persons the entire universe, created by such a superior being, can indeed be filled 
with “signs” rather than simply with physical states.


chapter 3
Needs as motivators of behaviour
Of all the distinguished types of communication the contiguous one, involving 
direct interactions with the immediate environment, is the most ubiquitous in the 
empirical world, including of course human behaviour. In fact, contiguous com-
munication is so common and seems so obvious that communication studies and 
semiotics rarely acknowledge its importance, concentrating mainly on symbolic, 
especially linguistic communication. However, seen from the evolutionary per-
spective symbolic communication, notwithstanding its importance as the defining 
marker of humanity, constitutes only a fraction of human communicative behav-
iour, and is of necessity founded upon phylogenetically older and still active forms 
of communication, involving contiguous interactions with the environment as 
well as indexicality and iconicity. This is why in the holistic view of the evolution 
of communication systems presented in this book the discussion of symbolic com-
munication has to be deferred to Chapters 10 and 11.
For all non-human autonomous systems, that is, for plants and animals, con-
tiguity is practically the only possible form of interaction with the environment, 
both within and across the species, and even across the kingdoms, where organ-
isms are often engaged in co-operative, mutualistic communication, as is the case 
with animals that pollinate flowers or disperse their fruits. In certain plants flower 
design and coloration are often well matched to the visual physiology of particular 
pollinating insects or birds. For example, flowers pollinated by hummingbird are 
often red, a colour attractive to those birds, while blue and yellow are more com-
mon in flowers pollinated by bees (Marler 1977: 47).
Among humans contiguous interactions with the environment are of neces-
sity also always present as a physical precondition of more complex forms of com-
munication involving indexes, icons, and symbolic signs. After all, a signal or a 
sign must first of all be contiguous, that is, spatio-temporally co-present with the 
receiver to be perceived, interpreted, and responded to by appropriate behaviour. 
A particular sign (a received letter for example) understood as image can be spa-
tio-temporally displaced from the original (the same letter at the moment of being 
posted by sender), and its content may provoke in the sender’s and receiver’s minds 
all kinds of para- and meta-associations, referring to things and events likewise 
spatio-temporally removed from the sender’s and receiver’s current whereabouts. 
However, the letter will not perform its symbolic communicative function without 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
first being contiguously, physically co-present with the receiver. Obvious and ba-
nal as it may seem, it is important to remember that no communication: indexical, 
iconic, or symbolic, can occur without sender and receiver first interacting using 
direct, contiguous stimuli.
Contiguous communication is also what homeostatic self-regulation in au-
tonomous systems is about. For instance, plants react adaptively to light, humidity, 
and temperature, and animal creatures too are more than passive puppets of their 
environment. They constantly weigh inputs from different senses and their own 
internal states, and on average are able to avail of optimal behavioural strategies to 
aid their survival and propagation. In the animal as well as the human world young 
organisms enter the world not with minds as blank slates, still to be inscribed by 
experience, but with genetically programmed predispositions to respond in par-
ticular ways to objects and events they encounter in their lives (Hauser 1998: 522). 
Empirical systems practically always exist in a competitive environment, where 
survival and a chance to reproduce depend both on quick and correct assessments 
of current situations and on equally quick and correct reactions to these situations 
(encounters with predators, search for food and mating opportunities etc.). This 
would mean that living systems equipped from birth with ready-made, automatic 
responses to certain vital experiences should stand a better chance of survival than 
systems not equipped with such inborn responses, which still have to learn how to 
react appropriately to important stimuli as they appear. The latter possibility is in 
fact highly unviable in the natural world, because systems that have to learn the 
correct responses to critical situations the hard way, by trial and error, are simply 
quickly eliminated by natural selection the first time they make a vital mistake. 
This means that the vast majority of responses to environmental stimuli must be 
based on genetically inherited predispositions, with ontogenetic learning playing 
only a comparatively small role in the system’s self-regulation, being in fact limited 
mostly to systems equipped with more advanced and flexible cognitive faculties 
such as those found in humans (Hauser 1998: 3; Cartwright 2000: 40, 344; Badcock 
2000: 9–11; Tooby and Cosmides 1992a: 61; Symons 1992: 140).
Needs and emotions
As observed in Chapter 1, functional equilibrium and homeostasis perform their 
regulatory role using the principle of negative feedback (Bertalanffy 1973: 42, 45). 
As Richard Dawkins also explains, living organisms are equipped with a measur-
ing device which gauges the discrepancy between the current state of things, and 
the “desired” state. The device is built in such a way that the larger this discrepancy 
is, the harder the organism works to reduce the gap between the existing and the 

	
Chapter 3.  Needs as motivators of behaviour	

desired state (Dawkins 2006b: 50). In this sense the organisms’ contiguous interac-
tions with the environment involve both the external inputs that disturb the or-
ganisms’ functional equilibrium, and the organisms’ own adaptive responses de-
signed to reduce that disturbance. To account for this adaptive significance of 
contiguous communication let me introduce a definition, whereby a disturbance 
of the system’s functional equilibrium caused either by a deficiency or excess of 
certain type of information or energy will be called a need (Wierciński 1981: 34).
Examples of needs thus understood are of course legion, and their character 
depends both on the generic nature of the system and on the specific environmen-
tal niche it occupies. With millions of vegetable and animal species existing in the 
world on the one hand, and with an equally large number of possible environmen-
tal niches occupied by each organism on the other hand, a possible number of 
needs experienced by each creature can indeed be beyond calculation or descrip-
tion. However, from a functional point of view what all cases of interactions be-
tween living systems and the environment have in common is the underlying 
principle of self-regulation, which causes the system to reduce deviations from its 
functional equilibrium whenever it is disturbed by a particular environmental in-
put. Thus, for instance, in warm-blooded creatures overheating of the body due to 
hot weather or exercise (excess of energy) will cause the need to cool down, fol-
lowed by appropriate involuntary reactions such as perspiration, instinctive search 
for shade or water, in humans also accompanied by such conscious actions as 
putting on lighter clothes, taking a cold bath, switching on air conditioning, hav-
ing a cold drink and so on. Feeling cold in low temperature is in turn an example 
of energy deficiency, which causes the need to get warm to maintain the desired 
thermal balance, achieved by huddling up to reduce the loss of surface heat, find-
ing a warm shelter, putting on warm clothes, eating high-calory food and so on.
Examples of needs caused by excess of information include (in humans) loud 
noise, intensive social interaction, dazzling light, mental stress – indeed, any stim-
ulus considered excessive (“too much”) and therefore intolerable by the system, 
and causing the need to remove the noxious stimulus: turning the loud music 
down (or putting in ear plugs), seeking solitude, wearing sun glasses, going to 
sleep or finding some other restful or relaxing activity – in a word, doing whatever 
is appropriate to lower the excessive diversity and level of informational inputs in 
order to restore functional equilibrium. On the other hand deficiency of informa-
tion can include forced silence, loneliness or boring company, visual monotony 
(during a sea journey for example), denied access to education – in short, any lack 
or shortage of desired information, likewise considered intolerable and unaccept-
able by the system, and causing the need to increase or change the information 
intake: seeking company and congenial surroundings, going on an exciting holi-
day trip, enrolling in a college course or buying a book – in a word, doing whatever 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
is appropriate to increase the diversity and level of informational inputs in order to 
restore the disturbed functional equilibrium.
Once a system’s functional equilibrium is disturbed by an excess or deficiency 
of the required form of information or energy, what prompts the system to restore 
this equilibrium is an internal reaction which we will call with a familiar term 
emotion. Derek Bickerton understands emotions in a similar way as “bridges be-
tween representation and response” (Bickerton 1990: 89). More specifically, in the 
context of the systems’ interactions with the environment it is possible to talk 
about two main kinds of emotions: 1/ negative emotions, caused by a disturbance 
of the system’s functional equilibrium; and 2/ positive emotions, caused in the sys-
tem by a restoration of functional equilibrium. In both cases emotion is an inter-
nal, genetically programmed reaction of the system which participates in homeo-
static self-regulation, by causing the system to avoid or reject noxious or dangerous 
stimuli through negative emotions, and to seek agreeable stimuli through positive 
emotions. This is tantamout to saying that emotions perform an adaptive function, 
or, in the words of Steven Pinker, they are “well-engineered software modules that 
work in harmony with the intellect and are indispensible to the functioning of the 
whole mind” (Pinker: 1998: 370). Also according to Henry Plotkin the specific 
emotions arising from particular life situations “must ultimately derive from the 
fundamental adaptive dichotomy of what ensures survival and perpetuation of 
genes and what does not” (Plotkin 1994: 208).
Lest the basic division of emotions into negative and positive appear too gen-
eral and obvious (it is), the psychologist Paul Ekman, working on evolutionary 
principles, has established a larger but still small number of seven basic emotions 
as displayed universally by the human face. They include, on the negative side, sad-
ness, anger, fear, disgust, contempt, and surprise, and on the positive side happiness 
as the general emotion of relief, satisfaction, and successful adaptation (Ekman 
and Friesen 1975; Ekman 2003:  58; Russell and Fernández-Dols 1997:  10–13; 
Brown 1991: 134). The cognitive archaeologist Steven Mithen argues that these 
emotions must have existed among all of our ancestrors back to at least six million 
years ago, because they are also possessed by the modern great apes (Mithen 
2005: 86). As also argued by the literary scholar Joseph Carroll, the seven universal 
emotions distinguished by Ekman are essential components in the tonal and ge-
neric structures of literary texts, with sadness underlying the elegiac genre and 
tragedy, happiness – comedy, surprise – suspense, and anger, contempt, and dis-
gust dominating in satire (Carroll 2004: 114). Emotions are primarily caused by 
informational stimuli, but due to the holistic nature of informational and dynamic 
processes in autonomous systems they also have their characteristic “energic,” or 
physiological manifestations, as expressed in intuitive linguistic expressions such 
as “to get hot under the collar” when agitated or nervous, “to get cold feet” when 

	
Chapter 3.  Needs as motivators of behaviour	

indifferent or uninterested, “to freeze with fear,” “to meet with cold/lukewarm/
warm reception,” “to have the hots” for someone, to experience “fire of passion” 
and so on. The metaphoric, or synaesthetic language used to express the rich and 
subtle but elusive nature of human emotional experience results no doubt from 
the presence of somatic sensations involved in emotions, which do not lend them-
selves easily to precise verbal expression. This is also why most of the time people 
communicate their emotional states through non-verbal signals and symptoms, 
which tend to be more instinctive and involuntary, without the conscious inten-
tionality that underlies verbal communication. These signals include certain un-
controllable bodily states such as breathlessness, perspiration, blushing, shaking, 
twitches and other manifestations of the autonomic nervous system which con-
trols and receives sensations from the heart, lungs, guts and the genital organs. 
Other important components of non-verbal communication consist of posture, 
hand gesturing, emotive vocalizations and facial expressions, which require spe-
cial training to be controlled voluntarily and are very difficult to fake. Only actors 
and confidence tricksters are adept at controlling these non-verbal signals of emo-
tional states, while for most people non-verbal communication is largely beyond 
voluntary control (Plotkin 1994: 209).
As said earlier, particular instances of excess or deficiency of the required 
kinds and levels of information or energy in empirical systems are limitless, but it 
is possible to arrive deductively at a limited and possibly exhaustive number of the 
types of needs likely to be found in real life. This can be achieved first of all by di-
viding the needs into those involving primarily excess or deficiency of energy, and 
those involving primarily excess or deficiency of information. I say “primarily” 
because, as stated earlier, informational (cognitive) and energic (physiological) 
processes in autonomous systems are always inseparably involved in the systems’ 
interactions with the environment. Energic processes include first of all bodily 
metabolism as well as involuntary physiological reactions such as perspiration, 
changes in body temperature, sexual arousal and so on. On the other hand cogni-
tive processes involve the computational operations of the brain, supremely real-
ized in the conscious (voluntary) mental activities of the human mind. Conse-
quently, the needs involving most energy and least information will be called 
energic, while the needs involving least energy and most information will be called 
cognitive, with the more specific types of needs distributed within the continuous 
spectrum in between.
Incidentally, the above general division of needs into energic and cognitive 
can be viewed as a systems version of the traditional philosophic dichotomy of 
“body” versus “mind” (or “soul”), “matter” versus “spirit,” or the Dionysian versus 
the Apollonian elements in human behaviour. However, while the theological and 
philosophic debates have tended to separate and juxtapose the two aspects of 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
human existence, a holistic approach should emphasize the interconnectedness 
and inseparateness between the energic and cognitive processes in autonomous 
systems, as indeed has often been recognized intuitively by artists and intellectu-
als. Oscar Wilde for example observed that “those who see any difference between 
body and soul have neither,” for “there is animalism in the soul, and the body has 
its moments of spirituality” (Wilde 1994: 48). Contemporary psychologists too 
widely accept the complex, functionally inseparable unity of the brain and the rest 
of the body, quite against the ancient dualism of “material” versus “spiritual” en-
demic in Western philosophy. In the words of the psychologist Richard Webster, 
“the human organism is an indivisible unity. Both consciousness and intelligence 
are properties, ultimately, not of the brain or of any organ or set of organs, but of 
both acting together” (Webster 1995: 485). This is also why evolutionary psychol-
ogy, as represented by John Tooby for example, advocates an integrated scientific 
monism in the place of the outdated dualism of body/mind, physical/mental, nat-
ural/human, biological/social and so on (Tooby and Cosmides 1992a: 21, 49).
Types of needs
Taking into account both the interrelatedness between the energic and cognitive 
proceses in autonomous systems, and the requirement of the homeostatic equilib-
rium in the systems’ relations with the environment, let us try and identify the 
types of needs likely to be found in empirical systems, beginning with the most 
energic ones.
All living systems are subject both to physical and biological laws that of ne-
cessity limit the systems’ lifespan, causing them to age and ultimately to die, even 
if they do not die prematurely due to predation, disease, starvation, or fatal acci-
dents. Because all systems do their utmost to remain alive, from a homeostatic 
point of view termination of existence creates an obvious, final, and irreversible 
disturbance in the system’s functional equilibrium. Since no individual organism 
can live forever, the only way to ensure some form of indefinite continuity of exist-
ence (barring perennial human dreams of eternal youth and immortality) is to 
produce its own copy. As we know, this is accomplished by a process of biological 
reproduction, which in the majority of species is sexual in character, involving the 
mixing and recombination of genetic material from two parents, male and female, 
to create if not an exact copy then at least a genetically closely related organism. 
The need to reproduce will be called procreative, and given its crucial importance 
in the generic survival of empirical systems it may be considered the most energic 
of needs, controlled by strong instincts and emotions, and least subject to volun-
tary control. The cognitive component of the procreative need will in turn involve 

	
Chapter 3.  Needs as motivators of behaviour	

the ability to interpret correctly relevant signals of sexual display in prospective 
mating partners as indexes of their genetic fitness.
During their available lifetime systems also require regular intakes of environ-
mental energies to sustain their metabolism. This is normally accomplished by 
consumption of organic substances that are chemically processed by the system to 
release the energy contained therein. The need related to the intake of life-sup-
porting energies will be called nutritional, and again given its importance for the 
system’s individual existence it too may be considered primarily an energic need, 
governed by involuntary instincts and emotions. On the other hand the cognitive 
component of the nutritional need will include the ability to search for and recog-
nize edible objects in the environment. The related physiological needs partaking 
in metabolic processes include breathing, which provides oxygen to the tissues 
and removes carbon dioxide, and sleeping, which restores the normal levels of 
activity of the central nervous system by helping to produce proteins essential for 
maintining the functioning of cells, including neurons (Greenfield 2001:  146; 
Guyton & Hall 1996: 763).
Autonomous systems must also be able to avoid or counteract physical inter-
actions with the environment that are potentially harmful to their bodily integrity 
and consequently to their fitness. Given the fact that all natural systems live in a 
highly competitive environment, with constant struggle for limited but vital com-
modities such as nutritional resources and reproductive opportunities, they must 
guard themselves against harmful physical interactions with competitors, which 
can reduce their chances to reproduce due to premature death or injury. The re-
lated need will be called protective, and will also depend to a large extent on built-
in emotions (fear, aggression), instinctive defensive reflexes, as well as cognitive 
skills related to danger assessment and fighting strategies. In all human societies 
the protective need appears early in childhood in the form of spontaneous aggres-
sive behaviour and rough-and-tumble play, in later life to manifest itself in equally 
universal fascination (in both sexes) with violence, as evidenced by the popularity 
of blood-and-thunder tragedies, murder mysteries, spy thrillers, adventure stories, 
action movies, and media crime reports. Many people enjoy participating in, and 
most people enjoy watching, the stylized, bloodless combat we call sport, or what 
George Orwell called “war without guns,” which basically consists of contests of 
aiming, chasing, or fighting, complete with victors and the defeated.
An individual system can also maximize its existence by interacting with oth-
er members of the group and exchanging with them the needed resources and 
adaptively relevant information. Thus understood co-operation characterizes 
most autonomous systems living in groups and populations, despite the fact that 
biologically speaking all organisms are selfish in promoting first of all their own 
genes rather than disinterestedly helping others (Dawkins 2006a: 32–36). At the 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
same time another fact of nature is that organisms co-operate under certain condi-
tions, because co-operation generates benefits for selfish individuals. All sexually 
reproducing species form co-operative alliances of varying durations, the smallest 
of which is the parental pair responsible for begetting, in more advanced species 
also feeding, protecting, and raising the offspring. Also, since co-operating over 
access to resources and over their distribution within the group increases statisti-
cally the chances of survival of a single system, co-operation appears to have adap-
tive significance, and as such is governed by genetically motivated responses to-
wards other group members (Cartwright 2000: 301). For instance, a pack of hyenas 
can catch prey so much larger than a lone hyena can bring down, so it pays each 
individual to hunt in a pack, even though this involves sharing food. Emperor 
penguins conserve heat by huddling together, so that each one gains by presenting 
a smaller surface area to the elements than he would on his own. A fish that swims 
obliquely behind another fish may gain a hydrodynamic advantage from the tur-
bulence produced by the fish in front, a phenomenon that may also account for the 
V-formation of flying birds (Dawkins 2006: 166). A group of human hunters can 
capture much larger animals than any individual acting alone can manage, and 
they can see off danger which would be a real threat to a solitary individual. Hu-
mans have developed psychological mechanisms designed to deliver benefits even 
to nonrelatives, provided that the delivery of such benefits acts, with sufficient 
probability, to cause reciprocal benefits to be delivered in return. In deferred im-
plicit exchange one party helps another at one point in time, in order to increase 
the probability that the act will be reciprocated at some unspecified time in the 
future. Natural selection can thus favour co-operation not for the good of the 
group but because it benefits each individual (Tooby and Cosmides 1992a: 169; 
Sterelny 2006: 217).
Consequently, the need related to the co-operative behaviour among living sys-
tems will be called social, involving both emotions that control social bonding, pri-
marily among genetically related organisms, and cognitive skills such as theory of 
mind, intuitive psychology, and what Steven Pinker calls intuitive economics, based 
on the concept of reciprocal exchange, which we use to swap goods and favours to 
benefit both parties involved in the transaction (Pinker 2002: 221). In addition to 
instinctive co-operative behaviour, in humans the social need also includes cultur-
ally acquired information cementing the group’s identity and aiding its survival in 
competition with other groups: elements of culture such as ethnic language and 
history, folklore and religion, social hierarchy, laws, customs and so on.
In addition to exchanging and sharing vital energies and information with 
other members of the group, individual systems must also actively search for the 
necessary resources in the environment. Even systems as relatively immobile as 
plants, which are literally rooted to the ground, turn their leaves towards the sun 

	
Chapter 3.  Needs as motivators of behaviour	

to maximize life-supporting photosynthesis, while animals, with their proverbial 
mobility, complex motor skills and sensory apparatus, constantly penetrate the 
environment searching for food and potential mates. Due to the fact that most 
resources needed for survival are either hidden or scattered thinly in the environ-
ment and have to be found, for most animal, that is, for non-photosynthesizing 
species, active, mobile behaviour has clear evolutionary advantage over passivity 
and inaction (the latter behaviour is in fact limited to a small group of predatory 
insects such as spiders, which patiently and passively wait for their prey to get 
caught in the web).
The still largely instinctive exploration of the environment by animals is sup-
plemented in humans by a more conscious and systematic study of the world in 
search of the needed resources. In his study of human environmental preferences 
the psychologist Stephen Kaplan distinguishes the category of “mystery,” defined 
as the promise of more information if one ventures deeper into the landscape. 
Mystery is based on the inference that one could learn more about the scene if one 
could explore its third dimension by changing one’s vantage point. A sense of mys-
tery is enhanced by such characteristics as screening in the foreground, a winding 
path, a distant prospect or other features that suggest the presence of more infor-
mation while at the same time partially obscuring it, such as a brightly lit area 
partially obscured by light foliage, or visually impenetrable foliage with a hint of a 
gap where one could pass through. Even slight undulations of the terrain can con-
tribute substantially to mystery (Kaplan 1992: 588, 594).
A historically more recent spectacular example of human exploratory behav-
iour is science, understood as a socially organized endeavour aimed at collecting, 
storing, and utilizing knowledge about the world, acquired through empirical ob-
servation, laboratory testing, experimentation, and abstract theorizing. The tech-
nical and intellectual scale of scientific inquiry is of course far superior to animal 
instinctive exploratory behaviour, but the underlying adaptive purpose – the 
search for life-supporting resources – appears in both cases similar (Shepard 
1997). The related need will consequently be called exploratory, and will primarily 
involve cognitive skills related to the gathering and processing of relevant environ-
mental information, sustained by curiosity and exploratory drive as the motivat-
ing emotions.
The exploratory activity naturally leads to the discovery both of different ele-
ments of the environment and of functional relations linking these elements. As-
suming that the natural environment represents an intelligibly ordered system 
based on predictable physical and biological laws rather than incomprehensible 
chaos, its exploration leads eventually to the discovery of some of the existing 
regularities, patterns and laws. Exploration thus involves the recognition, identifi-
cation, and classification of the adaptively relevant spatio-temporal elements of 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
the environment, including different types of terrain (forest, desert, mountains, 
glaciers, water reservoirs etc.), and the various temporal features (alternation be-
tween day and night, the lunar and solar cycles, the successions of the seasons, 
biological rhythms such as female menstruation and pregnancy, succession of 
generations, and individual lifespans).
Depending on its adaptive value a particular spatio-temporal element of the 
environment will provoke either positive or negative emotions together with cor-
responding reactions. Thus environmental features aiding survival, such as lush 
vegetation promising abundant food, sources of fresh water, warm climate or sea-
son providing thermal comfort, terrain combining groves for shade and shelter 
with meadows and undulations that offer optimal safety from predators (the abil-
ity to see without being seen), day-time with increased visibility to spot approach-
ing danger, clear sky with patches of clouds promising refreshing, passing showers 
and so on, will be adaptively associated with positive emotions inducing relaxa-
tion, confidence, and curiosity, as well as feelings of safety, comfort, and optimism. 
On the other hand environmental features hindering survival, such as barren 
deserts and impenetrable rocky mountains, excessively hot or cold climates and 
seasons, vast open spaces increasing exposure to predators, thick forests, jungles 
and darkness limiting visibility and likewise increasing vulnerability to lurking 
predators, atmosphering phenomena such as droughts or incessant rains, hail 
storms, snow blizzards, as well as occasional elemental crises and disasters such as 
electric storms, earthquakes, floods, avalanches, landslides and so on, will all be 
adaptively linked with negative emotions inducing anxiety, fear, panic, withdraw-
al, discomfort, insecurity, hopelessness, helplessness, and pessimism. (The above-
described emotional responses to specific elements of the environment are of 
course biased towards typical human needs and lifestyles, as there obviously exist 
numerous living species well adapted to environmental conditions considered ex-
treme, uncongenial or hostile to habitation from a human point of view.)
Various specific elements and features of the natural environment will also be 
classified according to the emotional response they provoke, depending on their 
adaptive significance. Thus dangerous, poisonous, and noxious species such as 
large cats, snakes, and insects, respectively, are universally fear-provoking and re-
pugnant to humans, while harmless species, especially when used as food (most 
hooved mammals, some birds and fish), will spontaneously provoke correspond-
ingly positive or neutral emotions (Brown 1991: 115). Also, during the exploration 
of the environment in search of optimal habitat different sensory stimuli relating 
to manifold environmental features such as shape, size, texture, colour, sound, 
smell and so on will be mentally classified into various patterns and configura-
tions, depending on the underlying emotional response as dictated by adaptive 
significance. These emotive, often elusive sensations related to our perception of 

	
Chapter 3.  Needs as motivators of behaviour	

nature are known to everyone, including of course poets, painters, and musicians, 
whose individual talents enable them not only to feel but also to express their 
emotive response to the world around them in tangible works of art. Ralph Waldo 
Emerson’s rapturous appreciation of natural beauty, combined with his intellec-
tual reflection on its possible causes, well captures the instinctive emotive response 
we all feel towards the various elements of the natural environment:
Such is the constitution of all things, or such the plastic power of the human eye, 
that the primary forms, as the sky, the mountain, the tree, the animal, give us a 
delight in and for themselves; a pleasure arising from outline, color, motion, and 
grouping.... besides this general grace diffused over nature, almost all the indi-
vidual forms are agreeable to the eye, as is proved by our endless imitations of 
some of them, as the acorn, the grape, the pine-cone, the wheat-ear, the egg, the 
wings and forms of most birds, the lion’s claw, the serpent, the butterfly, sea-shells, 
flames, clouds, buds, leaves, and the forms of many trees, as the palm (Emerson 
1994: 1506).
The psychologist Ellen Dissanayake likewise argues that the human tendency to 
seek order in the outside world, originally an adaptive behaviour in our ancestral 
environment, can now exist for its own sake, giving delight and satisfaction in and 
of itself. In artists giving shape and form to the amorphous and erratic sensations 
constitutes an intensification of this general innate structuring proclivity 
(Dissanayake 1991: 114).
From an adaptive point of view positive emotional responses are evoked by 
human perceptions of such specific environmental features as small (that is, un-
threatening) size, soft textures (not causing cuts or bruises during handling), 
green, blue, and yellow colours (of vegetation, clear sky, and warm sun, respec-
tively), sweet taste (of high-calory sugar and high-protein meat), sounds of medi-
um frequency and volume (relative to human voice). A young, proportionately 
built, healthy human body of both sexes, with a smooth, unblemished skin, pos-
sessing all the visual cues of fertility/virility will also evoke highly positive emo-
tions, including sexual attraction in the (usually) opposite sex (Etcoff 1999). On 
the other hand negative emotional responses will be caused by very small or very 
large objects (difficult to handle and control), hard and sharp surfaces and textures 
(easy to cause cuts and injuries when in contact with the body), very dark and very 
bright colours (reducing visual differentiation of details), bitter and sour taste (of-
ten associated with poisonous substances), smell of putrefaction (an index of in-
fectious decay and decomposition) and so on. Negative emotional response (re-
pugnance, indifference, fear) will also be associated with an ageing, wrinkled, 
stooped, disfigured, or sick human body (either past its fertility or infertile). The 
cognitive need related to the emotive assessment of the different elements and 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
features of the environment will accordingly be called aesthetic (for want of a bet-
ter word). For John D. Barrow too human appreciation of the “beauty” of the natu-
ral environment, of a young, well-proportioned, healthy human body, and of 
works of art has its basis in latent instincts and intuitive responses to the environ-
ment, imprinted in the mind through natural selection during human evolution-
ary history (Barrow 1995).
Given human metainformational cognitive faculties, it is possible to argue 
that the sustained exploration and functional assessment of the environment will 
lead to a more conscious reflection about the world, extending beyond the imme-
diate, contiguous adaptation and satisfaction of the basic energic needs. In hu-
mans the contiguous interpretation of the relevant environmental stimuli can thus 
be complemented by metainformational speculation and inquiry into the laws un-
derlying the discovered regularities, leading to the formulation of general models 
of the world, including hypothetical explanations of the ultimates causes and goals 
of the observable natural and socio-cultural phenomena. Such abstract specula-
tion would also presuppose a conscious perception of time and working memory 
extending beyond the immediate present moment to embrace imaginatively both 
the past and the future – a mental faculty most probably available only to humans. 
Able to perceive the flow of time and to engage in metathinking the human mind 
appears cognitively equipped to ask questions and formulate theories regarding 
the origin, purpose, and meaning of everything that surrounds humans in their 
daily interactions with the natural and social environments.
Despite the fact that metathinking often distances humans from their direct 
experience of the world, and that it is not always conducive to the satisfaction of the 
energic, adaptively more vital needs, it would appear that abstract speculation 
about the nature of the world and a search for its possible meaning have proved 
advantageous to humans from the point of view of long-term adaptation. A system 
not tied deterministically to an environmental niche assigned to it by evolution, as 
is the case with most animals, but flexible enough in its responses to be able to 
adapt to different conditions and to expand throughout the globe and even into 
cosmos, as is the case with humans, requires advanced cognitive faculties based on 
metathinking and the expanded perception of time to accomplish this. Conse-
quently, the cognitive need related to the search for the general purpose and mean-
ing of life and of the world will be called teleological (from Greek telos, “goal”). As 
far as we know the teleological need is present only in humans, and it is satisfied by 
means of metacognitive processes communicated mainly through iconic and sym-
bolic media such as visual art and verbal narratives. The literary scholar Joseph 
Carroll similarly talks of the uniquely human need to create cognitive order, and to 
make sense of the surrounding world in emotionally and imaginatively meaningful 
ways through concepts and constructions of religion, philosophy, ideology, science, 

	
Chapter 3.  Needs as motivators of behaviour	

as well as through aesthetic fictitious artefacts such as literary narratives – what is 
often referred to as intellectual or spiritual culture (Carroll 2004: 164, 198).
A particular expression of the teleological need, typically found in religious 
myth, usually assumes the form of a fictitious narrative describing the origin, his-
tory, and ultimate goal of life of an ethnic group, humankind in general, and the 
entire cosmos with its supernatural beings. This goal is typically conceived of in 
terms of an imagined ideal future state of humankind, described as a much more 
attractive version of the currently experienced life situation, and representing a 
state of optimal satisfaction of all needs – a sort of perfect homeostasis (heavenly 
bliss, salvation, immortality, return to paradise and so on). This imaged ideal state 
is linked with positive emotions to motivate thoughts and actions leading towards 
the attainment of that state, while departures from the set goal are linked with 
negative emotions and often involve punitive social sanctions, including ostra-
cism, the threat of a loss of the promised ideal state and the attainment of its op-
posite (hell, damnation, eternal suffering and so on). The ideal future state is often 
contrasted with usually less than perfect currectly lived situation, and is presented 
as an imaginary compensation of currently experienced discomforts, frustrations, 
and suffering. The attainment of this postulated perfect homeostasis may even 
require a deliberate intensification of current hardships and discomforts, by means 
of ascetic practices for example, or at least by patient forbearance of life’s suffer-
ings, in the expectation of the proportionately greater ultimate spiritual reward.
For the teleological models to be effective in satisfying the human sense of the 
meaningfulness of existence they must be, like all needs, emotionally saturated, 
motivating actions consistent with the values of the adopted world model and 
discouraging, by social censure and private guilt, behaviour that deviates from the 
norms dictated by the model. The teleological world models such as those pro-
vided by religion, myth, and the arts thus fulfil a necessary adaptive function of 
regulating the human cognitive behavioural system by providing emotionally and 
aesthetically saturated images and moral instruction to produce a sense of total 
cognitive order of the experienced world. Teleological imagery and narratives also 
stimulate subjective experience, a person’s “inner life,” introducing order and 
meaning into the complex and emotionally rich features of individual life, and 
explaining one’s place within the system of familial and social relations. Teleologi-
cal world models are indispensible for personal development, for the coherent or-
dering of ideas and feelings, and for the organization of shared experience that 
makes collective cultural life possible (Carroll 2004: 128).
Whether or not the universe and human life in it really possess some ultimate 
purpose and general meaning depends on particular metainformational, ideolog-
ical assumptions, religious or philosophic, which may or may not reflect the true 
and objective nature of the world. In this context the answer that science provides 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
to the question of why we are here is quite unequivocal: human beings, like all 
other beings, are here for no objective reason whatsoever. Evolution – the main 
biological explanation of how we arrived in this world – is basically a genetic proc-
ess, which creates organisms for no purpose except the dissemination of the genes 
that created the organisms (Dawkins 2006a: 19, 24). At the same time, as Richard 
Dawkins emphasizes, it is well within the human power to rebel against our evo-
lutionary purpose(lessnes), and to say “no” to our genes, as in practising celibacy 
or in using contraception, thus preventing our genes from copying themselves. 
Homo sapiens is probably the only life form possessing this capacity, together with 
the desire to ask the teleological why-questions, as evidenced by the history of re-
ligious, philosophic, and scientific debates. However, while religion offers self-de-
ceptive illusions as an answer to the question of why we are here, only science ap-
pears to be telling honestly and unsentimentally why things happen. In the words 
of the psychologist David P. Barash, things happen “because of thermodynamic, 
electromagnetic, or gravitational forces, selection pressure and so forth, including, 
in many cases, a hefty dose of chaos.” As to the human search for the meaning of 
life, Barash sees two fundamental possibilities:
One the one hand, we can delude ourselves, clinging to the infantile illusion that 
some One, some Thing, is looking over us, somehow orchestrating the universe 
with each of us personally in mind. Or we can face, squarely, the reality that life is 
meaningless (Barash 2006: 256).
With their built-in compulsion to search for the meaning of life humans are thus 
caught
between a recognition of life’s biologically based meaninglessness and another 
recognition, of the responsibility for people to achieve meaning in their lives – not 
by hiding behind the dictates of dogma, or the promise of a “greater purpose,” but 
by how they choose to live their lives in a world that is altogether lacking in pur-
pose (Barash 2006: 257).
Barash calls the latter position “evolutionary existentialism”: “In an absurd, inher-
ently meaningless world – our unavoidable evolutionary legacy as material crea-
tures in a physically bounded universe – the only rout to meaning is to achieve it 
by how we engage our own sentient existence” (Barash 2006: 257). In other words, 
while there is no objective meaning to life, the conscious and teleologically in-
clined humans can subjectively invent and impose purpose on their own individ-
ual and social lives – a purpose that can be just as real and important as if it ex-
isted objectively. In a long history of spiritual culture, which until the twentieth 
century consisted almost entirely of naïve and evasive illusions as to the general 
purpose and meaning of human life, one of the few honest voices to admit the 

	
Chapter 3.  Needs as motivators of behaviour	

objective meaninglessness and purposelessness of existence was that of Samuel 
Beckett. In his play Waiting for Godot (1952) two tramps, Vladimir and Estragon, 
spend the two acts waiting for Godot, with whom they believe they have an ap-
pointment. Towards the end, Vladimir cries to his companion: “We have kept our 
appointment, and that’s an end to that. We are not saints, but we have kept our ap-
pointment. How many people can boast as much?” To which Estragon replies: 
“Billions” (Beckett 1990: 74). Beckett’s work provides moving testimony to the 
tragic fact of human existence, in which a strong and compelling cognitive, subjec-
tive need to find purpose and meaning in the world and in individual life must 
inevitably be frustrated by objective absence of any such purpose and meaning. As 
the anthropologist Weston La Barre notes, the whole edifice of spiritual culture 
was invented as mere psychological adaptation to inner anxieties, mainly the fear 
of death and ultimate annihilation (La Barre 1972: 262). Trapped between the 
unavoidably painful pressure of the teleological need, the inner compulsion to find 
meaning in life, and the impossibility of ever having this need satisfied and as-
suaged, Beckett’s tramps and their heroic persistence to withstand the existential 
vacuum without succumbing to any of the available comforting illusions com-
mands nothing but deepest respect.
Human uniqueness
The presented suite of needs understood as specific types of disturbances of the 
system’s homeostatic equilibrium is designed to be complete and exhaustive, which 
means that it should cover all manifestations of behaviour found in empirical sys-
tems in their (mostly) contiguous interactions with the environment. In other 
words, contiguous communication, both among conspecifics and between the liv-
ing systems and their animate and inanimate environments, is about exchanging 
information and energies relating to the spheres of life subsumed under the distin-
guished types of needs: procreative, nutritional, protective, social, exploratory, 
aesthetic, and (in humans) teleological. It is clear, however, that the particular 
ways in which these needs are satisfied vary considerably, depending on the sys-
tems’ generic characteristics and the environmental niches they happen to occupy. 
For instance, while all biological systems reproduce, mostly sexually, to provide 
genetic recombination as a protection against pathogenic micro-organisms, their 
sexual behaviour exhibits a wide spectrum of forms of courtship as well as varying 
degrees of care of the offspring. Also, all living organisms, including of course 
humans, absorb nutritional substances found in their environment to remain 
alive; all organisms try to avoid being injured or killed by predatory species, ene-
mies, or by accidents; most organisms form groups and coalitions with division of 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
labour, hierarchy, co-operation and the sharing of resources; and all species have 
their senses alerted to the ever-changing configurations in the environment to find 
the most congenial living conditions to satisfy their procreative, nutritional, pro-
tective, and exploratory needs.
Humans of course share most of their needs with other living species, although 
the specifically human cognitive complexity and flexibility both expands and di-
versifies the ways in which these needs can be catered for in particular cultural 
contexts. Thus in respect of the procreative need humans can choose to mate ei-
ther primarily to produce offspring or primarily to enjoy the pleasure of sex, and 
they can mate both in heterosexual (in the vast majority of cases) or homosexual 
(in the small minority of cases) relationships, depending on their particular pro-
clivity. Courting, mating, and familial customs also exhibit wide, although not un-
limited, cultural diversity, including monogamy, polygamy, polyandry, fosterage 
and so on. Much of human collective and individual behaviour is also taken up by 
the search, production, storage, distribution, and consumption of food, histori-
cally realized in such forms of economy as hunting and gathering, pastoralism, 
farming, and most recently in industrial food production. Also, just as all animals 
spend their lives trying not to get killed or injured, humans too have developed 
life-protecting institutions such as law, army, police, and medicine, as well as hous-
ing and clothing to protect the physical and biological well being of individual 
members of the society against natural and human threats. On the other hand hu-
man ways of catering for the social need include complicated systems of kin and 
community relations and social hierarchy, with associated customs, laws, and tra-
ditions that help ensure social cohesion and collective identity through mutually 
shared language, territory, historical experience, values, and a sense of loyalty and 
solidarity with other group members in the face of external threat. The explora-
tory need in turn is satisfied in humans first of all through natural curiosity we all 
have about the natural and social worlds that surround us, and secondly through 
such cultural institutions as formal education, folklore and local history, and other 
permanent records of cultural memory such as historical monuments, works of 
art, public archives, science and research institutes, libraries, electronic data bases 
and so on. The aesthetic need in turn is satisfied by varying degrees of sensitivity 
to order, form, and harmony expressed through music, visual arts, literature, or 
simply by silent contemplation of the world, also aided by such social institutions 
as art schools, aristocratic or state art patronage, museums, and galleries. Finally, 
all humans want to see purpose and meaning in their individual lives, in the his-
tory of their society and of humanity as a whole. On the social level the specifi-
cally human teleological need is catered for by religious, philosophic, and political 
ideologies, which set long-term collective goals and prescribe practical means of 
attaining them.

	
Chapter 3.  Needs as motivators of behaviour	

It would appear – and it is only a deduction from the presented classification 
of needs – that in addition to the obvious quantitative differences in the way hu-
mans satisfy their needs when compared with other animals, the only qualitative 
difference is the unique presence in humans of the most advanced of the cognitive 
needs, the teleological one. As stated earlier, developing abstract theories about 
the possible origin and purpose of the world is only available to systems capable on 
the one hand of engaging in metainformational cognitive processes, and on the 
other hand possessing the extended perception of time, which enables them to 
hold in working memory the events that happened in the past and to speculate 
about the events likely to happen in the future. Without this awareness of time 
embracing the remembered past, the experienced present, and the imagined fu-
ture human communication would be limited, as it is in other animals, to the here-
and-now, that is, to contiguous interactions with the environment. It seems clear 
that without working memory embracing the extended time-frame no speculation 
about the possible origin and ultimate goal of things would be possible, just as 
there would be no need or possibility of engaging in iconic or symbolic communi-
cation based on the spatio-temporal displacement between image and original.
In addition to constituting the main qualitative difference between human 
and the other animals’ cognitive faculties, the teleological need and the related 
capacity for metathinking also affect the way humans cater for all the other needs. 
A characteristic feature of human behaviour is that the realms of life subsumed 
under the distinguished types of needs tend to be interpreted metaphorically by 
means of imaginative connotations extending far beyond the original biological 
significance of those needs. Thus sex and procreation can be approached by hu-
mans both in a literal, animal-like sense, as instinctive means of satisfying the sex 
drive and of producing offspring, and in a specifically human way, by transposing 
the biology of sex and procreation onto a symbolic plane and re-interpreting them 
as, for example, a manifestation of the divine hierosgamos, the union of male and 
female divine principles, the wedding of Christ with Mother Ecclesia, the alchem-
ical coniunctio oppositorum, the astrological conjunction of Mars and Venus, the 
Taoist yin and yang and so on. Likewise, the nutritional need can be both a way of 
satisfying physiological hunger and an element of symbolic culture, when it is gov-
erned by ritual dietary laws for example, and when food acquires religious signifi-
cance, as in symbolic consumption of the mystical body of Christ, conceived as a 
spiritual union between the deity and the believers. The protective need reduces 
the risk of loss of life and of physical injury, and at the same time it can also be 
reinterpreted symbolically as a metaphysical struggle between the forces of good 
and evil, or it can be turned into a holy war in defence of god’s cause and so on. 
Similarly, the social need both ensures the cohesion and solidarity within families, 
local and ethnic groups, and can give rise to such meta-concepts as god’s chosen 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
people as opposed to infidels, or civilized nations as opposed to barbarians. By the 
same token the exploration of the environment in search of vital resources needed 
for survival can be reinterpreted symbolically as a search for the golden fleece or 
the holy grail, just as the emotive evaluation of the elements of the natural envi-
ronment in terms of their adaptive usefulness can assume the form of meditative 
appreciation of the beauty and the sublime in nature. Finally, the teleological need 
requires by definition the uniquely human meta-cognition, which invests every-
thing people do with a sense of transcendental meaning and purpose, as illustrated 
by the traditional concepts of fortune, fate, divine providence and theological es-
chatology as putative explanations of the ultimate goals of an individual life, of a 
nation, humankind, and the entire cosmos.
Humanism versus dogmatism
If a need is to be understood in terms of homeostatic disturbance of the system’s 
functional equilibrium in its relations with the environment, an adequate satisfac-
tion of the need should theoretically restore the upset balance and ensure the sys-
tem’s optimal, need-free existence. However, in practice perfect and continuous 
homeostasis is never possible, nor is it desirable. Except in such symbolic concepts 
as the garden of Eden or heavenly Jerusalem with their promise of perfect and 
eternal happiness, a complete satisfaction of all needs is never possible, both be-
cause the external environment never remains static, constantly providing new 
stimuli to keep disturbing the system’s functional equilibrium, and because the 
system’s internal states constantly change due to on-going metabolic, physiologi-
cal, and cognitive processes. Perfect homeostasis is also an undesirable state, be-
cause some degree of stress, that is, mild disturbance of functional equilibrium, is 
a sign of active and healthy life. In the words of Ludvig von Bertalanffy,
stress is not only a danger to life to be controlled and neutralized by adaptive 
mechanisms; it also creates higher life. If life, after disturbance from outside, had 
simply returned to the so-called homeostatic equilibrium, it would never have 
progressed beyond the amoeba which, after all, is the best adapted creature in the 
world – it has survived billions of years from the primeval ocean to the present 
day (Bertalanffy 1973: 203).
In other words, without some degree of continuing instability in the relations be-
tween living systems and the environment, progressive evolution of the biosphere 
leading towards the ever-increasing organic complexity would not be possible. In 
fact, the only time a living system establishes a perfect homeostatic balance in its 

	
Chapter 3.  Needs as motivators of behaviour	

relations with the environment is when it stops processing information and ener-
gy; in other words, when it is dead.
While the state of homeostatic near-balance, involving some degree of healthy 
stress and alertness to environmental changes, appears to be an optimal behav-
ioural strategy in all animal species, the specifically human cognitive distance from 
contiguous behaviour afforded by metathinking can theoretically result in radical, 
even counter-adaptive modifications in the ways humans satisfy their needs. As is 
illustrated in the expanded model of communication (Figure 9), metainformation 
is normally linked to parainformation through negative feedback, which means 
that certain instinctive, adaptive responses can be reinterpreted not just in terms of 
symbolic extension but of opposition or negation, as dictated by particular reli-
gious, philosophic, or political ideologies. Indeed, the teleological need, this 
uniquely human cognitive phenomenon generated entirely by metainformational 
processes of the mind, is responsible for radical modifications of human behaviour 
of the kind not found in the animal world. Depending on a particular ideological 
requirement human needs can be either optimally catered for, or they can be de-
nied, condemned as “evil” or “sinful,” and repressed in the name of some “higher” 
ideal. In this way an ideologically motivated negative attitude towards sex and pro-
creation for instance can result in doctrinally induced sexual guilt, in celibacy and 
the cult of virginity; a negative attitude towards the nutritional need can lead to 
self-deprivation and fasting; the denial of the protective need can result in ascetic 
mortification of the flesh, self-mutiliations, martyrdom, or the cult of honorary 
suicide; the denial of the social need can produce monasticism and self-inflicted 
isolation of hermitism; a negative attitude towards the exploratory need can lead 
to doctrinal condemnation of natural curiosity, persecution of freethinkers and 
heretics, and official bans on independent intellectual or scientific inquiry; a nega-
tive attitude towards the aesthetic need can result in puritanic, philistine disap-
proval of beauty and pleasure as ungodly, decadent and indecent; while in the 
sphere of the teleological need a negative attitude can lead to intolerant dogmatic 
stipulations, usually accompanied by oppresive sanctions for non-conformists, as 
to which particular creed all people should obligatorily embrace. The positive (ap-
proving, tolerant) attitude towards all human needs can accordingly be called hu-
manistic, or liberal, while the negative (disapproving, intolerant) attitude towards 
needs can correspondingly be called anti-humanistic, or dogmatic.
In humanistic ideologies and corresponding value systems the aim of life is 
thus the optimal satisfaction of the needs of all people, as long as specific individ-
ual or group needs do not conflict with the needs of others. On the other hand in 
anti-humanistic ideologies the aim of life is individual self-denial and the glorifi-
cation of a collective, rigidly followed dogmatic ideology. Historical examples of 
socio-cultural systems organized around humanistic principles in the above sense 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
include the philosophic elites of the Greek polis from the sixth century BCE on-
wards, the progressive trends within the European Renaissance, and the liberal 
mainstream of today’s Western societies. On the other hand examples of anti-hu-
manistic, repressive social systems include the religious orthodoxy of the Euro-
pean Middle Ages, puritanism as an attitude whenever it appears, communist to-
talitarianism and all kinds of contemporary religious fundamentalisms. If the 
needs and the tendency towards their optimal satisfaction are part of human ge-
netic endowment, which means that they cannot be erased or culturally repro-
grammed, one would predict that humanistic, liberal societies generally make 
people happier than repressive societies, as indeed appears to be confirmed by 
spontaneous human migrations, which tend to move from repressive to liberal 
countries rather than the other way round.

chapter 4
From emotive vocalizations 
to bodily adornments
The origins of referentiality
Human responses to the environment thus occur in certain typical situations as 
circumscribed by the distinguished needs: procreative, nutritional, protective, so-
cial, explorative, aesthetic, and teleological. In the overwhelming majority of cases 
adaptive behaviour occurs in the context of direct, contiguous communication; in 
other words, it relies on reacting to various environmental stimuli occurring here 
and now within the natural sensory zone of the receiver. In most situations, espe-
cially among non-human animals, communicative behaviour does not extend be-
yond these contiguous interactions, but it is clear that contiguous communication 
is also a prerequisite for other, cognitively more advanced forms of communica-
tion, involving spatio-temporal displacements between originals and images found 
in indexical, iconic, and symbolic communication.
Academic disciplines such as communication studies, cultural studies, literary 
theory, linguistics and semiotics as a rule focus on specifically human forms of 
communication, notably the symbolic one which however, from a broader per-
spective constitutes only a part of communicative behaviour, even in humans. At 
least just as important are the much more ubiquitous, and for that reason probably 
considered too obvious, contiguous interactions with the social environment, 
which are usually the domain of psychology and sociology rather than of com-
munication studies or semiotics. Notwithstanding the importance of audio-visual 
mass media and print in social communication, it is good to remind ourselves that 
alongside the information bombarded at us from television, the Internet, radio, 
CDs, DVDs, computer games, cinema, newspapers, magazines, books, billboards, 
leaflets and so on, the bulk of social communication still occurs during direct, 
face-to-face, spontaneous and unmediated social interactions. People may enjoy 
watching their favourite programmes on television, or just succumb to random 
channel switching; they may spend hours every day surfing the Internet or playing 
computer games; they still attend cinema screenings or build their private DVD 
collections; they have radio played in the background or listen to their favourite 
music on I-pods for most of the day practically wherever they go; they have the 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
habit of at least scanning the newspaper headlines or reading the traditional book; 
their attention is inadvertently drawn to TV commercials, street posters, bill-
boards, and leaflets dropped on their doorsteps or handed out in the street, and so 
on. At the same time people still enjoy the daily chat and gossip with the family, 
friends, neighbours, and work mates; many practically never part with their mo-
bile phones, exchanging frequent calls, text messages, and emails on most trivial 
matters; and they love gathering to socialize and schmooze at homes, in pubs, 
cafés, shopping malls and other public places. Notwithstanding the mass media’s 
competition for our attention and their influence on our views and opinions, there 
is simply no substitute for spontaneous contiguous communication with other 
people, because, as I argued earlier, the need for social intercourse is simply part of 
ineradicable human nature.
Even participation in organized communal events, unless coerced against peo-
ple’s will by oppressive regulations such as those imposed in the past by totalitarian 
regimes, would not be possible without the individual innate need for social con-
tact. Given the choice between watching a football match on television in the com-
fort and privacy of one’s living room, and sitting in a crowded stadium in often 
inclement weather many people still prefer the latter, because direct, contiguous 
interactions with the environment are for many reasons more attractive and excit-
ing than indirect, indexical, iconic, and symbolic forms of communication, with 
their spatio-temporal displacement and the resulting sensory and cognitive aliena-
tion from the experienced event. A football fan sitting in the stadium watches the 
game from a long distance and from one angle only, while a televised transmission 
offers a multi-camera, elaborate visual spectacle presenting the game from many 
angles, with close-ups revealing important, otherwise unseen details, with replays 
and slow motion to repeat and prolong visual excitement and to offer an opportu-
nity for closer scrutiny of the action, accompanied by commentaries by sports ex-
perts and so on. Still, our sensory and cognitive systems appear to be geared prima-
rily towards registering the manifold environmental stimuli occurring here and 
now around us, in our immediate physical space, because in many situations these 
direct stimuli are more likely to affect our survival than information communi-
cated to us through icons or symbols, often referring to events distant in time and 
space and therefore immediately less urgent or dangerous. This is why social life 
has always revolved around live, contiguous communal events that appealed di-
rectly to the eye and the ear, and often also to the nose and the tactile sense: tribal 
rituals, religious ceremonies and processions, gladiatorial combats, medieval jousts 
and tournaments, military parades, coronations, triumphal entries of victorious 
military commanders, street theatre and other public spectacles such as masques, 
plays, ballets, concerts and operas (Briggs and Burke 2005: 33–36). The need for 
contiguous, multi-sensory, direct interactions with one’s social environment 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	

explains why live communal spectacles are still popular today, in the age seemingly 
dominated by indirect, electronic mass media of radio, television, video, DVD and 
recorded music available easily and cheaply in the comfort of our homes.
In other words, there is no substitute for the “real thing” to excite our senses 
and stimulate our minds, which is for instance why lovers of music, possessing 
private CD collections of their favourite pieces brilliantly performed and impec-
cably recorded by world-class musicians, still attend live concerts which often offer 
inferior quality of sound and performance when compared with the original stu-
dio recording. By the same token reading about celebrities in gossip magazines or 
watching them on television chat shows can be exciting enough, but spotting a 
celebrity in a public place, or meeting them personally, if only to shake their hand 
or to have a picture taken with them, can be for some people ecstatic beyond de-
scription. Similarly, reading travel literature, listening to other people’s stories 
about foreign countries, or watching films showing how the other half lives are 
also enjoyable, but for most people not as much as experiencing foreign travel di-
rectly, as the booming tourist industry incontrovertibly demonstrates. For similar 
reasons it is difficult to see online courses and distant learning ever completely 
replacing traditional, face-to-face interactions with the teacher in the classroom 
context. At the risk of elaborating the obvious, important as indirect communica-
tion is in distinguishing human culture from animal behaviour, the multi-sensory 
experience of contiguous interactions with the environment, so crucial from the 
adaptive point of view, as a rule excites much stronger emotions and seems more 
“real,” because it activates specialized cognitive modules designed by evolution to 
aid survival in direct, potentially life-threatening situations.
The modules in question, as evolutionary psychology demonstrates, are func-
tionally specialized and interrelated problem-solving cognitive devices, each dedi-
cated to a specific type of behaviour related to a typical adaptive situation. The 
cognitive modules and the innate predispositions they generate influence every 
aspect of human behaviour, including cognition involved in contiguous commu-
nication, the psycho-physiological structure of personality, sexual identity, family 
functions, individual roles in social structures, our relations to the non-human 
physical and biological environment, as well as such specifically human behav-
ioural manifestations as art, literature, religion, philosophy, and science (Wilson 
1978: 20; Fodor 1983; Barkow, Cosmides and Tooby 1992: 5; Cosmides and Tooby 
1994: 91; Samuels 2000: 13; Carruthers and Chamberlain 2000: 3; Boyer 2000: 95; 
Cartwright 2000: 193; Workman and Reader 2004: 21; Carroll 2004: vii, 23, 191).

 
From Interaction to Symbol
Defining index
The first step towards spatio-temporal separation of sender from receiver takes 
place during indexical communication. Index, as I defined it in Chapter 2, refers 
to a physical change (information) produced by sender in the environment upon 
direct physical contact, whether intentionally or unintentionally, as exemplified by 
a fingerprint, a signature, a photograph, a shadow, a voice or a smell. The number 
of rings found in the cross-section of a tree trunk is also an unintentional (of 
course) index of the age of the tree, because growth causes a new ring to form each 
year. I also distinguished three types of situation in which indexical communica-
tion can take place: first, when the change is spatio-temporally co-present both 
with sender and receiver, as illustrated by one’s reflection in the mirror, a percep-
tion of someone’s shadow, voice, smell, or by gauges of any kind, such as speedom-
eter or thermometer – what I called contiguous indexical communication; second, 
when the change is contiguous both with sender and receiver, except that receiver 
is spatially displaced from sender, as illustrated by a telephone conversation or a 
live television transmission – what I called simultaneous indexical communica-
tion; and third, when the change is spatio-temporally displaced from sender but 
contiguous with receiver, as illustrated by a footprint, handwriting, print, a seal, 
photography, film, voice recording and so on – what I called displaced indexical 
communication, which is probably the most important form of indexical commu-
nication, because most distinct from contiguous communication.
In C. S. Peirce’s classic formulation “An Index is a sign which refers to the Ob-
ject that it denotes by virtue of being really affected by that Object.” Also, “in so far 
as Index is affected by the Object, it necessarily has some Quality in common with 
the Object, and it is in respect of these that it refers to the Object” (Peirce 1998: 143; 
Greenlee 1973: 70). Peirce’s index “being affected by” the object corresponds to my 
perhaps stronger requirement that index be in fact physically caused by the object 
(sender), without which index simply could not exist. For instance, a shadow cast 
by a tree is not just “affected” by the tree; it is fully caused by it. Peirce also rightly 
emphasizes that “indices have no significant resemblance to their objects,” because 
“their action depends upon association by contiguity” (at origin, I should add). 
Indeed, a signature on paper bears no outward physical resemblance to the person 
who wrote it down, just as personal odour in no way visually or otherwise resem-
bles the person who emitted it.
There is, however, a necessary if tenuous physical link between sender and 
index in that the latter forms a new system, distinct from sender but produced by 
it in the environment, and therefore retaining some of the qualities of the sender. 
In fact, indexes such as voice, smell, or handwriting are as idiosyncratic and unique 
as faces and individual personalities, which is why for instance a written signature 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	

can be used as a guarantee of identity on bank cheques and other important legal 
documents. The indexicality of handwriting also explains why graphologists claim 
to be able to infer some personality traits from a person’s style of writing, and why 
a smell of sweat contains chemical properties unique to the person who emitted it. 
For example, police dogs can distinguish between any two human beings by smell 
alone, with the exception of identical twins. Most forms of animal communication 
have indexical quality, from pheromonal odours (which indicate the animal’s 
proximity and its physiological or emotive state), to alarm calls (which indicate the 
animal’s fear and indirectly the presence of a predator). Peirce’s examples of a pho-
tograph, a barometer, and a weathercock also appear to concur with the above 
definition of index. A photographic image on negative or printed on paper is a 
new system produced by light reflected from the photographed object and pos-
sessing some visual properties of the latter. The mercury in a barometer is a system 
distinct from the changes in atmospheric pressure which cause the mercury to 
expand or contract. Likewise, the turns of a weathercock caused by gusts of wind 
are related to but physically different from the changes in the direction of the wind 
that causes the weathercock to turn.
But Peirce’s definition of index is also broader and somewhat vaguer than the 
one proposed here. For example, Peirce includes in this semiotic category any in-
stances of “indicating” in human communication: demonstrative pronouns or ad-
verbs (this, that, here, there), their gestural equivalents such as pointing at things 
with a finger or stick, and all kinds of verbal instructions and commands such as 
See there!, or Look out!, an understanding adopted after Peirce by Thomas A. 
Sebeok and the cognitive archaeologist Iain Davidson (Peirce 1998:  161, 165; 
Sebeok 1994: 72; Davidson and Noble 1993: 383). Strictly speaking, however, de-
monstrative words or pointing gestures are not indexes, because they do not pro-
duce any physical changes in the environment outside the sender. Except in fairy 
tales no object is created or otherwise affected physically by being pointed at with 
a finger or with a magic wand: the gesture should rather be classified as an icon, 
because the line of the finger or stick imitates the extended line at the end of which 
the indicated object is situated relative to the pointer. For this reason Steven Mithen 
correctly refers to the pointing gestures used by the gorillas as iconic rather than 
as indexical devices: here the path of the gesture matches the desired path of body 
movement (Mithen 2005: 119). Similarly, verbal instructions or words such as here 
or that, interpreted by Peirce as indexical, only “indicate” things they refer to in a 
semantic, mental sense, without in any way physically affecting the indicated place 
(as in here) or object (as in that).
Likewise, Sebeok’s expanded understanding of index inspired by Peirce ap-
pears to include what according to my earlier definition constitutes not indexical 
but direct, contiguous communication. Using as an example the autonomous 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
system of a living cell, Sebeok interprets its reactions such as changes in magni-
tude or shape, secretion of chemical substances, movement versus immobility and 
so on in terms of indexical signals (Sebeok 1994: 68). However, changes in the 
cell’s shape or position appear rather to be part of the cell’s simple contiguous in-
teractions with its environment rather than indexes. On the other hand chemical 
substances secreted by the cell do produce a change in the environment, and can 
therefore be classified as indexes. In another example Sebeok interprets animal 
droppings, hairs, feathers, and threads of saliva detected by a hunter alongside 
animal footprints, snapped twigs, or smells as indexes of an unseen quarry. Again, 
according to my definition traces such as droppings, hairs, feathers, saliva and so 
on are really metonymic cues (not signals or signs because produced unintention-
ally), due to the fact that they originally formed an integral part of the animal and 
were not produced as a new element of the environment. That is to say, animal 
droppings (metonymic cues) were originally a part of the animal, whereas foot-
prints in the ground (indexes) were not. By the same token evidence collected by 
forensic scientists during police investigations does not consist entirely of indexes, 
as Sebeok again proposes, but also of a mixture of indexes (fingerprints, CCTV 
footage and so on) and contiguous metonymic cues (drops of blood, traces of 
DNA, hairs and so on). Sebeok also includes religious relics, such as saints’ bones, 
among indexes, but because these objects too were originally a part of the saints’ 
bodies they should probably again be classified not as indexes but as contiguous 
metonymic signs (not as cues or signals because they are now invested with sym-
bolic, that is, metainformational meaning) (Sebeok 1994: 65, 72).
Incidentally, the most famous displaced indexical sign of Christianity is prob-
ably the Turin Shroud, a piece of cloth allegedly containing an imprint of Christ’s 
body taken from the cross. The furore surrounding this relic among some people 
is perhaps understandable from a religious point of view, but one can speculate 
that the excitement would probably be much greater if for example something like 
Christ’s bone or lock of hair were ever to be found. The difference in emotive re-
sponse would be due to the fact that a contiguous metonymic sign (a bone) would 
be an integral physical part of, and therefore closer to the “real thing,” while an 
index (the image on the shroud) is only a displaced imprint of the object in ques-
tion, like a death mask, that is, a plaster cast of a dead person’s face, or like a pho-
tograph. The distinction between metonymic cues and indexes is not purely aca-
demic, because it can have important practical implications. For instance a bullet 
hole in the wall is a displaced index, whereas the bullet itself embedded in the hole 
is a contiguous metonymic cue, which from a forensic point of view constitutes a 
more important piece of evidence than the hole alone. The bullet, by virtue of be-
ing once an integral part of the weapon used in the crime, can help identify that 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	

weapon and possibly lead to the arrest of the suspect, whereas a bullet hole on its 
own is only a general indicator that some shooting has taken place.
In his broad definition of index Sebeok also includes certain types of cues and 
signals that should probably be classified as part of fully contiguous, direct com-
munication of the type discussed in Chapters 3. Sebeok’s extended indexes include 
for example some expressive features of human behaviour such as physiological 
reactions and emotive elements of speech that reveal personal characteristics 
(Sebeok 1994: 76). But signals such as facial expressions, gestures, bodily postures, 
and emotive vocalizations can hardly be treated as indexes, because they are part 
of the reacting system and do not exist outside of it (unless they are photographed 
or recorded on a tape, in which case they do of course become indexes). Admit-
tedly, these communicative bodily features do contain rudimentary referential 
function by exteriorizing the inner and therefore unseen mental, emotional, and 
physiological states of the sender, but they are still fully contiguous with these 
states. These physiological, semi-referential, involuntary bodily cues are what 
Sebeok refers to as symptoms, which he defines as “compulsive, automatic, non-
arbitrary signs, such that the signifier [an external physiological reaction] is cou-
pled with the signified [the relevant inner state] in the manner of a natural link” 
(Sebeok 1976: 42; 1994: 24). Thus profuse sweating and body trembling can be 
interpreted as symptoms of fear, blushing as a symptom of shame, goose pimples 
as a symptom of reduced body temperature, vomiting as a symptom of upset stom-
ach, fever as a symptom of disease, just as the complete immobility of a lying ani-
mal can be interpreted as a symptom of death.
On the other hand intentional, that is, cognitive and emotive rather than pure-
ly physiological inner states are communicated contiguously during social interac-
tions by means of what I defined earlier as signals, that is, outward expressions 
(mostly visual and auditory) of hidden thoughts, intentions, and emotions. Con-
tiguous bodily signals dominate almost entirely in animal communication, and 
they are still of paramount importance among humans, where they are comple-
mented by indexical, iconic, and symbolic signs communicating information about 
displaced originals. From the point of view of the evolution of communication, the 
involvement of rudimentary displacement between original (inner state) and im-
age (outward expression) in bodily symptoms, cues and signals constitutes there-
fore the first step towards fully indirect, referential indexical communication.
Bodily signals and the beginnings of referentiality
For evolutionary reasons visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory and tactile signals 
used by higher animals are principally related to sexual life (calling, courting, and 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
mating with the partner, as well as expressing jealousy and rivalry), family life 
(feeding, grooming, patting, embracing), and social life (using vocal signals, ges-
tures, and body postures to mark hierarchy and territory, producing alarm calls 
and information about food etc.). Bird singing for example has two main func-
tions: repelling rivals and attracting mates (Busnel 1977: 242; Slater 2000: 49). The 
primates, our closest animal relatives, also use complex vocalizations, which are 
particularly interesting from the point of view of the origin of human language. 
The primate vocal signals consist of various grunts, barks, screams, hoots and 
roars, each with a distinct message relating to a specific, contiguously relevant 
problem. The number of distinguishable primate calls, according to one estimate, 
never exceeds thirty, but most calls allow for some variation in loudness and fre-
quency, which appears to reflect the intensity (an iconic feature) of the state that 
elicits them (Dingwall 1979: 27). Predictably in the animal kingdom, the vocaliza-
tions used by apes and monkeys are affective in character, being invariably tied to 
various emotional contexts such as threats, aggression, fear, pain, pleasure, feed-
ing, separation and so on. According to the anthropologist Christ Knight, pri-
mates use complex, multi-sensory vocal, acoustic, and tactile displays including 
postures and facial expressions to negotiate the intricate social attitudes of domi-
nance, submission, appeasement, threat or sexual arousal. It is also from these pri-
mate displays that the human repertoire of gestures, smiles, frowns and other 
hard-to-fake emotional expressions such as laughter, crying and so forth ultimate-
ly derives (Knight 1999: 229). In fact, compared with other primate species hu-
mans can avail of relatively few innate emotive vocalizations: these only include, 
according to the evolutionist Terrence Deacon, the six reactions of laughing, sob-
bing, screaming with fright, crying with pain, groaning and sighing. By compari-
son, the repertoire of innate vocalizations in other primate species ranges from 
fifteen to forty, their limited number in humans being due to the predominance of 
symbolic language in social communication (Deacon 1997: 418).
When it comes to expressing emotions, the affective bodily signals, phyloge-
netically older than verbal language, still form the most efficient channel of human 
interpersonal communication, especially in intimate contexts. For example, facial 
expressions, often combined with emotive vocalizations, constitute a universal 
medium of emotional, non-linguistic communication capable of conveying subtle 
feelings probably inexpressible in verbal language (Wilson 1978: 23; Workman 
and Reader 2004: 122; Etcoff 1999: 34; Hauser 1998: 357, 361; Nelson and de Haan 
1997: 183; Ekman and Friesen 1975; Ekman 2003: 58; Russell and Fernadéz-Dols 
1997: 10–13; Brown 1991: 134). Among the many surviving vestiges of this ar-
chaic expressive communication are laughing with joy, shouting in derision, cry-
ing from pain, growling in anger, gasping in astonishment, talking in “motherese” 
with infants, giggling and cooing among lovers, exclaiming and screwing up the 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	

face with disgust and so forth. The particular outward expressions of inner emo-
tional states also appear to be non-arbitrary and therefore universal, based as they 
are on somatic and physiological reactions that cut across cultural barriers. Ac-
cording to Robin Dunbar laughter, found in all known societies, is a particularly 
good releaser of endorphins, chemicals known as opioids, which function as pain 
killers, inducing a feeling of relaxation, well-being, and positive disposition to-
wards other people (Dunbar 2005: 126–128). For Merlin Donald these emotional, 
largely involuntary expressions would have been useful visual and auditory com-
munication devices in the intimate family and tribal group that probably charac-
terized early hominid culture, before emotions, intentions, and other mental states 
started being translated into less affective, symbolic verbal language and iconic 
images (Donald 1991: 180).
Physiological symptoms, emotive cues and signals can thus be regarded as a 
transition between contiguous communication, in which what we see is what we 
get, and indirect, referential forms of communication, in which what we see is only 
a reflection (index) of a hidden cause. In bodily symptoms, cues and signals we are 
already dealing with rudimentary spatial displacement between original (an un-
seen inner state) and image (outward facial or bodily expression and vocalization), 
which for some scholars already constitutes reference, that prerequisite of com-
munication. For Terrence Deacon for instance even a bodily symptom refers to 
something other than itself, that is, to the inner state that generated it, while some 
animal vocalizations can even refer to something other than the body that pro-
duced it, as is the case with animal calls warning against proximate predators 
(Deacon 1997: 352).
In this context Marc D. Hauser speaks of “functional referentiality” in relation 
to adaptively significant signals such as warning or mating calls in animal com-
munication (Hauser 1998: 507). In such contiguous calls there is a correspondence 
or association between the structure of the emitted signal and the emotive state 
experienced by sender at the time of emission. Thus human newborns produce 
acoustically differentiated cries associated with pain and anger, in much the same 
way that rhesus macaques use acoustically differentiated calls associated with fear. 
In both humans and nonhuman primates, one typically infers the emotional state 
underlying the acoustic signal from several external cues, including non-acoustic 
signals such as facial expression, body posture, and the social context responsible 
for eliciting the signal (Hauser 1998: 505). Hauser also calls some animal signals 
“representational,” so that for example an alarm call given in response to a leopard 
would be semantically analogous (at least in the literal, parainformational sense) 
to the human word “leopard,” if it were also given in response to a real leopard, and 
if it was meant to elicit behaviourally appropriate responses from other humans 
nearby (Hauser 1998:  508). Field research conducted by primatologists D. L. 

 From Interaction to Symbol
Cheney and R. M. Seyfarth also indicates that vervet monkeys use different vo-
calizations that convey information about specific predators such as leopards, 
snakes, and eagles. Each of these predators requires different evasive action: climb-
ing a tree (leopard), standing on hind legs and looking into the grass (snake), and 
looking up in the air or diving straight into the bushes (eagles) (Cheney and 
Seyfarth 1990; Allen and Saidel 1998: 185; Cosmides and Tooby 1994: 89). The 
ability to identify an external enemy, to warn other group members by means of a 
specific call corresponding with the enemy, to understand the call and to take ap-
propriate evasive action all appear to indicate that animal calls and visual signals 
(such as panicky behaviour) are not only symptomatic, in the sense of communi-
cating inner emotive states, but can also be representational, in the sense of refer-
ring to a relevant object in the external environment (Hauser 2000: 78).
Reference and representation are thus not limited to human iconic or sym-
bolic communication, but are in fact ubiquitous among animals living in groups 
and equipped with sufficiently advanced sensory and cognitive apparatus to regis-
ter, produce, interpret and exchange cues and signals observed in the environment 
or emitted by other animals. Interestingly, most mammals appear to be more at-
tuned to olfactory or vocal cues and signals than to visual ones, by being able to 
interpret odours and sounds as indexes of other unseen but contiguously co-
present animals. For example, the chimpanzee hunters rely on acoustic cues to 
locate their prey, altering the direction of pursuit when they hear the grunting of 
forest hogs. On the other hand visual cues are apparently more difficult for pri-
mates to observe, and for instance vervet monkeys seem unable to understand the 
danger implied when they see the visual indexes of their predators, such as the 
trail left by a python or the carcass from a recent leopard kill. Chimpanzees too are 
poor at drawing inferences from visual indexes, being unable to interpret the ani-
mals’ tracks left on the ground – a skill mastered by all human hunters (Dunbar 
1995: 121; Mithen 1999a: 80). Still, referential communication, mostly olfactory 
and auditory, is amply illustrated by animal behaviour, the fundamental difference 
between animal and human forms of communication remaining in the level of 
meaning, which differs depending on the species’ needs and the organization of 
their nervous systems. In animals reference is symptomatic, sometimes indexical 
or even iconic, but generally parainformational and nearly always contiguous. On 
the other hand in humans reference is symptomatic, indexical, iconic, symbolic, 
and generally metainformational. Another important difference is that most ani-
mal signals are innately motivated, resulting from the multigenerational history of 
the individual’s genetic material that favoured a particular signal as a response to 
a given proximate situation (Morton 1994: 349). By virtue of not possessing blank 
minds at birth humans too are equipped with instinctive responses to certain typ-
ical adaptive situations which, however, can be modified (mitigated or enhanced) 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	 
or even overridden by culturally driven symbolic values, largely resulting from the 
dictates of the specifically human teleological need.
Bodily adornments as the first indexical signs
If physiological and emotive bodily symptoms, cues, and signals form the first step 
towards referential communication, then artificial extensions of the body found in 
human cultures, such as skin decoration, makeup, jewellery, head dress, clothes 
and so on can be called indexical signs (more precisely, contiguous indexical signs) 
in the full sense of the term. While bodily signals are a form of extended pheno-
type, that is, they remain an integral part of the body and its physiology, bodily 
adornments originate outside the body, and technically speaking form a separate 
system (index) produced by a person as the reacting system. This is why a pea-
cock’s colourful tail developed by evolution to attract females by advertising its 
owner’s phenotypic quality is an example of a bodily signal, whereas the feather 
head dress of a native American tribal chief is a contiguous indexical sign an-
nouncing its wearer’s social status and authority.
Contiguously indexical bodily adornments used by humans probably ap-
peared at least during the Upper Palaeolithic cultural “explosion” around 40,000 
years ago, together with the earliest instances of permanent displaced iconic signs 
such as the realistic paintings found in the caves of southern France and northern 
Spain. Unlike the inadvertent cues and intentional but genetically motivated bod-
ily signals used by animals, contiguous indexical signs produced by humans as 
extensions of their bodies are already a part of culture, although their production 
is no doubt facilitated by specialized, evolutionary older, animal-like cognitive 
modules designed to draw attention to one’s body to attract mates, to scare oppo-
nents, and to indicate one’s status within the group (Etcoff 1999: 36; Gibson 1993a: 
11; Mithen 2005: 155; Lambert 2004; Ingold 1993: 35; Kendon 1993: 48–53; Ding-
wall 1979: Provine 1997: 170–173). Indeed, contiguous indexes in the form of 
bodily adornments belong to human cultural universals, attested among all docu-
mented hunting-gathering, farming and urban societies, and they include such 
practices as body painting, ritual scarring of the face and torso, elaborate hair ar-
rangements, refinements of costume, face makeup and masks. These adornments 
may have their further, mimetic (iconic) and quasi-symbolic significances, as 
Merlin Donald and Steven Mithen suggest, such as the indication of one’s status, 
group affiliation, and relationships with other individuals, what in today’s societies 
is symbolized by a uniform or a wedding ring for example (Donald 1991: 277; 
Mithen 1999a: 173). However, any possible meta-meanings of bodily decorations 
hinge upon their primary indexical character as contiguous, emphatically 

 From Interaction to Symbol
conspicuous extensions of the relevant parts of the body sending socially impor-
tant messages.
An interesting hypothesis to explain how the transition from animal body sig-
nalling to human indexical bodily signs could have occurred in our evolutionary 
history has been advanced by the anthropologist Camilla Power (Power 
1999: 93–109). From a Darwinian point of view any lasting biological or cultural 
invention owes its durability to its usefulness, in practice to the extent in which it 
enhances individual fitness, that is, survival and/or reproductive opportunities. 
This is why some of the most important bodily signals in animals serve the pro-
creative need, by announcing fertility and the readiness to mate. Among most 
mammalian females the oestrous cycle, that is, the period of fertility and therefore 
of sexual receptivity, is communicated outwardly with a fanfare of signals, such as 
the swelling and reddening of the skin around vagina, emission of menstrual blood 
(among apes and primates) and of distinctive odours, by provocative, inviting be-
haviour and so forth. In humans, for reasons that are still debated, ovulation is 
concealed both for male and female, which may explain for instance why many 
traditional societies saw virtually no link between copulation and conception 
(Cartwright 2000: 226–231).
According to Camilla Power, concealed ovulation in women evolved as a way 
of confusing or deceiving men about the precise period of the women’s fertility, 
otherwise symptomatized externally only by menstruation. At some point in the 
evolution of archaic Homo sapiens overt symptoms of ovulation (indicating cur-
rent fertility) had been lost, and females had to invent a means of forcing male 
attraction and sustained support, especially in the form of supplies of energy-rich 
food. Menstruation, the most prominent cue of imminent fertility, and a means of 
keeping the male interested in the female, is something that no male could afford 
to ignore without risking his mating prospects. At the same time a menstruating 
female is a potential threat to any other pregnant or lactating female, by being able 
to divert the energy and investment of all males to herself. Therefore the archaic 
Homo sapiens females, argues Power, may have avoided reproductive stress and 
jealousy over males by adopting a reciprocal coalitionary strategy of manipulating 
menstrual signals. Thus whenever a coalition member menstruated, the whole 
coalition joined in advertising this valuable signal as widely as possible to confuse 
males and ensure a more equal distribution of their reproductive and supportive 
attention to all females. Non-menstruating women would confuse and deceive 
males either by borrowing a menstruating woman’s blood, or by mimicking it with 
other blood or blood substitutes such as red ochre. Such cosmetic manipulation of 
menstrual cues has been termed “sham menstruation,” and it is hypothesized that 
it was practised by a coalition of all fertile women alternating naturally in their 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	 
ovulation periods between phases of fertility and non-fertility (Power 1999: 99; 
Knight 1999: 242; Cartwright 2000: 228–233).
Within the coalition of menstruation faking women one would also expect a 
competitive dynamic to attract males by producing increasingly elaborate sham 
menstrual advertising, resulting in ritualistic amplification of indexical, sexually 
sensitive bodily displays. These could involve the use of red pigment to amplify 
and broadcast the menstrual cues, with additional multimedia effects of move-
ment, song, and dance to further advertise the women’s phenotypic quality, that is, 
physical fitness as a symptom of good health and fertility. A possible implication 
of the sham menstruation theory is that one of the earliest expected evidence of 
human indexical signs should be cosmetics focused on red pigment. Another im-
plication of the theory is that the deception practised by menstruation faking 
women should be socio-centric rather than individualistic or egocentric. Human 
females organized in the sham menstruation coalitions would create permanent 
indexical signs and associated imaginary constructs, which they would share with 
other members of the coalition as well as with men outside the coalition.
In support of Power’s theory ethnographic studies show that cosmetics, often 
involving the menstruation mimicking red pigment, are indeed ubiquitous in 
modern tribal puberty and nubility rituals, where they are manipulated by coali-
tions of women to attract male attention. Among the peoples of the Lower Congo, 
for instance, red pigment forms the most often used ingredient of beauty prepara-
tion, where it connotes physical attractiveness and sexual maturity. Applied to 
modern societies the sham menstruation theory may also explain the perennial 
male erotic interest in women’s red lipstick, rouged cheeks, crimson dresses, and 
not least in the red-light districts with their “red queens” (Ridley 1994: 269–296). 
One of the bestsellers of medieval literature, the allegorical The Romance of the 
Rose, culminates in the male lover’s all-too-literal conquest of the vagina-like red 
rose (Lorris & De Meun 1994: 333).
From a semiotic viewpoint Camilla Power’s theory of sham menstruation 
throws light on an important transition from animal-like communication based 
on inadvertent bodily cues to fully human communication based on artificially 
made and socially shared indexical as well as imitative, that is, iconic signs. In-
deed, Power infers that female strategies involved in sham menstruation eventu-
ally led to the emergence of iconic and symbolic culture, and can therefore account 
for the putative origin of art (Power 1999: 107). Body-painting used to inform or 
deceive males about female imminent fertility, combined with dance and singing 
as ways of attracting attention to the female body, could constitute the earliest art 
media involving contiguous indexical and iconic visual and auditory signs, long 
before the appearance of durable representational images (displaced icons) paint-
ed or carved on surfaces other than the human body, such as wood, animal skin, 

 From Interaction to Symbol
bone or rock. Despite the scarcity of material evidence we can strongly hypothe-
size that for tens, if not for hundreds of thousands of years before the onset of re-
corded iconic culture around 40,000 years ago, forces of sexual selection drove the 
cosmetic body-paint traditions by competitions between female ritual coalitions 
and male mate choice for cosmetically decorated females. Steven Mithen reports 
that fragments of red ochre were found in sites dating as far back as 250,000 years 
ago, and large quantities of red ochre were also found in man-made deposits from 
at least 125,000 years ago in Africa (Mithen 1999a: 27; Donald 1991: 277; David-
son 2003: 154). It is generally accepted among archaeologists that the earliest use 
of ochre was for proto-symbolic body decoration rather than for painting cave 
walls or other artefacts. In the Upper Palaeolithic cave art low reliefs representing 
women, with large sagging breasts and bulging, broad thighs, were often height-
ened with red ochre (Leroi-Gourhan 1968: 117). The colour red, on its own or 
even more so when applied to selected parts of the female body such as lips, but-
tocks and breasts, produces a range of physiological effects, including acceleration 
in heart rate and stimulation in certain parts of the brain, and for this reason it is 
the privileged colour in all cultures (Mithen 1999b: 154; 2005: 251).
As the psychologist Nancy Etcoff also convincingly argues, our innate re-
sponses to red colour, especially in the context of sexual behaviour, explain why 
still today most women apply attention catching points of red to their lips and 
cheeks, in addition to powder that is a shade lighter than their natural complex-
ions, to bring out the redness of the lips and cheeks even more. The light founda-
tion and blush on the cheeks and red on the lips are thus sexual signals mimicking 
the blush of youth, nulliparity, and the vigour of health (Etcoff 1999: 113). Red, the 
colour of blood, of blushes and flushes, of nipples, lips, and sexually excited geni-
tals, is visible from afar and emotionally arousing. The attention-grabbing and 
emotionally-stimulating properties of red also explain why it is the colour of stop 
signs, railway signals, fire engines, some national flags and political emblems.
If women’s use of red pigments on erotically sensitive parts of the body can be 
regarded as the first instance of contiguous indexical signs, so can skin painting 
and body decorations used by men. One of the innate cognitive modules of the 
human social mind appears designed to produce and read indexical signs used by 
both sexes as extensions and modifications of their bodies to advertise sexual at-
tractiveness, physical prowess, and social status (Boyer 2000: 95; Sadowski 2001c: 
70; Symons 1979: 22; Pinker 1998: 484, 468; Etcoff 1999: 146, 164, 246; Guthrie 
1970: 259; Buss 2004: 251). These indexes include such universally attested body 
decorations as makeup, tattoos, skin piercing, jewellery, head dress, elements of 
clothing, talismans and so on. Unlike the historically more recent displaced iconic 
representations produced on durable materials and surfaces other than the human 
body, bodily ornamentations belong to the evolutionary more archaic, contiguously 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	 
indexical forms of social communication, still in full use today, as the thriving 
cosmetics and fashion industries, as well as our self-consciousness about our ex-
ternal appearance indisputably testify. In all cultures clothes and fashion help peo-
ple to negotiate their relations with the outside world, in addition to providing 
them with comfort and protection. As visual extensions of human bodies and per-
sonalities, clothes mirror people’s intentions and desires, related primarily to sex 
and status. As Nancy Etcoff again suggests, the original purpose of female clothing 
for example may have been to draw attention to the erotic zones of the body rath-
er than to hide them (Western sexual puritanism notwithstanding). This is why 
primitive art and body decoration tend to highlight the sources of fertility: cloth-
ing makes necks appear longer, breasts larger, shoulders wider, waists trimmer, 
hips curvier, feet smaller, and legs longer. Trends in (particularly female) fashion 
are continually changing, revealing and concealing in turns various erotic parts of 
the body, thus keeping sexual interest and social interactions alive and focused 
(Etcoff 1999: 222).
From memory to consciousness
Contiguous indexicality as exemplified by bodily adornments represents a more 
ancient form of social communication, mainly because reading contiguous cues, 
signals, and signs requires less advanced cognitive faculties than those needed to 
decipher signs referring to displaced originals: it is simply easier to establish a 
cognitive link between original and image when both are physically co-present, 
than when they are separated in time and space. On the other hand the ability to 
interpret an image that is removed from its original, as is the case with communi-
cation based on displaced indexes as well as on icons and symbols, involves mak-
ing an extra cognitive effort to recall the semantic association linking the cur-
rently perceived sign with the absent original, and in most cases it also means 
learning that association in the first place. In other words, a large and important 
part of human communication is based on learned associations between cultur-
ally specific signs and their often equally specific meanings, which in most cases 
are displaced from the communicator and acquired through that paradigm of 
symbolic communication, the verbal language (see Chapter 10).
While animals communicate in a limited variety of contiguous situations 
(mating, danger warnings, territorial rivalry and so on), referential displacement 
inherent in the human language turns this form of communication into a most 
effective tool to exchange ideas about an almost unlimited variety of subjects and 
events from the present, past, future, including also the imaginary, nonexistent 
events. Still, ontogenetic learning facilitated by language in a significant measure 

 From Interaction to Symbol
must build on and complement the innate responses which humans share with 
other mammalian species. In general, animals negotiate their environments using 
largely automatic reactions they were born with, aided by a limited number of 
learned, conditioned responses. On the other hand one of the features distinguish-
ing humans from other animals is the extraordinary capacity of the former to learn 
many new things during their lifetime, and to store this knowledge in the mind for 
easy and quick access, whenever the need for a particular bit of acquired informa-
tion arises. The cognitive faculty, largely absent in non-human animals, that makes 
this continuous learning possible, is memory – a prerequisite of such potent hu-
man cognitive attributes as the perception of the flow of time and the resulting 
ability to communicate about displaced objects and situations, without which hu-
man consciousness and culture would not be possible.
Animals too have memory, but it is rigidly programmed by the genes rather 
than by ontogenetic learning, and it is specialized rather than open, designed to 
optimize the demands of a species-specific task. For example, squirrels have 
evolved a capacious memory to keep track of the many places in which they cache 
their nuts, just as birds whose males sing to impress the females or to intimidate 
other males have genetically programmed capacious memory for songs (two hun-
dred, in the case of the nightingale). By contrast human memory is not specialized 
but open and multifunctional. It is what psychologists call “episodic,” or “autobio-
graphical” memory, employed mainly to keep track of one’s social transactions: 
who did what to whom, when, where, and why (Pinker 1998: 124; Coren, Ward 
and Enns 2004: 346; Schiffman 1996: 492). Human episodic memory is also con-
tinuous and sequential, carried over from one episode to the next, thus stimulating 
the cause-and-effect form of reasoning, absent for example in apes, whose memo-
ry is concrete, situation-bound, and related to immediate, short-term responses to 
current situations. Having no sense of the past and unable to anticipate the future, 
the apes, and even more so all the lower animals, live entirely in the present, from 
one discrete episode to another perceptively new discrete episode. This is why ani-
mals excel at accurate instinctive situational analysis and at prompt, optimal re-
sponses to the current events, but they cannot mentally re-present a situation to 
reflect on it, either individually or collectively. Even the new responses learned by 
Pavlovian-type conditioning do not become part of the animal’s memory in any 
conscious sense: these responses are only recalled, automatically and for a brief 
moment, when the stimulus that created the conditioned response in the first place 
reappears to prompt the same reaction (Donald 1991: 160; Bertalanffy 1981: 78).
Contiguity therefore reigns supreme for animals, and the lack of the sense of 
the flow of time is one of the reasons why chimpanzees, our nearest animal cous-
ins, cannot be taught human language, that communication system specially de-
signed to navigate mentally across the entire time spectrum. During the 1950s and 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	 
early 1960s psychological experiments were conducted to demonstrate whether 
humans learn language instinctively or because they are exposed to language they 
hear around them as they grow up. For the purpose of comparison, several fami-
lies of American psychologists raised baby chimpanzees in their own homes 
alongside their own children. The effect was that chimps did learn to speak a few 
words of English, but on the whole the language-learning experiment proved to be 
a dismal failure for the chimps. One thing was that “speaking” really relied on 
whispering sounds that resembled the English words the chimps were imitating, 
but that could be blamed on their lack of the human-type vocal apparatus. More 
importantly, chimps will never be able to speak a human language because they 
lack the following interrelated cognitive faculties: combinatorial thinking neces-
sary for grammar, a sense of time to anticipate the development of the communi-
cative situation and to establish a sequence of causes and effects, and theory of 
mind to predict how the listener is going to understand and react to what the 
chimps “says” (Dunbar 2005: 117–119). Ever slaves to the here-and-now, chimps 
(and little human children for that matter) could only learn the individual words 
when the referents, such as food items, were functionally present. Typical mes-
sages of both chimpanzee and language-learning child consist therefore mostly of 
entreaties, demands, mollifications, declarations of ownership and indications of 
location. However, as human children grow beyond the age of three they can use 
language to report what has happened to them (which means that they develop a 
conscious sense of time); they can play and experiment with elements of language 
(due to combinatorial thinking); and they can introduce new, often imaginary top-
ics (thanks to the faculty of meta-thinking). As experiments have shown, chim-
panzees could accomplish none of the above things: all they could do was to string 
a number of words together in an emotive response to the current, most typically 
food related situation (Dissanayake 1991: 116).
Working memory, the ability to hold in conscious attention events that last in 
time, must have been acquired gradually in the course of human evolution, as both 
sides of the “eternal now” were being perceptually expanded to encompass more 
and more of the chronologically related events, both those that have just happened 
and those that were imaginatively anticipated to occur in the immediate future 
(Eichenbaum and Cohen 2001: 471; Sterelny 2006). According to Steven Mithen 
the Neanderthals, a species of Homo related to us and becoming extinct about 
30,000 years ago, lacked this kind of working memory and their capacity to hold a 
variety of information in active attention was considerably lower than that of 
modern humans, which was one of the reasons, argues Mithen, why the Neander-
thals did not manufacture material signs (Mithen 2005: 233, 251). It is possible to 
speculate that among the elements of the early hominids’ lifestyle that were stable 
enough over a sufficiently long time to selectively force an expansion of working 

 From Interaction to Symbol
memory were the following: the domestication of fire, the production of tools, and 
group hunting – all of them processual activities that required planning, concen-
tration, attention, and sustained multi-stage action to be accomplished.
As archaeological evidence indicates, the controlled use of fire dates back to 
late Homo erectus populations about 60,000 years ago, with some evidence of the 
opportunistic use of fire, obtained from a lighting bolt for instance, going as far 
back as one and a half million years (Dunbar 2005: 39). Sustained, controlled use 
of fire must therefore have been the common heritage of both the Neanderthals 
and the Cro-Magnon populations (circa 40,000 years ago), from which modern 
humans evolved. The use of fire is one of human universals, and its advantages 
include temperature control, illumination, protection from animals, cooking, pu-
rification, and aid in shaping tools (Brown 1991: 95). The psychologist Nicholas 
Humphrey also emphasizes the biggest if least tangible benefit of taming fire – the 
possibility to provide a focus for family and friends to gather round, to exchange 
gossip and useful knowledge, and to cement social bonds (Humphrey 2002: 182). 
The domestication of fire must have also played an important role in the psycho-
logical evolution of humanity, in that it required planning, including the choice of 
the site for the fire, the search and stocking up of fuel, as well as concentration and 
attention in igniting the fire and keeping it alive by adding more fuel at the right 
intervals. The processual, cause-effect nature of these activities both required and 
enhanced the expansion of working memory and the mental separation of the 
present from the future, while concentrated attention on a single, perceptually 
prominent spot (bright and hot), emotively associated with warmth, safety, and 
social intimacy, must in the long run have contributed towards the formation of 
specifically human consciousness, centred both on one’s self and on one’s immedi-
ate kin gathered round the fire. Derek Bickerton even says that the taming and 
handling of fire would not have been possible without a secondary representa-
tional system, corresponding with meta-thinking, necessary for the development 
of symbolic culture (Bickerton 1990: 141). A home base organized around the fire 
is another universal characteristic of the humans species, not only among the his-
torically recent settled farmers, but even among the more ancient hunter-gatherers 
and nomadic pastoralists, who did not wander aimlessly but returned habitually to 
seasonal bases. Apes on the other hand roam constantly, sleep where night finds 
them, and then wander again to some other point in their habitual range. The 
earliest home bases have been attested for the Homo erectus (over a million years 
ago), who dwelled in caves and constructed temporary shelters where they kept 
fires, both for cooking and for protection from other species.
Expanded working memory, including processual thinking and anticipatory 
imagination, was also needed in effective tool production, impossible without the 
ability to visualize in a lump of rock a still-unformed shape and to anticipate what 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	 
its use must be, in the same way as the sculptor must first imagine the yet-unfin-
ished form of the human figure he will create by chiselling away the unnecessary 
parts of a block of marble. The complexity of tool production should thus be a 
good index of the sophistication of neural circuitry underlying technical intelli-
gence, a cognitive faculty rudimentarily present in the chimpanzees, which have 
been observed to strip leaves off sticks to use as probes for ants and to make fishing 
sticks for termites. In addition to catching insects, chimpanzees use small sticks 
for acquiring honey, removing nuts from their shells, and picking bits of brain 
from skulls. They also use leaves crushed together to form a sponge to gather up 
ants or water (Mithen 1999a: 74). However, the chimps’ instrumental behaviour is 
still comparatively simple: a tool usually consists of a single component; it is man-
ufactured from whatever material just happens to be lying around, without any 
apparent foresight or planning; and it remains entirely subordinate to the emotive, 
short-term, contiguous context of the nutritional need. Chimps cannot prepare a 
tool ahead of the situation in which it will be used, something that consciously 
anticipating humans do all the time. Nor does the manufacturing of simple tools 
constitute a part of the chimpanzees’ “culture”: once the tool is used and hunger is 
satisfied the tool is simply abandoned, not carried around or “remembered” to be 
later reproduced. Steven Mithen states unequivocally that we simply cannot at-
tribute chimpanzees with specialized cognitive processes dedicated to the manip-
ulation and transformation of physical objects, what he calls technical intelligence, 
so far found only in humans (Mithen 1999a: 76).
By comparison, the tools produced by Homo habilis, our ancestors from about 
two million years ago, already contain evidence of beginnings of processual think-
ing and expanding working memory. The so-called Oldowan artefacts (named 
after the site of Olduvai Gorge in East Africa) produced by Homo habilis include 
for example tools made to make other tools, such as the production of a stone flake 
to sharpen a stick. Such multi-step instrumental behaviour is unknown among 
chimpanzees, and it testifies to an early form of human-type cognitive fluidity, 
whereby the practical properties of two contrasting types of raw material, such as 
stone and wood, are understood, compared, and held in the mind as part of work-
ing memory (Mithen 1999a: 96). However, as Steven Mithen demonstrates, tool 
technology of early humans remained fairly conservative for hundreds of thou-
sands of years, being largely limited to general-purpose hand axes, with the visible 
absence of tools containing multiple components, such as the hunting weapons 
produced by modern hunter-gatherers (the Inuit of Greenland for example). Still, 
the production of a typical symmetrical hand axe involved several stages, includ-
ing the finding of the right raw material, careful planning to envisage the required 
symmetry of the tool, as well as manual skill, acquired through experience rather 
than based on instinctive motor behaviour, to detach flakes from a rough stone 

 From Interaction to Symbol
nodule, sculptor-like, to achieve the desired, precise shape (Mithen 1999a: 118, 
127, 131; Ingold 1993: 36; Gibson 1993c: 191).
Another important feature of the life of early humans that required and in 
turn reinforced long-term memory was group hunting, an activity that is impos-
sible without advanced cognitive faculties such as detailed planning, sophistica-
tion of design of hunting tools and weapons, as well as patience and attention in 
manufacturing those tool and in stalking the big game. Some animals, such as 
large cats or the canidae, also practise group hunting, but it is their genetically 
determined way of life, as their canine teeth, fangs, claws, rapacious behaviour and 
meat-oriented digestive systems testify. By contrast, hunting is by no means a ge-
netic necessity for the omnivorous humans, who have to consciously manufacture 
weapons and traps to make up for the absence of sharp canine teeth and claws. 
Still, group hunting must have been a persistent enough feature in the life of early 
humans to produce by natural selection certain innate behavioural predisposi-
tions, especially in males, such as those that motivate today’s amateur hunters and 
anglers in their hobbies. Collective hunting also required a high level of co-opera-
tion and exchange of information about the natural world, best achieved through 
the speed and efficiency of symbolic verbal language which, as I shall discuss in 
Chapter 10, by definition involves capacious working memory to talk about spa-
tio-temporally displaced objects and events. Modern hunter-gatherers (as well as 
amateur hunters and anglers) talk compulsively and with gusto about all the prac-
tical aspects of hunting: the tracks and trails of animals, the technical details of 
hunting equipment, weather conditions, features of hunting terrain, successes and 
failures of hunting expeditions, alternative hunting plans and so forth (Mithen 
2005: 160, 166). As argued by the psychologists Gordon D. A. Brown and Nick 
Chater, foraging behaviour was the main ecological factor for the development of 
human timing ability, memory for temporal durations, and episodic memory. In 
addition to that, foraging behaviour appears responsible for human understand-
ing of the links between psychological representations of memory, space and time 
(Brown and Chater 2001: 100; Martindale 1981).
In the end, ontogenetic memory (in contrast to the rigidity and automatism of 
phylogenetic memory) proved useful to humans, mainly because it enabled them 
to use the past to predict the immediate future, thereby to achieve greater adaptive 
flexibility during their lifetime rather than over an incomparably longer period of 
evolutionary adaptation. Memory is one of the cognitive faculties to make specu-
lation about the future possible, and it probably evolved as a way of supporting 
effective decision-making related to forthcoming events. Because our decisions 
concerning the future require more information than is usually available in the 
environment at the moment of making a decision, additional information is pro-
vided by the relevant past facts and experiences stored in memory (Klein, 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	 
Cosmides, Tooby and Chance 2002). Although we do not literally experience ex-
actly the same events over and over again, most events of the same type have 
enough similarities to previous ones for memory to put those who have it at a 
distinct advantage over those who do not (Workman and Reader 2004: 221). Rob-
in Dunbar observes that one of the conspicuous features of our mental world is the 
way we rehearse what we are going to do, which involves considering alternative 
options, evaluating their likely outcomes, predicting cause-effect links and so on, 
something that other primates, living wholly in the contiguous presence, cannot 
do (Dunbar 2005: 65). Humans, by contrast, have what the neuroscientist John C. 
Eccles calls a “memory of the future,” or “remembered anticipations” – a memory 
not only of what has happened, but of the complex anticipations that we experi-
ence when we are thinking about future planned actions with all their possible 
consequences (Eccles 1989: 229). As a species, we also possess what in Chapter 3 I 
defined as the teleological need: we seem to be preoccupied with ends and goals; 
we organize our actions around imagined consequences they will produce; we 
struggle in vain to comprehend the implications of our inevitable termination of 
life; and we create marvellously elaborate and obscure stories to fulfil our need to 
find purpose and meaning in the fabric of this universe.
Memory is also a necessary condition for that uniquely human, complex, elu-
sive and mysterious mental entity called consciousness, or awareness of one’s own 
existence (Thompson and Madigen 2005: v; Coren, Ward and Enns 2004: 420–424). 
All living systems exist objectively and care about what happens to them in the 
interest of survival. However, for plants and non-human animals the “caring” is 
done largely through instinctive, context-bound responses produced in the “eter-
nal present” of contiguous interactions with the environment, without any subjec-
tive sense of the continuity of these interactions. Animals are mentally capable of 
doing many clever things, but for all we know they are not aware that they are do-
ing these clever things. Similarly, human children are skilful “know-how-ers,” but 
not “know-that-ers” (Hauser 1998: 595). The absence of self-awareness in primates 
and small children is largely due to the lack of the subjective sense of the passage of 
time, and the resulting inability to appreciate the continuity of one’s mental proc-
esses and consequently of one’s existence. On the other hand in adult humans the 
extended working memory and the associated capacity to remember what has hap-
pened to one a minute, an hour, a day, weeks, months or years ago naturally gener-
ates a sense of continuity of subjective experience as the foundation of self-aware-
ness, and of a feeling of one’s distinctiveness from other systems in the environment 
(not yet the Cartesian “I think, therefore I am,” which denotes a more advanced 
form of introspective consciousness, but something like “I experience, therefore I 
exist.”) (Eccles 1989: 201–204, 226). For instance, chimpanzees and gorillas are able 
to recognize themselves in the mirror, and appear to have a rudimentary concept 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
of self, but it seems that no chimp or gorilla knows that he is aware of himself 
(Mithen 1999: 93; Dissanayake 1991: 119). Consciousness can therefore be defined 
as a meta-cognitive ability of a system to be aware of its own subjectivity, and as far 
we know this ability is available only to humans. It is what the cognitive psycholo-
gist Robert L. Solso defines as “a state of attentional wakefulness in which one is 
immediately aware of his subjective sensations” (Solso 2003: 27).
The state of self-awareness is by no means obvious or inevitable in evolution, 
and indeed for Richard Dawkins the appearance of subjective consciousness is the 
most profound mystery facing modern biology (Dawkins 2006c: 59). On the other 
hand the physiologist Derek Denton sees consciousness as emerging gradually 
from animal primal emotions such as thirst, hunger, hunger for air, and pain, as a 
way of “constructing an integrated mental scene” to remember experiences related 
to these emotions in order to respond more flexibly to similar situations occurring 
in the future. This “primary consciousness,” observed in animals with certain brain 
structures similar to our own, would eventually give rise – according to Denton – 
to a “higher-order consciousness,” epitomized in humans, which involves a sense 
of self, the capacity of self-awareness, of an “inward turning of consciousness,” 
when the mind itself is both the subject and the object of cognition (Denton 
2005: 5, 103). In a similar vein, Dawkins suggests that perhaps consciousness has 
arisen as a result of the brain’s representation of the world being complete enough 
to include a model of itself, a cognitive feat corresponding to what I earlier defined 
as meta-thinking, that is, not only thinking but also being aware of one’s thought 
processes (Dawkins 2006c: 59, 278). Thus understood self-awareness has the in-
evitable effect of liberating one’s mind from the world of concrete here-and-now 
experience, and of generating a quasi-autonomous virtual meta-experience in the 
meta-world – what is often referred to as spiritual culture or simply imagination. 
Without memory an organism is the slave to actuality: it only registers events 
when they take place. On the other hand consciousness facilitated by memory is 
able to monitor sensations, to entertain representations of sensations expressed 
through abstract entities such as numbers, as well as linguistic and visual symbols 
(Laszlo 1972a: 92). This is why psychologists strongly link working memory with 
consciousness, regarding the latter as a means of integrating and co-ordinating 
remembered perceptual data (visual, auditory, tactile and so on), as the basis of 
imaginative projections about the future (Baddeley 1993: 21; Schiffman 1996: 492). 
Thus understood consciousness would appear to confer important selective ad-
vantage: a species possessing it can plan actions, communicate the plan within a 
group, and carry it out in purposive teamwork. In this way consciousness can tran-
scend the limitations of genetically programmed behaviour, allowing its possessor 
to learn from personal and group experience (Coren, Ward and Enns 2004: 346; 
Hoerl and McCormack 2001: 3; Laszlo 1972a: 95).

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	 
Conscious, subjective perception of the flow of time is therefore fundamental 
to the way humans perceive, think, act and represent the world. It permeates lan-
guage, the main human system of social communication, and is the very founda-
tion of culture conceived as conscious collective memory, separate from genetic 
memory. Every natural language in the world has separate verb tenses for past, 
present, and future, plus innumerable modifiers to specify time more precisely, 
such as “yesterday,” “today,” “recently,” “in an hour,” “while,” “during,” “after” and 
hundreds more. Cultural memory on the other hand constitutes a second (in ad-
dition to genetic) mode of inheritance, which evolved in humans as a way of adapt-
ing to a social environment that was changing faster that the natural, non-human 
environment, and required greater cognitive flexibility than that provided by 
purely instinctive, rigid, and stereotypical biological responses (Workman and 
Reader 2004: 368). In short, without extended working memory there is no per-
ceptual connection between past, present, and future, no consciousness, no plan-
ning, no fully purposeful action, no culture, no technology, no art, no religion, no 
narrative or anything that defines us as human. None of these phenomena is also 
possible without memory-dependent social communication based on displaced 
referents: indexical, iconic, and symbolic, that constitutes much of human cultural 
behaviour. In the words of the biologists Peter B. and Jean S. Medawar,
human behaviour can be genuinely purposive because only human beings guide 
their behaviour by a knowledge of what happened before they were born and a 
preconception of what may happen after they are dead: thus only human beings 
find their way by a light that illuminates more than the patch of ground they stand 
on (Medawar and Medawar 1977: 171).
Memory and the beginnings of culture
It may be unfashionable in academic circles to speak of evolutionary progress, but 
as Edward O. Wilson comments in relation to the development of life, rather than 
remaining static or regressing nature has in fact managed to produce through time 
organisms of increasingly complex structure (Wilson 1998: 107). Richard Dawkins’ 
answer to the question of progress in evolution is also a limited “yes,” especially in 
relation to human evolution, which happens to involve primarily the nervous sys-
tem, that is, the brain (Dawkins 2003: 119, 248, 251). Ervin Laszlo too observes 
that we only need to consider the contrast between the simple single-celled organ-
isms and warm-blooded creatures such as mammals to see that the direction of 
evolution is from simple to complex, rather than the other way round (Laszlo 
1972a: 58). It does not mean, however, that complexity of structure or function is 
the predestined goal of evolution; rather, it is the result of it. Despite the compulsions 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
of human teleological need, as expressed in religious and philosophic ideas, to 
impose ultimate, transcendental purpose on the history of the universe, objec-
tively speaking there seems to be no preset goal in the development of living sys-
tems. Rather, we can talk about the process of evolutionary transformations of 
organisms in interactions with one another and with the environment, leading 
towards gradually more effective adaptations (Dawkins 2006b: 178, 181). Subject 
neither to some transcendental purpose nor to pure chance, evolution does none-
theless reveal one great constancy: a tendency to favour increments in structural 
complexity, especially of the nervous system, to bestow an ever-increasing repre-
sentational power on some organisms. Anything that gives a creature a fuller view 
of its environment will enable it to survive perils that would otherwise be fatal, and 
creatures whose representational systems (i.e. brains) are even fractionally more 
sophisticated than those of their conspecifics will tend to outbreed them, and over 
lengthy periods of time the genes carrying such adaptations will spread through 
the population (Bickerton 1990: 103).
Applied to the evolution of human communication systems the above general 
observation probably means that while there was nothing inevitable about the 
transition from contiguous and indexically contiguous communication to com-
munication based on displaced referents, the latter simply proved more effective 
by bestowing greater adaptive flexibility and ecological success on the Homo sapi-
ens when compared with the early hominids, to say nothing of all other animals. It 
is very probable that the Neanderthals became extinct precisely because they could 
not compete for resources with modern humans possessing superior hunting abil-
ities aided by complex tools and more effective, symbolic systems of communica-
tion based on displaced referents, notably syntactic language. As far as we know, 
the Neanderthals painted their bodies, that is, they availed of contiguously indexi-
cal communication, but they had no language and used no symbols: that is, they 
had no ability to engage in communication based on displaced referents, and con-
sequently had no related cognitive abilities such as extended working memory and 
consciousness (Mithen 2005: 223, 263). At the same time social communication 
based on indexes, icons, and symbols did not descend on humanity suddenly, in 
the form of predestined, god-sent inspiration, like the black monolith from Stanley 
Kubrick’s film 2001: The Space Odyssey. Rather, it arose gradually through natural 
selection from the complex brain circuitry of our ancestors as a more effective 
cognitive tool for exchanging useful information, for the purpose of outdoing the 
rivals such as the Neanderthals in competition for vital ecological resources.
One of the earliest consequences of the ability to establish imaginatively caus-
al links between temporally displaced objects, in other words of memory, are com-
plex tools, whose production is impossible without processual, cause-effect type of 
thinking that comes with memory. All tools and other human artefacts such as 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	 
weapons, hunting traps, other contraptions, devices, and machines, also clothes, 
jewellery, built shelters and other architectural structures, musical instruments, 
works of art and so on – in fact everything that archaeologists call material culture, 
are indexes of human conscious, creative thoughts and actions, just as ant hills, the 
birds’ nests, the spiders’ webs, the beavers’ dams and so on are indexes of the ani-
mals’ instinctive, rigid and specialized behaviour. According to the definition of 
index adopted in Chapter 2, any direct physical change produced by a system in 
the environment forms an index of that system, an indirect evidence of the sys-
tem’s existence and behaviour. The change can assume the form of unintentional 
and inadvertent cues, as in leaving footprints or excrements, or in the form of in-
tentional signals, instinctive in the case of animals, and both instinctive and voli-
tional in the case of humans. For example, for most mammals urinating is a phys-
iological reaction to remove liquid metabolic waste, but for some species it can be 
both that and a way of scent-marking the territory, as happens among male dogs, 
in which case the same reaction constitutes not only a physiological cue but also a 
social signal. Female or young dogs urinate without lifting their legs, directly on 
the ground, whereas a mature male dog lifts its leg and urinates on a post or tree, 
at a nose height just right for other dogs to detect. In other words, in the latter case 
urinating is not only a manifestation of renal physiology, but also an act of com-
municating (Plotkin 1994: 104). Unlike an inadvertent cue, signal is designed (by 
evolution) to be manipulative, that is, to influence the behaviour of others by com-
municating a message, in the above example something like “keep away, this is my 
territory, and if you trespass, you’ll have to reckon with me.” Of course, no such 
line of reasoning goes through the brain of a male dog marking its territory in this 
way: the animal simply performs a genetically programmed reaction without real-
izing what it is doing, still less why.
In the case of meta-thinking humans, however, we are dealing with behav-
iours that can be interpreted both as cues or signals and also as signs of poten-
tially symbolic significance. Chronologically speaking, the earliest human indexi-
cal signs, that is, consciously produced artefacts other than symptomatic behaviours 
such as facial expressions, body language, and emotive vocalizations, are bodily 
adornments (contiguous indexes) discussed earlier, as well as tools and weapons 
(displaced indexes) made from some durable material such as stone, bone, or 
wood. These artefacts not only required the human-type extended ontogenetic 
memory and cause-effect thinking, but they also encouraged and reinforced these 
cognitive faculties in return, by serving as what Henry Plotkin calls “exosomatic 
information storing devices,” as exemplified today by works of art, books, micro-
films, magnetic tapes, CDs, DVDs, and other digital storage devices (Plotkin 
1994: 254). Early in human history a woman painting her body with red ochre (a 
contiguous index) relied on the memory of the attention paid by males to 

 
From Interaction to Symbol
menstruating women, and conversely, a female body painted in red would make 
males remember the connection between the colour red on the woman’s body and 
her possible fertility even more. In the same way the multi-stage production of a 
tool required the memory and anticipation of the tool’s purpose, just as the fin-
ished tool constituted a reminder, a mnemonic device, of the reason and purpose 
for which the tool was originally manufactured.
Working memory was thus necessary as a psychological precondition to pro-
duce both contiguous and displaced indexes, but it also had to be aided by the very 
artefacts it helped to produce, because – as we all know only too well – human 
memory is an imperfect cognitive tool. Our minds are certainly not like comput-
ers in this respect, because unlike computers we tend to forget many of the things 
we once memorized. For instance, we forget important appointments, we have 
selective and distorted recollections of the past, we often suppress the memory of 
embarrassing or shameful events, we are often seemingly unable to remember the 
name of a familiar person and so on. If memory is the product of evolution that 
gives humans an adaptive edge over animals relying solely on automatic, instinc-
tive or conditioned responses, why does it apparently fail us so often? The psy-
chologist Daniel Schacter proposes an adaptive explanation of why human mem-
ory is fallible, by listing what he calls “the seven sins of memory.” These include 
transience, that is, the gradual weakening or loss of memory over time, as in not 
being able to remember in detail what we did years ago; absent-mindedness, that is, 
a breakdown at the interface between attention and memory, as in forgetting where 
we left our keys; blocking, that is, failing to retrieve information that we know we 
know, as in being unable to remember the name of a familiar person; misattribu-
tion, that is, forgetting the source of information, as in claiming as our own an 
experience we read about in a book or saw in a film; suggestibility, that is, distort-
ing or exaggerating what happened under the influence of leading questions or 
comments; bias, that is, unconsciously editing the past, to present ourselves in a 
more positive light for example; and persistence, that is, repeatedly recalling dis-
turbing or unpleasant events, as in reliving a car crash or some embarrassing inci-
dent. Thus according to Schacter transience is adaptive because not all experiences 
and information remembered at any given time will have future benefit; absent-
mindedness is adaptive because we cannot attend to everything at once; blocking 
is adaptive because the things we tend to forget are low in frequency or ones we 
have not used for some time; misattribution is also adaptive because often what is 
remembered is more important than where the particular information came from; 
suggestibility is adaptive because exaggerating the events of the past under the 
influence of leading questions makes us look more confident and reliable before 
the interlocutor; bias is adaptive because it presents us in a more positive light; and 
persistence is adaptive because by making negative events prominent memory is 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	 
warning us not to make the same mistakes again (Schacter 2001; Workman and 
Reader 2004: 226–229).
It is precisely because our memory is fallible and imperfect that we need the 
exosomatic information storing devices. If human memory was like that of a com-
puter, always complete, accurate, and quick on recall, we would not need mne-
monic devices such as folk stories, works of art, social ritual, writing, photography, 
film, sound recordings and other electronic data bases prompting culturally rele-
vant information in our minds. Anything once thought, imagined, seen or heard 
would be remembered faithfully for ever to be recalled accurately and in its en-
tirety at any time, and we would not need any external cues or prompts to remind 
us of anything. The earliest works of art – the Upper Palaeolithic cave paintings 
and sculpture – are thus indirect evidence both of the presence and of the imper-
fection of human memory. On the other hand, the fact that other primate species 
such as the Neanderthals did not produce durable exosomatic information storing 
devices indicates that they had no working memory at their disposal, and that they 
did not need pictures, rituals or folk tales because there was nothing in the Nean-
derthal mind to be prompted or retrieved by these artefacts.
The primary purpose of prehistoric realistic art was therefore to store useful 
information about the part of the natural world that the early humans needed to 
remember: knowledge about animals either used as prey or feared as predators. 
The cave images and portable sculptures facilitated the recall of those important 
elements of the natural environment by serving as mnemonic devices to identify 
the species and to communicate useful knowledge about animal behaviour (Mithen 
1999a: 170, 172). In fact, the purpose of any durable sign is to reinforce individual 
and social memory, as culturally acquired knowledge of the natural and social 
environments was expanding beyond what any individual, equipped with imper-
fect and fallible memory, could consciously embrace. The durable signs would in-
clude first of all material, visual artefacts, such as bodily adornments, tools, weap-
ons, sculpted pieces of wood or bone, as well as rock carvings and paintings, which 
were probably supplemented by auditory signs such as speech or song, durable 
due to their repeatability despite the natural volatility of the auditory medium. 
Even before the Upper Palaeolithic portable sculptures, cave paintings, and rock 
carvings, which mark the recorded beginnings of iconic culture, the continuity of 
cultural memory must have been maintained by such visual signs as contiguous 
indexical bodily decorations, especially the permanent ones such as tattooing and 
scarifications. Impermanent bodily adornments such as makeup, clothes or jewels 
are by comparison more transient, subject to change together with a person’s social 
role, or even due to something as unpredictable and capricious as one’s personal 
whim or fashion, which seem to change without any apparent accompanying shifts 
in cultural values, but just for the sake of changing.

 
From Interaction to Symbol
On the other hand permanent bodily decorations and modifications found in 
tribal societies, including circumcision for boys, clitoridectomy for girls, scarifica-
tions, tattoos, body piercing, branding, hair removal, cranial binding, feet binding 
and so on, are constant and fixed reminders of one’s ethnic and tribal affiliation, 
social status and gender role (Ebin 1979: 25). As the ethnographer David Lewis-
Williams puts it, the surface of the body can become the stage upon which the 
drama of socialization is indexically enacted, in which body adornment becomes 
the language through which it is expressed (Lewis-Williams 2004: 90). In all cul-
tures social identity changes through individual life: people move from adoles-
cence to adulthood, from unmarried to married, from child-bearing to past-child-
bearing, from unrelated to related-by-marriage status. Body adornments are 
sensitive to these changes, and in many cultures people change them to signal their 
social role-of-the-moment. Body decorations and alterations thus represent re-
movable and irremovable, respectively, contiguous indexes that determine, either 
temporally or permanently, a person’s membership in a group and his or her posi-
tion in it. For example, different tribes of the American Indians of the Northwest 
Coast used to distinguish themselves from other tribes by deforming their skulls 
in very specific and purposeful ways. Among the Kwakiutl, the Salish, and the 
Nootka, whose members were designated as “Flat-Heads” by early white explorers, 
shortly after a child’s birth the mother would bind a board against its forehead at 
an angle which produced the sloping head peculiar to her own people. Slight vari-
ations of the technique would result in different head shapes which served to dis-
tinguish one people from another at a glance. As a literally unchangeable marker 
of ethnic membership, the sloping head as a contiguous indexical sign also carried 
for the Indians additional, aesthetic meta-meaning, as a high-domed forehead was 
considered to be a feature of great beauty by its practitioners (Ebin 1979: 35).
In other cultures permanent bodily decorations and modifications would not 
only serve as constant reminders of tribal identity, but would also distinguish dif-
ferent classes of people within the tribe. Circumcision, scarring, or tattooing were 
usually applied during puberty initiation rites to mark a young person’s progress 
from the position of a child to that of an adult, a status that carried with it its ap-
pertaining rights, privileges, and duties. In such cases bodily signs change together 
with the person’s social status, providing a permanent, portable record of one’s 
personal history on constant display to fellow tribesmen, to remind everyone of 
the wearer’s life experience to date, as well as of his or her current social role. The 
Marquesas Islanders, for instance, used to tattoo their bodies gradually, adding 
new tattoos to different parts of the body during a series of initiation rites per-
formed between birth and old age, at which time the body would be completely 
covered in tattoos. Thus different patterns of tattoos or permanent scars would 

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	 
distinguish unmarried girls from married women, pubescent boys from adult 
warriors and so on (Ebin 1979: 47, 53, 56).
Of course the body in its natural state also produces inadvertent visual cues 
indicating a person’s sex, age, physical attractiveness and fitness. However, in hu-
man cultures these outward cues of physiological development are not sufficient, 
and have to be accompanied and enhanced by consciously produced contiguous 
indexical signs in the form of both permanent and changeable bodily decorations, 
to provide more detailed information about one’s status in a society whose struc-
ture is much more complex than anything found even among the most social of 
animals. The universality of human preoccupation with cultural modifications of 
the body and with external appearance appears to be due to the working of an in-
nate cognitive module, originally developed as part of primate social instinct, to 
read bodily and facial cues and signals for relevant emotions and intentions in 
direct, contiguous communication (Etcoff 1999: 36; Gibson 1993b: 11; Mithen 
2005: 155; Lambert 2004; Ingold 1993: 35; Kendon 1993: 48–53). In today’s West-
ern societies, with their social mobility and legal equality of everyone, bodily 
modifications are no longer rigid markers of one’s social duties and privileges but 
more of a lifestyle choice, a free expression of individual personality rather than of 
collective values or an indication of one’s status. Thus teenagers tattoo and pierce 
their bodies and wear eccentric clothes as an expression of their angst and peaceful 
rebellion against conventional, adult values; people diet and exercise to keep their 
bodies in shape mainly for private health reasons; plastic surgery is becoming 
more and more fashionable to gratify people’s personal vanity rather than to indi-
cate their social status; and most of us attend daily to our personal hygiene and 
wear clean, neat clothes more because these things make us feel comfortable than 
to prove our membership in “civilized” society.
Material culture as index
Apart from contiguous indexical signs worn by people directly on their bodies, 
which in traditional cultures provide a record of their individual personal histories, 
the displaced indexes that constitute material culture serve, in addition to their 
direct utilitarian purpose, as mnemonic devices coding their producers’ different 
ethnic histories. All societies at a comparative level of social and technological de-
velopment use similar tools which, however, always differ slightly in the manner of 
their production, in raw materials, variations of shape, ornamentation and so on. 
Some of these differences may be due to radically different conditions of the groups’ 
living environments, so that, for instance, the aboriginal hunters of Australia and 
the native Eskimo will use widely differing hunting tools, despite other similarities 

 From Interaction to Symbol
in the basically hunting-gathering ways of life of the two groups. But even within 
the same type of environment neighbouring groups can develop distinct and 
unique styles in the manufacturing of the same types of tools, which henceforth 
become indexes, incidental or deliberate, of group affiliation. Members of one 
group will recognize as their own the particular manufacturing style, shape, and 
ornament in tools, weapons, clothes, shelters and so on, and will emphasize their 
group solidarity by “patriotically” holding on to these artefacts rather than borrow-
ing foreign ones. At the same time alien or unfamiliar styles, usually attributed to 
neighbouring or rival groups, will be treated with curiosity mixed with distrust, or 
conversely, with admiration. In addition to their immediate practical purpose 
therefore, utilitarian material artefacts inadvertently function as cultural memory 
aids, reminding their users of who belongs to the group and who does not.
In this way material artefacts support cultural memory and consolidate group 
identity, which explains every group’s respect for its own artefacts, frequent dis-
trust of other groups’ material culture, as well as occasional acts of deliberate de-
struction of the material achievements of rival groups as a way of undermining 
their cultural identity. History of human conflict not only abounds in wholesale 
slaughters and massacres of populations, but also in systematic, deliberate destruc-
tions of the enemy’s material heritage, to make sure that “not a stone upon a stone” 
is left of the enemy’s dwellings, temples, works of art and infrastructure. The image 
of the once powerful ancient city state of Carthage springs to mind, razed by the 
Romans in 146 BCE, its population sold into slavery, the site ploughed, and salt 
poured into the furrows so that nothing would ever grow there (Davies 1997: 155). 
In modern times a similar attempt to wipe out a country’s capital from the face of 
the earth, as if it had never existed, was Adolf Hitler’s revengeful decision to de-
stroy west-bank Warsaw following the fall of the city’s uprising against the Ger-
man occupation in September 1944. The demolition of the city proceeded me-
thodically for more than three months, while its population was sent as 
slave-labourers to Germany (Davies 2003: 437). Unlike Carthage, however, War-
saw was rebuilt from scratch after the war, much of it in its original shape, in a 
heroic attempt to restore Polish national identity and to maintain cultural continu-
ity. The respect and nostalgia for historical monuments is not mere sentimentality 
or political propaganda therefore; it serves an important adaptive purpose for the 
group by consolidating its identity as distinct from that of other groups. The de-
struction of material artefacts serving as indexes of culture and as collective mem-
ory aids can effectively cripple any attempts by survivors to restore the ruined 
culture. Civilizations die both because people as individual carriers of cultural 
memory die or become dispersed, and because of the destruction of the material 
artefacts as indexes and as memory aids sustaining the culture’s identity.

	
Chapter 4.  From emotive vocalizations to bodily adornments	 
This is why all societies value their material heritage: architecture, works of 
art, tools, written documents – in fact any material remains that establish a tempo-
rally displaced contiguous and indexical link with the past, that is, with the socie-
ty’s history. It is the contiguous character of objects such as architectural ruins, 
original works of art and historical documents that defines their emotive and nos-
talgic value, as compared for example with replicas, copies, or reconstructions of 
the same artefacts. In semiotic terms, replicas are contemporary icons of tempo-
rally displaced contiguous or indexical signs, and their psychological effect is less 
powerful than that of contiguous signs because, unlike indexes, iconic signs are 
not physically caused by originals. Historic ruins (metonymic contiguous signs) 
are for this reason rightly perceived as more authentic and “truthful” in relation to 
their originals, even if they no longer resemble the originals they were once part 
of. On the other hand copies, replicas or reconstructions (icons) may look like 
their originals, but they are rightly perceived as less authentic and less “truthful” 
than the ruins, because they have no physical connection with their originals. The 
historic Old Town in Warsaw, almost completely destroyed by the Germans dur-
ing the last war, was rebuilt after the war as an icon of what it once was, losing its 
contiguous and indexical authenticity in the process (except for a few surviving 
parts of the old walls incorporated in the new buildings). On the other hand, the 
ruins of the Roman Forum are left as ruins, and no decision has been taken to re-
construct Rome’s ancient quarter to make it look the way it did two thousand years 
ago. The present site in no way resembles the ancient city of Rome, but at least the 
ruins are real. By the same token Leonardo Da Vinci’s badly preserved famous wall 
painting of the Last Supper from the church of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Milan 
is left as it is, that is, badly preserved, with conservation limited to prevent further 
deterioration of the painting. Leonardo’s painting today may be a far cry from its 
original appearance, but the spatially contiguous character of what remains is 
probably rightly considered more valuable than any possible iconic reconstruction 
of its original shape, however faithful. Semiotically speaking, the remains of the 
original paint on Leonardo’s picture form a spatially contiguous metonymic sign 
of the original work, as well as an index of Leonardo himself. On the other hand a 
repainted picture, despite its possible greater visual resemblance to the original, 
would constitute an iconic sign, in other words a copy, without any direct, causal 
link either with the original painting or with Leonardo himself.


chapter 5
Photography, or the magic 
of iconic indexicality
As I discussed earlier, contiguous communication is the necessary condition for 
all other, cognitively more complex forms of indirect communication, involving 
indexes, icons, and symbols with their spatio-temporally displaced originals. After 
all an index, an icon or a symbol, regardless of their actual meanings, must first be 
directly perceived in the contiguous context before they are interpreted and pos-
sibly responded to. Moreover, any man-made sign, whether iconic or symbolic, is 
first of all an index, an automatic material record and reflection of human con-
sciousness and purposeful behaviour: a tool, a talisman, a work of art, a building, 
a spoken utterance or written text, initially contiguous with the person who origi-
nated it and later displaced, either spatially or temporally or both, but still retain-
ing that “magical” link with its creator by virtue of being once contiguous with 
him. Indexicality is indeed closely connected with contiguity, evidently so at its 
origin, which is why displaced indexical signs are often psychologically endowed 
with all the emotive responses normally due to direct, contiguous signs.
When indexicality is mistaken for contiguity
From an evolutionary point of view responses provoked by contiguous signs are 
largely governed by innate cognitive modules shaped by natural selection, for 
which reason they tend to be emotionally charged, often beyond conscious control, 
and what we sometimes describe as “irrational.” But while instinctive, emotive re-
actions to contiguous events, because of the latter’s direct effect upon our survival 
and fitness, are understandable and “normal,” similar reactions extended towards 
displaced indexical signs, simply because they were once physically associated with 
significant objects, persons, or events, can raise a few eye-brows among the more 
cool-headed, so-called rational people. Unreasonable and illogical as it may appear, 
mistaking displaced indexes for contiguous signs is a universal tendency of the hu-
man mind, which lies at the root of magical thinking, at least of one type of it, 
identified by the anthropologist James George Frazer as contagious magic (Frazer 
2002: 11; Mauss 1972: 64). This widespread way of thinking and acting follows, 

 From Interaction to Symbol
according to Frazer, the psychological law of contact or contagion, based on the 
assumption that things that once have been in contact with each other remain al-
ways in contact, even when physically separated. Thus a sympathetic, “magical” 
link is believed to exist between a person and any severed part of that person (a 
simultaneous metonymic sign) such as hair, nails, teeth, the navel-string or the 
placenta. Whoever gets into possession of those once fully contiguous objects will 
be able – so the thinking goes – to exert an influence, from a distance, upon the 
original owner of these objects. Among numerous examples Frazer mentions mid-
wives in nineteenth-century Germany, who would deliver a dried navel-string to 
the father of a new-born child, with an injunction to preserve it carefully, for as 
long as it was kept the child would live, prosper, and be free from sickness (Frazer 
2002: 40). The use of nails or hair in black, harmful magic is part of popular folk-
lore, even in modern industrial societies, and does not require further exemplifica-
tion. Irrational reactions to spatially and temporally displaced metonymic signs 
underlie the cult of relics as well as the fascination with fetishes and memorabilia, 
in religious and secular contexts alike. Whether it be a saint’s bone, a child’s lock of 
hair, John Lennon’s glasses, or a rosary blessed by the Pope, the very fact that cer-
tain objects were once in direct contact with significant public personages or peo-
ple dear to us endows these objects with compellingly emotional, indeed “magical” 
quality, to which we often succumb against our more rational judgment.
Interestingly, within the magical mindset charms, both malevolent and be-
nevolent, can be worked on a person not only through displaced metonymic signs 
but also through displaced indexes, such as impressions left by the body in the 
ground for example. In his monumental study of magic and religion Frazer quotes 
it as a world-wide superstition that by injuring footprints one could also injure the 
feet that made them. For example, the natives of south-eastern Australia believed 
that they could harm a man by placing sharp pieces of quartz, glass, bone, or char-
coal in his footprints. As an instance of benevolent magic based on the same prin-
ciple Frazer mentions a custom practised among southern Slavs, whereby a girl 
would dig up the earth from the footprints of the man she loved, and put it in a 
flower-pot. She would then plant in the pot a marigold, a flower believed never to 
fade, and as its golden blossom grew and bloomed, so should her sweetheart’s love 
grow and blossom, never to fade. According to a similar line of thinking, the abo-
rigines of Victoria would put hot ambers in the tracks of the animals they were 
pursuing. Hottentot hunters would also throw into the air a handful of sand taken 
from the footprints of the game, believing that this would bring the animal down. 
Ewe hunters of West Africa would stab the footprints of game with a sharp-point-
ed stick in order to maim the quarry (Frazer 2002: 44).
The rationalistic and condescending Frazer could write a hundred years ago 
that contagious magic was typical for “the crude intelligence not only of the savage, 

	
Chapter 5.  Photography, or the magic of iconic indexicality	 
but of ignorant and dull-witted people everywhere” (Frazer 2002: 12). No matter 
how empirically mistaken magical thinking can be, the universality and persistence 
of contagious magic in traditional cultures, as well as similar reactions in otherwise 
educated people in secularized Western societies, strongly suggest the working of 
innate cognitive modules, originally developed to cope with contiguous situations 
always affecting one directly in a way impossible to ignore without potentially 
putting oneself in danger or missing some existentially important opportunity. 
What happens in contagious magic is that a person acts towards a temporally dis-
placed metonymic sign or index as if it was a fully contiguous sign. In other words, 
one acts as if time did not exist, or rather as if one wished it did not exist. This way 
of thinking would appear to be an echo of the archaic, early human mindset, geared 
primarily towards registering and reacting only to physically co-present events, as 
the ones most likely to affect one’s survival. In this archaic frame of mind one still 
subjectively exists in the “eternal present,” unable to differentiate perceptually be-
tween a current event and an event that is past. If the effects of time are ignored, 
then elements that once formed an inseparable whole, such as a person and his or 
her hair, nails, or personal objects, can still constitute a “whole” for a subjective 
observer, even if the elements have become separated with time. Thus understood 
magical thinking, based on our inability or reluctance to accept the working of 
time, should for evolutionary reasons constitute our default cognitive state, which 
has to be overridden by a conscious effort to learn the objective, that is, actual 
cause-effect temporal links between objects and events in the world, and to disbe-
lieve the often psychologically compelling but objectively false connections.
In this sense even for the most self-aware, rational, and scientifically educated 
people there is no escape from at least some residues of contagious magic, as is 
testified by our often obsessive emotional attachment to, or at least interest in, 
mementos, keepsakes, souvenirs, family photographs, gifts from people once dear 
to us, various “secular” talismans, fetishes and so on – objects imbued with nostal-
gia and sentimentality springing from our unconscious refusal to accept the de-
structive progress of time, in a naïve wish to stop its ravages and to live again, 
against our better judgment, in the eternal present.
Indexical and iconic “magic”
Photography, a very recent technological invention, offers a good example of a 
quasi-magical way of thinking that characterizes our supposedly modern and ra-
tional minds. The emotive effect produced even by a poor-quality photograph of a 
person is in some respects incomparably greater than that produced by a well-
painted portrait, and that has everything to do with the difference between the 

 From Interaction to Symbol
indexicality of photography and the iconicity of painting. As a representational 
visual medium photography should be discussed more appropriately in the con-
text of the history of iconic signs, especially of realistic painting which photogra-
phy effectively ended in the late nineteenth century. However, it is important in 
the present context to emphasize the primarily indexical character of photography, 
and by extension of film and television, which accounts for the truly “magical,” 
psychologically archaic quality of these otherwise modern and highly technologi-
cal forms of social communication.
As discussed in Chapter 4, the appearance of expanded working memory in 
humans brought on not only a general perception of the cause-effect relations be-
tween events occurring in the world, but also a more specific realization of the 
negative consequences of time such as the ageing and dying of living organisms, by 
extension including oneself and one’s relatives, that is, people sharing one’s genes. 
Since ageing and dying, unavoidable as they are, in an obvious way reduce one’s 
fitness and are thus counter-adaptive, the realization of these depressing phenom-
ena must always have been associated with negative emotions such as sadness, 
grief, helplessness and so on. These emotions could be alleviated up to a point by 
self-deceptive attempts to “arrest” the destructive consequences of time, for in-
stance by “immortalizing” the visible world (as well as the invisible, supernatural 
one, according to one’s beliefs) in permanent images, carved or painted, with an 
underlying desire to establish some illusory control over the otherwise uncontrol-
lable changes brought on by time. The sentiment expressed in the Latin aphorism 
ars longa, vita brevis, originally attributed to the ancient Greek physician 
Hippocrates, may in fact have been experienced dozens of thousands of years ear-
lier by prehistoric sculptors and painters, who wanted to fix in permanent images 
the fleeting world around them. Symbolic language too probably played some role 
in imposing this self-deceptive control over time, for example by means of stories 
recounting the mythical, cyclical history of the universe and of the group, based on 
the birth-death-rebirth pattern, narrated at regular intervals as determined by the 
group’s ritual calendar. However, in the absence of any linguistic records from the 
early history of humanity, we have to rely on preserved permanent iconic images, 
such as those found in the Upper Palaeolithic portable sculpture and cave paint-
ings from over 30,000 years ago (see Chapter 7).
It is possible therefore to speculate that the earliest iconic images served a 
double magical (in the sense of self-deceptive) purpose: to arrest the destructive 
working of time by “freezing” an object in a specific moment on an iconic image, 
and to control the object represented by the image. However, due to their manner 
of production icons reflect not so much the outside world as human perceptions 
and beliefs about that world. As can be recalled, an icon is an image related to 
original through correspondence of information, in other words, through 

	
Chapter 5.  Photography, or the magic of iconic indexicality	 
perceptual resemblance, rather than through any direct physical link between the 
two as is the case with indexes. This is because unlike index an icon is produced by 
the receiver (here: humans), and not by the sender (here: external object). In this 
sense a silhouette of a bison painted on the wall of Lascaux cave only resembles the 
real bison in its shape, but otherwise possesses no physical connection with the 
animal in question. Any beliefs in the efficacy of sympathetic magic based on ex-
ternal similarity between original and image must therefore have been limited in 
comparison with the alleged magical power of an image that was somehow di-
rectly connected with original, as is the case with contiguous metonymic and in-
dexical signs. Icons can thus be expected to possess less “magic” than metonymic 
signs or indexes, and should accordingly exert less powerful emotive influence.
In view of the above, the main reason for the extraordinary psychological 
power of photography lies in the fact that it combines – uniquely in the history of 
human visual representations of the world – the effects of both iconicity and in-
dexicality. A photograph is, in this sense, an iconic index, as are its derivatives such 
as film and television. It is first of all indexicality that makes these forms of visual 
representation so much more efficacious in reflecting the outside world, and so 
much more powerful in their emotive effect on viewers than purely iconic repre-
sentations such as painting, drawing, or sculpting. The iconic indexicality of pho-
tography means that its images not only resemble the photographed objects (with 
resemblance much closer and more realistic than that produced by even the best 
paintings), but that the photographic images are also physically related to the ob-
jects they represent in a way never attained by painting. This is why the art critic 
Jonathan Friday refers to photography as a distinctive mode of signification, 
“straddling the categories of icon and index,” in that it represents the world so as 
to give us something akin to perceptual experience of what it depicts (Friday 
2002: 49). Another term used by critics to refer to the indexicality of photography 
is “transparency”: this is because, as the philosophers of art Noël Carroll and 
Kendall L. Walton explain, we see through photographs to the objects, persons and 
events that give rise to them. Paintings on the other hand are not dependent on the 
visible properties of the objects which they represent, but are dependent instead 
on the painters’ beliefs about these objects (Carroll, Noël 1995:  70; Walton 
1997: 68). The idea that photographs have a physical connection with what they 
represent, and that they differ fundamentally in this respect from drawings, 
sketches, and paintings, which are humanely mediated, and that because of this 
photographs somehow put us in closer contact with the world than do “hand-
made” pictures, has been a constantly recurring theme in theoretical and aesthetic 
discussions of photography (Walton 1997: 67; Bazin 1980; Sontag 1978; Marien 
2006; Trachtenberg 1980). Even in painting from life, the painted scene reflects 
only the painter’s beliefs of what is there, whereas a scene in front of the camera is 

 From Interaction to Symbol
not affected by the photographer’s beliefs. Kendall L. Walton puts it simply and 
succinctly: “The painter paints what he thinks he sees. The photographer captures 
with his camera whatever is in front of it, regardless of what he thinks is there” 
(Walton 1997: 68). In other words, photographs depict realities that already exist 
(although of course only the photographer’s choice can disclose them), whereas 
paintings create physically non-existent realities.
It is thus the combined emotive power of indexicality and iconicity that ac-
counts for a truly “magical,” compelling and deeply touching effect of photographs, 
both at the moment of taking the picture and later when contemplating it. It is 
ironic, as the writer Susan Sontag has observed, that at the point of history when 
secularism became almost entirely triumphant in the Western world, photography 
should revive, in wholly secular terms, something like the primitive status of im-
ages, an irrepressible feeling that the photographic process has something magical 
about it. No one takes an easel painting, merely an iconic image, to be in any sense 
co-substantial, that is, indexical, with its subject, because it only represents or re-
fers. On the other hand a photograph is not only like its subject, but by virtue of 
being an index of its subject it is also indirectly a part of it. In an instinctive psy-
chological sense therefore a photograph is a potent, if illusory, means of acquiring 
the subject and of gaining control over it (Sontag 1978: 155). The indexical nature 
of a photograph creates a subjective impression of a surrogate possession of a cher-
ished person or thing, a possession based on an implicit assumption of identity, on 
an inseparable sympathy between a photograph and what it represents. Susan 
Sontag describes vividly this uncanny, magical effect:
The lover’s photograph hidden in a married woman’s wallet, the poster photo-
graph of a rock star tacked up over an adolescent’s bed, the campaign-button im-
age of a politician’s face pinned on a voter’s coat, the snapshots of a cabdriver’s 
children clipped to the visor – all such talismanic uses of photographs express a 
feeling both sentimental and implicitly magical: they are attempts to contact or lay 
claim to another reality (Sontag 1978: 16).
Considering both the compelling psychological effects of photographs and our 
innate sensitivity both to iconic images and to indexes of important objects, such 
as fellow humans for example, it is curious that it should take humanity so long to 
produce displaced iconic indexes, which is what photographs are in semiotic 
terms. The reasons for this delay were mainly practical – photography is a highly 
technical medium – and the right conditions for it were only created as a conse-
quence of a number of discoveries and inventions in physics and chemistry made 
during the scientific and industrial revolutions in Europe and America in the last 
few centuries.

	
Chapter 5.  Photography, or the magic of iconic indexicality	 
Brief history of iconic indexicality
If photography is to be defined in terms of displaced iconic indexicality, then the 
first “photographs” on record are imprints of human hands with outstretched fin-
gers, found among the paintings on the wall of the Chauvet cave from over 30,000 
years ago. In Chauvet a hand was placed flat on the cave’s wall, and paint was then 
applied around it and between the fingers (Chauvet and Deschamps 1996: 79). 
Such negatives of human hands are also found in other Upper Palaeolithic caves in 
southern France and northern Spain, as are the positives: impressions of hands 
coated with pigment and pressed against the wall. In one Spanish cave, the Gargas, 
there are nearly a hundred and fifty red and black hands, some of them small, 
probably belonging to women or children (Leroi-Gourhan 1968: 148). These “sig-
natures” are the first recorded permanent and intentional iconic indexes: iconic in 
the sense that the impressions of the hands bear a close resemblance to the hands 
that made the impression, and indexical in the sense that the impressions were 
actually physically caused by the hands of living people, who evidently wanted to 
preserve a bit of themselves for posterity, not unlike those modern tourists who 
cannot resist inscribing or carving their names, with dates, on the walls of famous 
buildings they visit.
The dream to be able to fix an iconic index of a person, in other words to pre-
serve the appearance of that person after the person’s death, in defiance of time, is 
also reflected in the widespread myth of the Otherworld, where the souls of the 
dead people continue their existence. In the absence of family photo-albums or 
home videos containing temporally displaced iconic indexes of dear persons, the 
ancient Greeks invented Hades populated by living “shadows” of dead people. In 
semiotic terms a shadow is a contiguous index, physically caused by an object 
obstructing the light rays, thereby possessing a direct connection with that object. 
The shadow of a person meets that person’s feet on the ground, and when the 
ground is even and the rays of the sun fall at an angle of about forty-five degrees, 
the shadow will produce an undistorted image of its master. The duplication of an 
object by another object that is tied to it and imitates its motions and at the same 
time is curiously transparent and immaterial has always caused fascination. 
Throughout the world the shadow is considered an outgrowth of an object that 
casts it. The second, filmy self of a person for example is believed to be identical 
with or related to the person’s soul or vital power. To step on a person’s shadow is 
a serious offence in some cultures, and a man can be “murdered” by having his 
shadow pierced with a knife. At a funeral, care must be taken to avoid having a 
living person’s shadow caught by the lid of the coffin and thus buried with the 
corpse (Arnheim 1974: 317). Fully contiguous with a person during his lifetime, 
the immaterial “soul” can survive its carrier to dwell for ever in the land of shadows, 

 From Interaction to Symbol
which is how Homer describes Hades, visited by Odysseus anxious to embrace the 
shadowy and elusive figure of his dead mother (Homer 1980: 115).
In early modern times a direct precursor of displaced iconic indexes of pho-
tography were the fully contiguous iconic indexes produced by the camera ob-
scura, an optical device and a drawing aid used by realistic painters of the seven-
teenth- and eighteenth-centuries. The camera obscura, literally, a “dark chamber,” 
was a portable box equipped with a convex lens and an internal mirror which 
righted the upside-down image created by the lens, so that it could be traced on a 
piece of paper placed on translucent glass plate installed in the top of the device. 
Drawings thus made could help artists to trace the outlines of shapes to be trans-
ferred onto canvas to achieve highly realistic and accurate, truly “photographic” 
paintings of landscapes and cityscapes, such as those by Canaletto (1697–1768) 
(Links 2005: 118). Before the invention of film and television the effects produced 
by the camera obscura must have been truly astounding: on the two-dimensional 
screen the viewer could see a three-dimensional scene, in its natural colours, fully 
animated, reduced in size and neatly framed. The camera obscura could capture a 
moving image (a contiguous iconic index of a scene), but it could not fix it to make 
it temporally displaced – this part was attempted by a painter who created a per-
manent icon out of a fleeting iconic index, losing the indexical character of the 
image in the process. This is why Canaletto’s paintings of Venice, Rome, and Lon-
don, realistic as they are, are not as accurate, faithful, and “real” as would have 
been achieved even by a primitive, black-and-white photograph, to say nothing of 
today’s colour, high-definition digital images. Also, effective as the camera obscura 
was in tracing the outlines of buildings and perspectives of the streets, it was of no 
use in trying to transfer onto canvas the image of a human face, which consists of 
tones and shades rather than of lines. This is why the device could help artists to 
produce city paintings of admirable accuracy, but was of no help in painting por-
traits – a much more popular genre at the time.
An early attempt to capture a human figure, especially the head if not actually 
the face, and to fix it in a permanent iconic index were the silhouette cut-outs, 
popularized in the late eighteenth century by the Swiss scientist J.K. Lavater. The 
shadow of a person’s profile cast by sunlight or a candle was traced onto paper, and 
then the image was filled in by hand, or used by the artist as a template to cut a 
silhouette from black paper. Silhouettes, or shadow portraits, were part entertain-
ment and part artistic venture, and their popularity drew on the widespread con-
ception that human character could be read through the study of facial features 
(Marien 2006: 1, 5). Silhouettes were of course not as detailed and colourful as 
painted portraits, but were considered to be more faithful and truthful of a per-
son’s appearance (and personality) than the latter, precisely because of their in-
dexical rather than merely iconic origins.

	
Chapter 5.  Photography, or the magic of iconic indexicality	 
The missing indexicality in painted images may be responsible for the popular 
subject of the “invention of painting” in early modern art, in which the origin of 
the art of portraiture was attributed to the observation and tracing of a person’s 
shadow. As the art historian Ernst H. Gombrich reminds us, the subject goes back 
to Roman poetic love tale recorded by Pliny the Elder (23–79 CE), in which 
Boutades, a potter of Skyon, discovered with the help of his daughter how to mod-
el portraits in clay. She was in love with a youth, and when he was leaving the 
country she traced the outline of the shadow which his face cast on the wall by 
lamplight. The father filled in the outline with clay and made a model (Pliny 
1991: 187; Gombrich 1995: 31). The architect Leon Battista Alberti in his treatise 
De Pictura (1435) also quotes Quintilian as saying that “the earliest painters used 
to draw around shadows made by the sun, and the art [of portraiture] eventually 
grew by a process of additions” (Alberti 1972: 61). The popularity of this story in 
the Renaissance is also testified by Giorgio Vasari, who in his Lives (1568) recounts 
another version of the legend of the origin of painting. Accordingly, painting was 
first brought to Egypt by Gyges of Lydia, who once saw his own shadow cast by the 
light of a fire and instantly drew his own outline on the wall with a piece of char-
coal (Vasari 1987: 27). The popular cut-out portrait silhouettes of the eighteenth 
century were based on the same quasi-photographic principle of combining the 
indexicality of a person’s shadow with the iconicity of traditional painted portraits, 
to achieve the accuracy and fidelity of representation unattained by conventional 
painting or sculpture. Pliny also gives an account of ceremonies for the dead in 
which mimes who physically resembled the departed would make them visible 
and “alive” again by putting on their death masks (Beyer 2003: 17). The ritual com-
bined contiguity (live performance), iconicity (resemblance of the mimes to the 
dead), and indexicality (death masks), thus coming as close as was physically pos-
sible to “reviving” the dead, even closer than today’s practice of displaying the 
immobile dead body wearing life-simulating makeup in some funeral homes be-
fore the grieving relatives, or of watching the now dead member of the family on 
home video (an iconically indexical, but not a contiguous medium).
The uncanny truthfulness of representation achieved by the indexical method 
of silhouette cut-outs also gave rise to the vogue of the pseudo-science of physiog-
nomics, which purported to read the character of a person from the record of a 
profile. Unlike the fleeting, immaterial, and fully contiguous shadow, a cut-out 
silhouette formed a fixed, fully displaced, and durable indexical outline of a per-
son, very much like portrait photography that became all the rage in the nine-
teenth century. And like photographs, cut-out silhouettes attracted the same mag-
ical beliefs often associated in folklore with shadows. As said earlier, unlike the 
physical objects they reflect shadows lack solidity and substantiality, for which 
reason they were believed to belong to the immaterial, spiritual world. We cannot 

 From Interaction to Symbol
touch or grasp a shadow, and so in ordinary parlance we often resort to the meta-
phor of shadows to describe anything unreal: shadow boxing is not real boxing, 
and the Shadow Chancellor is not the real chancellor. At the same time, by virtue 
of its indexicality the appearance of an immaterial shadow testifies to the solidity 
of an object, for what casts a shadow must be real. The physical connection be-
tween an object and its shadow also explains beliefs in shared properties between 
the two, as in the legend of the healing power of the shadow cast by Saint Peter, 
represented for example in a fresco by Masaccio (1425) in the Brancacci Chapel in 
Florence (Gombrich 1995: 21).
Because shadows or mirror reflections cannot exist without solid, material ob-
jects that produce them, in popular beliefs insubstantial ghosts do not cast shad-
ows, or else they exist only as shadows or mirror reflections. In Eastern-European 
folklore mirrors used to be covered in a house where someone has just died, lest 
the soul of the dead person appear in it. These superstitions are comically exploit-
ed in Roman Polanski’s spoof horror film The Fearless Vampire Killers (1967), in 
which two mortals: the Professor, played by Jack McGowran, and his assistant, 
played by Polanski himself, camouflage themselves in a crowd of vampires danc-
ing at a ball. The disguise works until both the two mortals and the vampires stop 
their dance to look into a huge mirror hanging in the hall, which shows only the 
reflections of the mortals – an unmistakable giveaway of their flesh-and-blood 
solidity that prompts a comic chase after their very blood.
Photography versus painting
Photography in the true sense of the word started around 1802, when a member of 
the Wedgwood family (the pottery makers) wrote a pamphlet called Description of 
a Procedure for Copying Paintings onto Glass and for Making Silhouettes by the Ef-
fect of Light on Silver Nitrate. However, the credit for producing the first perma-
nently fixed iconic indexes achieved by the photographic process of silver nitrate 
goes to the Frenchman Joseph Nicéphore Niépce, and his first camera picture tak-
en in 1826. Its subject was a cityscape, a courtyard in Chalon-sur-Saône, rather 
than a human figure, mainly because the image required eight hours of exposure 
to be recorded on the photosensitive plate. It was Niépce’s younger partner, Louise 
Daguerre, who in 1829 developed the first precise photographic images, which he 
called, after himself, daguerreotypes. In the decades that followed photography 
became all the rage, chiefly among rich enthusiasts, who carried their cumber-
some and expensive cameras and tripods to take pictures of city squares, land-
scapes, historic monuments, and other large and immovable objects. The exposure 
time was gradually reduced to 15 minutes in full sunlight in the late 1830s, and 

	
Chapter 5.  Photography, or the magic of iconic indexicality	 
then to 20–40 seconds by the early 1840s (Briggs and Burke 2005: 133; Freund 
1980: 22; Benjamin 1980: 199–216).
The fascination with the new, initially expensive but easy and quick way of 
making accurate and realistic pictures of the world went hand in hand with instant 
recognition of the fundamental difference between photographic images and tradi-
tional paintings. Unlike the latter, photography was first perceived not as an art but 
as a mechanical process of impersonally copying nature, while the photographer 
was thought to be merely a non-interfering observer – a scribe, not a poet. Indeed, 
while it obviously took human inventiveness and ingenuity to produce a camera in 
the first place, the very creation of the image was taken care of by the optical and 
photochemical processes largely beyond the photographer’s direct control: light 
reflected from objects was focused through the lens and exposed to chemically 
coated glass or metal plate, later replaced by flexible celluloid, before undergoing a 
complex chemical process resulting in a photograph – a static record (index) of 
reflected light at an instant in time. The earliest written accounts of photography 
often did not even describe the new medium in terms borrowed from machines, 
instruments, and processes of the Industrial Revolution, but in terms of nature and 
natural history. For example, the words “invention” and “discovery” were used in-
terchangeably in reference to photography, while other technological achievements 
such as the railroad or the telegraph were unequivocally called inventions, despite 
the fact that they too were based on objective physical laws and processes. At the 
beginning photography was thus considered as a natural phenomenon, much like 
magnetism or electricity, which were also understood to be discovered rather than 
invented, and then applied to human use (Marien 2006: 23).
Of course the photographic process was not totally accidental, because it in-
volved the photographer as the conscious agent, who chose the object to be pho-
tographed, placed the camera in front of it, and allowed the physical processes of 
nature to create a desired image. But it is these physical processes, applying largely 
beyond the photographer’s control, that determine the inherently indexical char-
acter of photography, so different from the iconicity of painting or drawing, which 
are created entirely by the artist. It is because of this fundamental difference be-
tween intentional and personal (iconic), and physical and impersonal (indexical) 
depiction that we say that a painting or drawing is made, whereas a photograph is 
taken (Friday 2002: 39). This is also why in popular (and instinctively correct) 
perception photographic images have a greater power to usurp reality than do 
paintings. In 1925 the painter-photographer László Moholy-Nagy wrote that “in 
the exact mechanical procedures of photography and the film we possess an ex-
pressional means for representation which works incomparably better than did the 
manual procedures of the representational painting we have known hitherto,” and 
that “painterly methods of representation suggestive merely of past times and past 

 From Interaction to Symbol
ideologies shall disappear and their place be taken by mechanical means of repre-
sentation and their as yet unpredictable possibilities of extension” (Moholy-Nagy 
1969: 9, 15). While painting is never more than the stating of an interpretation, a 
photograph, in Susan Sontag’s words, is “a trace, something directly stencilled off 
the real, like a footprint or a death mask,” which turns a photograph into “a mate-
rial vestige of its subject in a way that no painting can be” (Sontag 1978: 154).
Unlike paintings therefore, photographs are causally dependent on the objects 
they represent, whereas paintings are causally dependent only on the beliefs and 
skills of the painter. This also means that paintings, iconic as they are in relation to 
the objects depicted on them, are also indexical in relation to their authors, which 
explains why in popular perception paintings are valued not so much for their sub-
ject matter, as because of who painted them. Art critics, dealers and the general 
public seem to care less about what a painting by Da Vinci, Cézanne, or Picasso 
represents, than about the fact that it is a painting by Da Vinci, Cézanne, or Picasso. 
By the same token, the indexicality of photography explains why we are more inter-
ested in what photographs depict than in who took them, so that the photogra-
phers’ names, even as important as those of Alfred Stieglitz, Robert Capa, or Henri 
Cartier-Bresson, are not as well known in popular culture as the names of some 
twentieth-century painters. This is also why naïve, commercial, or merely utilitar-
ian photography is no different in kind from photography as practised by the most 
accomplished professionals: there are pictures taken by anonymous amateurs which 
are just as interesting, as formally (if inadvertently) sophisticated as professional 
artistic photography. The value of a photograph will thus depend always on its sub-
ject, even if it is seen subjectively by an (often amateur) photographer. The stylistic, 
subjective characteristics of photography, such as controlled lighting, skill of com-
position, clarity of subject, precision of focus, print quality, elitism of gallery exhi-
bition – features borrowed from painting – are extraneous to the essence of photog-
raphy. Its indexical nature, which guarantees a closer relation with the represented 
subject than can ever be achieved in merely iconic painting, means that amateur-
ish, unposed, crudely lit, asymmetrically composed photographs can be just as in-
teresting and compelling, if not more, than the most accomplished paintings.
The differing perceptions of indexes and icons as forms of social communica-
tion also explain the different values attached to original works of art, their copies 
and forgeries. An original painting is its author’s index as well as a unique article, 
and its high value, material and symbolic, is due both to its direct, physical con-
nection with the painter and to its uniqueness. In the case of old paintings there 
exists an additional historical value due to the painting’s spatially contiguous rela-
tion to the original context of production. Copies of original paintings, on the 
other hand, are simply icons of unique articles, and their comparatively smaller 
value is due both to their lack of contiguous relatedness to original authors and to 

	
Chapter 5.  Photography, or the magic of iconic indexicality	 
their possibly multiple number. Art forgery in turn is obviously a form of substitu-
tive deception: a forged work of art is an exact copy (icon) of a unique original 
article, indexical only in relation to its often obscure author, which is now passed 
off as the genuine, original and unique article, supposedly indexical in relation to 
a famous painter and the original historical context of production.
The inherent ability of photography to transcribe external reality from its in-
ception gave the medium its documentary validity as both accurate and seemingly 
unbiased. Edgar Allan Poe, whose daguerreotype portrait was made in 1849, wrote 
in an article on photography for a popular magazine in 1840 that “the closest scru-
tiny of the photographic drawing discloses only a more absolute truth, a more 
perfect identity of aspect with the thing represented” (Trachtenberg 1980: 38). 
Over a century later Susan Sontag would say that just as a written description, or a 
handmade visual image such as painting or drawing are only interpretations of 
reality (symbolic and iconic, respectively), photographic images, because of their 
indexical character, do not seem to be statements about the world as much as 
pieces of it, miniatures of reality that anyone can make or acquire (Sontag 1978: 4). 
This is why taking photographs and manipulating them gives one a sense, illusory 
as it may be, of ordering and somehow controlling reality. A crudely chronological 
order of snapshot sequences posted in family albums, or the dogged accumula-
tions and meticulous filing of photographs used in weather forecasting, astrono-
my, microbiology, geology, archaeology, art history, medical training and diagno-
sis, military reconnaissance and police investigations turn information about a 
fragment of the outside world into systems of classification and storage. The in-
dexical nature of photography gives the information thus attained the quality of 
objective evidence rather than of merely subjective impression, which is why pho-
tographs, film or video footage (from CCTV cameras for example) are used as 
indisputable and hard evidence in courts, together with fingerprints or DNA sam-
ples (the latter as displaced indexes and displaced metonymic signs respectively). 
The earliest recorded instance of the use of photography in police investigations 
was the roundup of the Communards in Paris in June 1871. During the Franco-
Prussian War of 1870 and the short-lived Paris Commune of 1871, hundreds of 
pictures were taken of the Communards, who willingly allowed themselves to be 
photographed on the barricades. When the Commune fell, the police used these 
photographs to identify the Communards, who were nearly all executed. Since 
then photographic, film, and video evidence has been a useful tool of modern 
states in the surveillance and control of their increasingly mobile populations 
(Freund 1980: 108).
The value of the photographic image both as a truthful record of external real-
ity and as evidence in crime investigations has been both explored and challenged 
in Michelangelo Antonioni’s classic film Blow Up (1966). In the film, a professional 

 From Interaction to Symbol
photographer accidentally captures on his camera what he thinks is a record of a 
murder committed in a park. Details such as a hand with a gun sticking out of a 
bush and what looks like a dead body lying on the ground are beginning to show 
once the photographer enlarges the pictures in his darkroom. However, the larger 
the incriminating images are the less clear they become, as the blown-up grain 
blurs the details, rendering them unintelligible and therefore unreliable as possible 
evidence of the alleged crime. Paradoxically, the closer the photographer wants to 
get to the “truth” of the crime using the supposedly objective photographic proc-
ess, the farther he moves from actually furnishing any convincing evidence. The 
largest blow-up of the crucial element of the crime scene, the dead body, ulti-
mately looks on the photographic print like a piece of abstract art – blurred and 
indistinct beyond recognition, just a chaotic pattern of black and white spots rath-
er than a realistic image of anything that would persuade anyone about the sup-
posed murder. Antonioni seems to remind us both of the limitations of the photo-
graphic medium to represent reality, and of the mechanical, artificial, and 
ultimately elusive character of the photographic process, which reflects reality 
more because we want to believe it than because of its objective, physical nature.
Photography and the human face
For technical reasons (long exposure) the earliest photographs depicted city 
squares, courtyards, streets, historical monuments, landscapes and other immov-
able objects, but as soon as the exposure time was reduced to 20–40 seconds 
around 1842, the most popular photographic object became – predictably – the 
human face and figure. As said earlier, the recognition of personal identity, inter-
pretation of facial expressions and of body language appear to be governed by 
cognitive modules involved in our social life, which alert us instinctively to facial 
features, to identities and personalities of socially important people as well as of 
people related or known to us. Just as we are interested in the physiognomies of 
high-status, public figures—what we today call celebrities—so we are universally 
fascinated by family resemblances and – not least – by our own faces. Family his-
tories and genealogies as a function of expanded memory must have been a hu-
man preoccupation since the beginning of consciousness and the first awareness 
of the transience of individual life. Individual portraits, however, come late in the 
history of visual representation, to culminate in Roman marble busts – three-di-
mensional icons of remarkable realism, which included also the earliest portrait 
“photographs”: indexical wax masks of dead members of Roman families. With 
their no-nonsense approach to reality the Romans insisted upon an exactitude 
that included every wart, pimple, wrinkle, and blemish in their portrait busts, 

	
Chapter 5.  Photography, or the magic of iconic indexicality	 
which were certainly done from life, like much later painted portraits or photo-
graphs (Woodford 1982: 84).
The development of the photographic portrait in the nineteenth century cor-
responded with the rise of the middle classes in Western Europe: by having one’s 
portrait done an individual of the ascending bourgeoisie could visually affirm his 
or her new social status. In this the bourgeoisie followed the model of aristocratic 
portraiture executed on canvas, of portable, miniature portraits on powder boxes 
and pendants, with tiny portraits of friends, lovers, and relatives. However, by 
1850 the miniature painted portrait had all but disappeared under the influence of 
the new medium of photography. For one-tenth the price of a painted portrait, the 
photographer could furnish a likeness which satisfied both the taste and the pock-
et of the widening spectrum of middle-class population (Freund 1980: 9–11).
The long-established obsession with family history thus received a truly mi-
raculous aid in the form of a new medium which – for the first time in history – 
allowed people to know exactly what they looked like when they were younger, 
and what their parents and grandparents looked like as children. We all change 
throughout our lives from day to day, from year to year. The famous series of Rem-
brandt’s self-portraits from youth to old age shows the artist studying this relent-
less process, but it is only with the coming of photography that we have all become 
fully aware of this effect of time. We look at the snapshots of ourselves and of our 
friends and family taken a few years ago, and we recognize with a shock that we all 
have changed much more than we tended to notice in the day-to-day business of 
living. This is because the feeling of constancy completely predominates over the 
changing appearance (Gombrich 1982: 107). Before the invention of the camera 
not even a tiny minority of the rich who commissioned paintings of their children 
could possess that knowledge, as even the best painted portraits, due to their icon-
ic nature, were less informative than is a casual family snapshot. To a much greater 
extent therefore than eighteenth- or early nineteenth-century portrait paining, 
photography began to actively promote nostalgia which turned the new medium 
into a form of elegiac art. In the words of Susan Sontag again: “All photographs are 
memento mori. To take a photograph is to participate in another person’s (or 
thing’s) mortality, vulnerability, mutability. Precisely by slicing out this moment 
and freezing it, all photographs testify to time’s relentless melt” (Sontag 1978: 15).
Given the evolutionary reasons for the universal preoccupation with family 
histories and for the nostalgic awareness of the passing of time, it comes as no 
surprise that once photographic portraits became technically possible they quick-
ly rendered obsolete the art of the portrait as it was hitherto practised by painters, 
miniaturists, and engravers. Gustave Courbet (1819–77), the founder of Realism 
in painting, could argue that his aesthetic ideal as a painter was “the scrupulous 
imitation of nature,” but the tenet of the Realist manifesto (1856), “One cannot 

 From Interaction to Symbol
paint what one does not see” was, with the substitution of one word, a truism in 
photography (Gernsheim and Gernsheim 1969: 245). Indeed, many of the tradi-
tional artists became the first photographers, and their previous experience as 
painters and craftsmen was partly responsible for the high quality of the photo-
graphic industry during its early days. For instance, one of the most eminent pho-
tographers of mid-nineteenth century, Félix Tournachon Nadar, began as an il-
lustrator and caricaturist before he opened his photographic studio in Paris in 
1853. Important figures in the arts, literature, and politics flocked there to be pho-
tographed, including the painter Delacroix, the composer Meyerbeer, the poet 
Baudelaire, or the revolutionary Bakunin. Queen Victoria and Prince Albert 
bought their first daguerreotypes in 1840. When the daguerreotype was intro-
duced in America in 1839, the total output of photographs taken during the next 
few decades consisted in ninety-five percent of portraits. With lower prices and 
greater speed of production, the photograph put the painted portrait out of busi-
ness within two generations, creating real daguerréomanie in Europe and America 
(Sontag 1978: 15; Freund 1980: 35, 41; Briggs and Burke 2005: 133).
Predictably therefore, the earliest popular use of photography was to memori-
alize the appearance, growth, and the achievements of family members, especially 
on such celebratory occasions as births, weddings, holy communions, confirma-
tions, graduations, birthdays, Christmases, parties, and of course holidays. At first 
to have a photograph taken of themselves people had to go to the photographer’s 
studio, with its choice of painted backgrounds and plaster pillars. The popularity 
of family photographs was increased after the 1880s, when the camera became 
more mobile and could enter more freely the private and domestic space. Eventu-
ally, photography permitted an unprecedented range of people to look at relatives 
whom either space or time had taken from them. Everyone, not just the privileged 
and wealthy few as was the case in the era of painted family portraits, could ac-
quire a visual sense of their own past, to see before them their own genealogy, and 
to be able to pass their image to later generations that would know their faces 
(Hirsch 1981: 44). The opportunity to gratify one’s nostalgia about the past and to 
anticipate the future – both functions of human conscious memory and the social 
instinct focused primarily on one’s kin – was thus provided by the invention of and 
popular access to the iconic indexes of photography, which for the first time in 
history granted a gift of visual immortality on its users.
The introduction of small, portable, easy-to-operate cameras, notably by 
Kodak, towards the end of the nineteenth century led eventually to the decline of 
professional studio portrait photography (Freund 1980: 86). Hundreds of thou-
sands of people were now learning to take their own pictures recording the main 
events of their lives, which in semiotic terms meant converting direct, contiguous 
signs into indirect, displaced iconic indexical signs. Private cameras became 

	
Chapter 5.  Photography, or the magic of iconic indexicality	 
inseparable from tourism, both as a way of collecting visual trophies as evidence 
of trips taken and places visited, and as a way of relieving the stress of travelling 
and of adapting, if only for a brief time, to new surroundings. The very activity of 
taking pictures is soothing and reassuring, in assuaging general feelings of disori-
entation and anxiety that are likely to be exacerbated by travel. This is probably 
why given the choice between buying a superior photographic postcard of a visited 
place and taking an inferior picture with one’s own camera, most people prefer to 
do the latter. The popularity of postcards, whose value as iconic indexes was com-
parable to that of privately taken photographs, was the greatest in the early dec-
ades of the twentieth century, when relatively few people could afford their own 
cameras (Freund 1980: 99). Today, in the age of cheap storage of digital pictures on 
personal computers, the traditional postcard and even printed photographs seem 
to be gradually disappearing both as records of one’s travels and as a way of keep-
ing friends and family informed about one’s holidays. (The latter function is now 
being taken care of by electronic mail, mobile telephoning and text messaging.) 
While it can be argued that taking pictures all the time while on holiday gets in the 
way of contiguous, direct sensory experience, photographing the visited places 
seems to establish a sense of instant appropriation and an illusion of control over 
the new and otherwise unfamiliar environment. In the long term, photographs 
will also exist as indexical records and memory aids of events that have ended, of 
people who have gone away or died, conferring a kind of immortality and impor-
tance that the photographed objects would never otherwise have attained.
The “magical” sense of appropriation and illusion of control over photo-
graphed objects are also responsible for the often uncomfortable feeling people 
have when being photographed. The anxiety is due to the combined effects of pho-
tographs as iconic indexes and of our instinctive, if illusory and incorrect, recogni-
tion, underlying universal magical thinking, that both indexes and icons have a 
direct though hidden sympathetic link with the objects they depict, in this case 
with us. I said earlier that treating displaced indexes as contiguous signs, in other 
words mistaking records of objects for objects themselves, lies at the heart of con-
tagious magic as identified by James George Frazer. On the other hand mistaking 
icons of objects for the very objects underlies the other common type of magic, 
called by Frazer the homeopathic magic, which is based on the principle of simi-
larity, whereby things that resemble one another are believed to possess an invisi-
ble, but direct, sympathetic link, so that by manipulating the icon one can also 
manipulate the object depicted by the icon (Frazer 2002: 12).
Homeopathic magic normally assumes that the object exists independently 
from the human observer, who employs imitative magic in the illusory wish to 
exercise control over that object. Pushed far enough, the belief in the direct 
connection between image and object can lead to a conviction that by creating an 

 From Interaction to Symbol
image one can somehow, again magically, bring the represented object into life. In 
a myth handed down to us in Ovid’s Metamorphoses, the sculptor Pygmalion 
wants to fashion a woman after his own heart and falls in love with the statue he 
makes. He prays to Venus for a bride modelled after the image, and the goddess 
turns the cold ivory into a living body (Ovid 2002: 302). For Ernst H. Gombrich 
the myth of Pygmalion expresses the artist’s ultimate dream in the power of art to 
create rather than just to portray (Gombrich 2003: 80, 84). On the other hand, in 
semiotic terms the story appears to reflect the desire to turn an iconic sign, which 
only resembles its original, into a contiguous sign, which is the original itself, again 
to exercise illusory control over the original object created according to one’s own 
wishes. However, the artist’s ultimate dream illustrated by the myth of Pygmalion, 
just like homeopathic magic in general, must remain an illusion: objectively speak-
ing there is no physical, causal connection between icon and original, because icon 
is an index of the system that created it, and not of the original object represented 
by it. Artistic representation will therefore always remain distinct from the reality 
it resembles, as artists more sober than Pygmalion usually acknowledge. A lady 
once visited the studio of the painter Matisse and commented on his work in 
progress: “But surely, the arm of this woman is much too long.” The artist famous-
ly replied: “Madame, you are mistaken. This is not a woman, this is a picture” 
(Rogers and Rogers 1986: 105).
On the other hand, in the world of the child or the naïve adult there is no clear 
distinction between reality and appearance, between a contiguous object and its 
iconic representation. The child can use a table upside down for a spaceship, and a 
basin for a crash helmet. For a child, still immersed mentally in homeopathic mag-
ic, the basin does not “represent” a crash helmet; it is a kind of improvised helmet. 
Magic may be largely a thing of the past among most educated, adult people in the 
West, but quasi-magical feelings still affect our iconic thinking, even if we know 
that two similar objects are in fact two different, unconnected objects. For in-
stance, most people still feel fear or disgust at touching an object resembling an 
offensive substance, such as a chocolate dog turd which is, objectively speaking, 
perfectly edible and tasty, but which is for many people tainted and disgusting by 
mere resemblance to real dog turd. Residual homeopathic magic is also at work 
when we agree to suspend our disbelief and allow ourselves to be engrossed by a 
movie, aroused by pornography, or terrified by a roller coaster – when the similar-
ity of iconic image or action triggers the same emotions as the real thing.
The psychologically compelling power of iconic images, as in painting and 
sculpture, can be considerably enhanced if the iconic image has also indexical 
qualities with regard to the represented object, as is the case with photography. In 
this sense a photograph, or a related device such as the camera obscura, can exert 
an even more powerful “magical” effect than painting, precisely because of its 

	
Chapter 5.  Photography, or the magic of iconic indexicality	 
combination of indexicality and iconicity and the related combined effects of con-
tagious and homeopathic magic. The English explorer Edward Dodwell relates in 
his Classical and Topographical Tour through Greece (1809) how he managed to get 
rid of the Turkish governor (Disdar) who constantly put difficulties in Dodwell’s 
way, which could only be overcome by “gifts,” until one day he got rid of the mer-
cenary Turk in a most extraordinary way. When Dodwell tried to explain the cam-
era obscura he was using, the Disdar
no sooner saw the temple [of Acropolis] instantaneously reflected on the paper in 
all its lines and colours, than he imagined that I had produced the effect by some 
magical process; his astonishment appeared mingled with alarm.... He again 
looked into the camera obscura. At that moment, some of his soldiers happening 
to pass before the reflecting glass, were beheld by the astonished Disdar walking 
upon the paper: he now became outrageous, and after calling me pig, devil and 
Buonaparte he told me that if I chose I might take away the temple and all the 
stones in the Citadel, but that he would never permit me to conjure his soldiers 
into my box. When I found that it was in vain to reason with his ignorance, I 
changed my tone, and told him that if he did not leave me unmolested, I would 
put him into my box, and that he should find it a very difficult matter to get out 
again (Gernsheim and Gernsheim 1969: 29).
Visibly alarmed, the Disdar immediately retired discomforted, and henceforth 
carefully avoided Dodwell and his dangerous box.
A person from the iconoclastic Islamic world may have reacted with supersti-
tious fear to the allegedly appropriating power of photographic images, but even 
in the West, with its history of rich visual culture, people still tend to feel appre-
hensive and self-conscious at having their pictures taken. We know rationally that 
cameras do not “steal our souls” and take us into the photographer’s possession, as 
tribesmen were reported to feel when first confronted with a white man’s camera, 
and therefore we do not panic when we are being photographed. Still, the residual 
magical fear remains, making us feel awkward and uncomfortable, as if our pri-
vacy has been invaded, some trespass and disrespect have taken place, and indeed 
as if some material part of ourselves has been “stolen” by the photographer. Few 
people in today’s Western societies share the primitive dread of cameras, but some 
trace of irrationalism is still there, as seen in our reluctance to tear up or throw 
away a photograph of a once loved one, or of someone dead or far away.
Interestingly but probably not surprisingly, our anxiety about being photo-
graphed seems to increase with age. Just as youth, the time when we are better 
looking (a cue of fertility) is for biological reasons preferable to old age, the time 
when we are less good looking (because past our fertility), so we generally prefer 
ourselves on photographs taken at younger age. As we grow older we dislike being 
photographed because we do not want to be reminded by the camera that we are 

 From Interaction to Symbol
not as young and attractive as we once were. In fact, we even tend to look “older” 
on photographs, especially on casual snapshots, mainly because our attention is 
sharper when looking at a new object (the photograph) than when looking at our 
all-too-familiar reflection in the mirror. The much stronger and “panicky” reac-
tion of tribesmen to seeing photographs of themselves may also be due to the 
shock of actually seeing their own faces for the first time.
If our photographic anxiety increases with age, then we should be least un-
comfortable to be photographed when young. Indeed, teenagers and people in 
their twenties generally like having their pictures taken, provided they look “cool” 
on them, that is, relaxed, at ease, self-assured, and in control, not tense or self-
conscious. Having a photographic copy, or better still, multiple iconic copies of 
oneself at the prime of one’s life is actually a very desirable way, especially for 
women, of advertising one’s phenotypic quality as widely as possible. This desire is 
greatly facilitated today by the visual mass media such as the MTV Channel for 
example, which shows practically nothing else but young, good looking, vivacious, 
bouncy, assertive, laughing and smiling young people of both sexes, whose body 
language and tone of voice (never mind what they actually say) communicate to 
millions of viewers their health, vigour, and sexual attractiveness, that is, indi-
rectly their good genes. As we grow older and less attractive we begin to be afraid 
of the camera’s disapproval, and when photographed we want to look “our best,” 
which requires some preparation, more in women than in men one would predict, 
before the picture is taken: adjustments in dress, hair and makeup, assuming a 
bodily posture suggesting good fitness, putting on a rejuvenating smile and so on. 
Older people will only tolerate being photographed when given the opportunity to 
manipulate their appearance before the picture is taken, and they absolutely hate 
surprise, casual, unprepared snapshots of themselves (even if they do not always 
say so). Again, mature women probably more so than mature men want to see an 
idealized, beautified and rejuvenated photographic image of themselves, and they 
feel embarrassed and annoyed when the camera does not present them as more 
attractive than they actually are at their age.
For this reason older or less attractive people not only tend to manipulate their 
own appearance before being photographed, but they also expect and often insist 
on manipulating the picture after it is taken. As early as the mid-1840s, a German 
photographer invented the first technique for retouching the negative, and his two 
versions of the same portrait – one retouched, the other not – astounded crowds 
at the Exposition Universelle held in Paris in 1855 (Sontag 1978: 86). Retouching, 
involving the removal of wrinkles, warts and so on, is basically a form of intention-
ally reducing the indexicality (that is, truthfulness) of the photographic image, and 
of increasing its iconicity, thus bringing it closer to the traditional painted or 
drawn portrait. In this way a retouched photograph, like plastic surgery, falsifies 

	
Chapter 5.  Photography, or the magic of iconic indexicality	 
reality in order to flatter our vanity, by making us believe that we are younger and 
better looking than we actually are.
However, no matter how anxious and uncomfortable we felt at the time of be-
ing photographed, and how much we disliked our portrait when we first saw it, we 
tend to like photographs of ourselves with time – as we grow older we always pre-
fer images of ourselves when we were younger. In this way portrait photography 
exerts a double psychological effect on us: on the one hand it is a way of arresting 
the damages caused by time and of achieving a sort of perennial youth, and on the 
other hand photographic portraits are a sobering reminder of how illusory and 
self-deceptive our desire to freeze the past is, as the difference between the face on 
the photograph and the face in the mirror grows wider and wider with time. One 
is reminded of the pathetic obsession with which an ageing silent film queen, 
played by Gloria Swanson in Billy Wilder’s Sunset Boulevard (1950), watches over 
and over again the old films in which she starred, living totally in the illusion of the 
past, unable to accept the passage of time. The two opposite effects of photography, 
one giving us a pleasing illusion of timelessness and the other painfully reminding 
us of the actual passage of time, thus cancel each other out, leaving us not better 
off perhaps than were the people before the age of photography, who never had to 
experience the frustration of comparing their current appearance with their 
younger image. Without photographic portraits people are both denied the pleas-
ure of seeing their young selves “immortalized,” and spared the anguish and nos-
talgic sorrow at seeing their youth gone.
The popularization of photography in mid-nineteenth century, like the inven-
tion of moving pictures later in the century, marked the beginning of iconic in-
dexical culture that was to dominate Western societies, gradually replacing the 
early modern culture based on iconic, painted images and the printed text. Pho-
tography not only offered a democratic opportunity for anyone to possess and con-
template their own and their family’s realistic portraits – it also affected every as-
pect of social life, providing the technological basis for twentieth-century visual 
mass media such as photojournalism, advertising, film, television, video, DVD, 
and the Internet. Before the introduction of newspaper photography ordinary peo-
ple could visualize only those events that took place in their contiguous, immedi-
ate space: in the street, in the village, or on the battlefield. Newspaper photographs 
and later documentary film and television, due to their iconic indexicality and 
wide dissemination, offered an opportunity of surrogate participation in events 
not directly experienced, thus enlarging the near-contiguous (in the case of pho-
tography and film depicting recent events) and fully contiguous (in the case of live 
television) sphere of interaction with the increasingly global social environment.
In Western societies from the turn of the nineteenth century photography, 
alongside the traditional printed word, became a powerful tool of keeping the 

 From Interaction to Symbol
public informed, and of influencing and manipulating their views and opinions. 
The first newspaper photograph was printed in 1880 in the New York Daily Herald, 
using the process known as halftone, which allowed both the photographic image 
and the printed text to be run through the press at the same time (Freund 
1980: 104). Before that illustrations in the newspapers were scarce and consisted of 
handmade, that is, iconic, wood engravings. Initially, for technical reasons even 
photographs were reprinted in the newspapers as engravings with a note “after a 
photograph,” which both assumed the public’s familiarity with the new medium 
and reinforced the veracity and accuracy of the engraving. Today thousands of 
newspapers and magazines print millions of photographs daily, most of them in 
colour for increased realism and authenticity, allowing hundreds of millions of 
people around the world to expand their immediate, contiguous experience with 
visual, spatially displaced iconic indexes of events not directly accessible, enabling 
people to share the same information practically across the globe at the same time. 
Still photography is now of course supported by the related medium of television, 
which has a two-fold communicative advantage over photography: it presents per-
sons and objects in realistic movement, and in live broadcasts it provides an in-
dexical experience of spatially displaced but simultaneous events, at least of those 
deemed important by television agencies to be communicated to the general pub-
lic. Realistic movement and simultaneity with regard to represented objects and 
events were the two main features missing in nineteenth-century photography. 
But as soon as technology made these effects possible, the photographic media, 
especially television, moved even closer to providing a surrogate, fully contiguous 
representation of life for millions of people across the globe.

chapter 6
Photography plus movement, 
or even more magic
Humans and most other animals appear to be predisposed to pay instinctive atten-
tion to all movement taking place within the physical range scanned by their sens-
es, in humans mostly by vision. In our evolutionary history moving, self-propelled, 
laterally symmetrical objects tended to be either animals or other humans, and it 
paid in survival terms to keep a watchful eye on what these objects were doing: did 
they behave like friends or like enemies, did they look like potential sources of food 
or like potential predators. There are deep evolutionary reasons why motion is the 
strongest visual appeal to attention (Plotkin 1994: 103; Allen and Saidel 1998: 195; 
Schiffman 1996: 195). A dog or a cat may be resting peacefully, unimpressed by all 
the lights and shapes that make up the immobile setting around them, but as soon 
as anything stirs, their eyes will turn to the spot and follow the course of the mo-
tion. Young kittens seem completely at the mercy of any moving thing, as though 
their eyes were glued to it. Human beings are similarly attracted by movement, as 
evidenced by the effectiveness of mobile advertising, whether it be flashing neon 
signs or TV commercials, or by the much greater visual appeal of performances in 
motion as compared to still photography, painting, sculpture, or architecture 
(Arnheim 1974: 372). Given this universal propensity of the human nervous sys-
tem, a device that would add movement to still photographic images to enhance 
their realism and visual attractiveness was in a sense only waiting to be invented.
The birth of cinema
The device in question is of course the medium of film, in semiotic terms defined 
as animated iconic indexes. If such is the definition, then the first “cinema screen-
ing” ever described must be Plato’s celebrated allegory of the cave from The Repub-
lic. In its original philosophic context the allegory was designed to illustrate the 
limited extent of human knowledge about the world as revealed by the senses:
Imagine an underground chamber like a cave, with a long entrance open to the 
daylight and as wide as the cave. In this chamber are men who have been prison-
ers there since they were children, their legs and necks being so fastened that they 

 From Interaction to Symbol
can only look straight ahead of them and cannot turn their heads. Some way off, 
behind and higher up, a fire is burning, and between the fire and the prisoners and 
above them runs a road, in front of which a curtain-wall has been built, like the 
screen of puppet shows between the operators and their audience, above which 
they show their puppets.... Imagine further that there are men carrying all sorts of 
gear along behind the curtain-wall, projecting above it and including figures of 
men and animals made of wood and stone and all sorts of other materials, and 
some of these men, as you would expect, are talking and some not.... do you think 
our prisoners could see anything of themselves or their fellows except the shad-
ows thrown by the fire on the wall of the cave opposite them?... if they were able 
to talk to each other, would they not assume that the shadows they saw were the 
real things? (Plato 2003: 241).
Plato’s parable illustrates the limitations of human perception and cognition (in 
not being able to see things “in themselves” but only their indexical reflections), 
but the description also bears a resemblance, mutatis mutandis, to a modern cin-
ema screening, in that both Plato’s shadows and the moving photographic images 
projected on the cinema screen are iconic indexes, reflections of invisible things 
that caused them. (With an important difference in that Plato’s shadows are fully 
contiguous animated iconic indexes, whereas film consists of spatio-temporally 
displaced animated iconic indexes.) Also, unlike the spectators in Plato’s cave cin-
ema viewers are not prisoners tied to their seats and forced to look only at the 
screen, nor is the film we are watching a mechanical reflection of reality, because 
in addition to being an index it is also an icon, an artificial product partly created 
by human imagination. Only a naïve viewer will mistake a fleeting cinematic im-
age for solid contiguous reality: children often do that, as does the frustrated 
housewife from Woody Allen’s film The Purple Rose of Cairo (1985), who believes 
that a dashing film character falls in love with her and steps off the screen to join 
her in the real world.
The medium of cinema as we know it came upon the scene in the mid-1890s, 
at the end of a century that saw a vast proliferation of visual forms of popular cul-
ture, not only of printed photographs but also of mass-produced lantern slides, 
illustrated fiction, dioramas (painted backdrops with three-dimensional figures 
depicting famous historical events), circuses, “freak shows,” amusement parks, 
music halls, theatre, opera and so on. Cinema offered an advantage over these 
contiguous forms of visual entertainment in that its displaced indexical images 
could be copied and disseminated more widely: multiple prints of the same film 
made sure that the cinema could offer a cheaper and easier way to organize enter-
tainment for the masses. Live performances in theatres and music halls, despite 
their attractiveness as fully contiguous events compared with the displaced in-
dexicality of the cinema, were more expensive and took more organizing to 

	
Chapter 6.  Photography plus movement, or even more magic	 
produce. On the other hand film, once made, could be copied relatively cheaply 
and then shown to audiences around the world, its initially silent quality allowing 
also for distribution across language barriers. Movies would become the most 
popular visual art form of the late Victorian age and would define, together with 
its younger sister television, the audio-visual technological character of twentieth-
century popular culture, with its easily accessible, democratic photographic im-
ages, complete with movement and fully synchronous ambient sound.
The main technological prerequisite for the invention of cinema was the abil-
ity to use photography to make successive pictures on a clear surface. The expo-
sure time would also have to be short enough to allow for sixteen or more frames 
to be seen in a single second, after scientists realized that the human eye will per-
ceive smooth motion if a series of slightly different images was placed before it in 
rapid succession, minimally around sixteen per second. The medium of cinema 
depends upon two physiological deficiencies in our visual system. Firstly, the reti-
na is unable to follow rapidly changing light intensities: at critical “fusion” fre-
quency more than fifty flashes per second will create the impression of steady light. 
Secondly, the phenomenon known as apparent motion occurs when the eye sees a 
string of displays as a single moving one. This effect depends on the fact that the 
eye will infer movement from an intermittent input if the jumps are not too large. 
Flicker fusion and apparent motion illustrate how automatic and mandatory the 
physiological, bottom-up processing in film perception is: although we know that 
a film is only a stroboscopic display of fixed frames, we cannot fail to construct 
continuum light and movement (Haber and Hershenson 1980: 122). The cinema 
also required that photographs showing different stages of movement be printed 
on a base flexible enough to be passed through the camera rapidly. In 1888 George 
Eastman devised a still camera that made photographs on rolls of sensitized paper, 
and the next year he introduced transparent celluloid roll film, creating a break-
through in the move toward cinema. Finally, to film movement cameras had to be 
fitted with an intermittent mechanism, based as it happened on the sewing ma-
chine (invented in 1846) to allow for a stop-and-move passage of the celluloid 
strip through the camera at the rate of sixteen, and later twenty-four frames per 
second (Thompson and Bordwell 2003: 14).
The first public screening of motion pictures famously took place in the Grand 
Café in Paris on December 28, 1895, where the brothers Louise and August Lu-
mière astonished their audience with a close view of August and his wife feeding 
their baby (the first home movie ever); a staged comic scene of a boy stepping on 
a hose to cause a puzzled gardener to squirt himself (the first slap-stick comedy); 
and a shot of the sea (the first nature film). Other early films by the Lumière broth-
ers impressed the audiences with the sight of a train arriving at the station, with 
passengers embarking and disembarking, and a shot of workers leaving a factory 

 From Interaction to Symbol
(the first documentaries). Each film consisted of a single take of about forty sec-
onds’ duration, shot from a camera fitted with a standard lens and placed on a 
stationary tripod to simulate a point of view of a standing person witnessing the 
event. For many days long lines of spectators waited to see the films, and the Lu-
mière brothers quickly exploited their success, sending representatives all over the 
world to show and make more films. The cinema soon became part of news media 
and of popular entertainment in the late 1890s.
Interestingly, most subjects of the early short films were non-fiction, or actu-
alities, the prototype of later television news reports, that is, film records of recent 
(that is, temporally near-contiguous) but spatially displaced events. The films in-
cluded topicals, or news reports offering brief coverage of current political, cul-
tural, or military events as well as of accidents. Also popular were short documen-
taries, scenics and travelogues, offering views of distant cities and landscapes. In 
most cases cinematographers would cover events in the locations where they oc-
curred, thus offering truly indexical, authentic records of distant events. On many 
occasions, however, filmmakers recreated current events in the studio – both to 
save money and to make up for the fact that cameraman had not been at the scene. 
In 1898, for instance, both American and European producers used model ships 
in miniature landscapes to re-create the sinking of the battleship Maine and other 
occurrences relating to the Spanish-American War. Audiences probably did not 
believe that these faked scenes were actual records of real events; rather, they ac-
cepted them as representations of those events, comparable to engravings in news-
magazines (Thompson and Bordwell 2003: 21). Semiotically speaking, real news 
films or photographs are displaced iconic indexes of events; films or photographs 
containing fake, or staged scenes are displaced indexical icons of events; engravings 
or drawings in newspapers and magazines are displaced icons, while written or 
spoken reports of events use linguistic, that is, arbitrary, displaced symbolic signs. 
The four types of signs thus offer a respectively increasing perceptual and cogni-
tive distance from real, contiguous events, such as those experienced by an eye 
witness for example.
The distinction between iconic indexes and indexical icons thus underlies our 
differing reactions to photographs and films of real events on the one hand, and to 
photographed or filmed reconstructions of events on the other hand. Iconic in-
dexes, precisely by virtue of their indexicality, have a causal, physical relationship 
with real-life objects, persons, and events they depict. On the other hand indexical 
icons, by virtue of their iconicity, do not possess this direct, causal link with the 
events they reconstruct, despite their photographic, that is, indexical medium. The 
two types of photographic signs thus reflect the respective differences between 
documentary photography and film on the one hand, and dramatized photogra-
phy and film, or mock documentary, on the other hand. If the aim of photography 

	
Chapter 6.  Photography plus movement, or even more magic	 
or film is primarily to inform the viewers about events that really happened, then 
iconically indexical signs, even of poor quality, are preferable as more truthful and 
authentic. On the other hand, if the object of photography or film is either to offer 
the photographer’s and the filmmaker’s interpretation of what happened, or a rep-
resentation of entirely fictitious events, then indexically iconic signs can do the 
job. It is clear, however, that indexical icons, despite their visual, photographic re-
semblance to the events in question, have no direct, causal connection with these 
events and are therefore perceived as less truthful and authentic. As in the early 
days of photography and film, whenever original, documentary material is not 
available, photographers and filmmakers of today resort to staged reconstructions 
of events, as in television crime or history programmes, which are often made to 
look like real documentaries, that is, like iconic indexes. Such staged reconstruc-
tions are often deceptively similar to real, documentary footage, by being shot with 
hand-held cameras for example, inviting the audience to succumb to the illusion 
of watching a filmed event as it really happened, although it is obvious that what is 
presented is an iconic reconstruction, not a true indexical record of the event.
For example, because of the legal ban on media presence in courts, the pop 
star Michael Jackson’s case of alleged child molestation in 2005 was staged with 
actors outside the court almost simultaneously with the actual hearings, to give the 
news-hungry TV viewers at least some visual material, iconic rather than indexi-
cal, instead of a perceptually even more distant mere verbal, that is, symbolic re-
port of what was happening behind the closed doors of the courtroom. Obviously, 
for Michael Jackson fans or the paparazzi the most desirable experience would 
have been to be actually present in the court during the hearings, that is, to avail of 
fully contiguous communication with the event. Second best would have been a 
televised live transmission, providing spatially displaced but simultaneous iconic 
indexes of the hearings. Next in perceptual attractiveness would have been a tele-
vision broadcast after the event, providing both spatially and temporally displaced 
iconic indexes of the proceedings. Even less exciting but still better than nothing is 
what was actually shown on television: a staged reconstruction providing both 
spatially and temporally displaced indexical icons of the event. Finally, least satis-
fying from the point of view of a person anxious to witness the event would have 
been a post-factum mere verbal report, however factually accurate, providing both 
spatially and temporally displaced symbolic representation of the proceedings. 
Both the newscasters’ verbal reports and visual, iconic reconstructions of events 
seen on television are generally believed to be “truthful,” in the sense that they 
indirectly but accurately depict what really happened, and they can usually supply 
more complete information than a fragmentary documentary (indexical) footage. 
Still, when it comes to important public events, even a single casual photograph 
taken by a chance witness, a brief low-definition video made with a mobile 

 From Interaction to Symbol
telephone, or a poor-quality amateur sound recording are perceived as truer and 
more authentic than an impeccably produced dramatized reconstruction of the 
complete event, which looks disappointingly inauthentic and fake to a viewer anx-
ious to know about the facts as they actually happened.
On the other hand, if the aim of photography and film is not to inform the 
viewers about real events but undisguisedly to present fictitious, staged scenes, then 
indexical icons of artistic photography, of feature film and television drama are 
liberally used as the producers’ imagination and audiences’ expectations dictate, 
quite independently of any actual events in the world outside the photographer’s or 
the filmmaker’s studio. Fiction films as visual equivalents of literary narratives were 
popular right from the beginnings of cinema, as first exemplified by the Lumière 
brothers’ comic gag with the squirted gardener (L’arroseur arrosé). A typical public 
screening in the early days of cinema would include a mixture of scenics, topicals, 
as well as fiction films in a single program (Thompson and Bordwell 2003: 22). A 
cinematic show would also have some musical accompaniment, if only to drown 
the whirring sound of the projector, although in some cases exhibitions had noises, 
that is, sonic icons, synchronized with the action on the screen to supply the miss-
ing audio dimension for increased realism. The iconic indexes of short scenics and 
topicals later developed into newsreels, documentaries, and television news bulle-
tins, while the indexical icons of fiction films evolved into the huge industry of 
feature film production, later including television dramas and sitcoms.
The mirror and contiguous iconic indexicality
The photographic media, that is, still photography as well as motion pictures and 
television, have thus provided, for the first time in history, a possibility of creating 
displaced iconic indexical images and of cheaply copying and communicating 
them to practically everyone, as is clearly the case in today’s media-saturated glo-
bal culture. I related the particular perceptual attractiveness of the photographic 
media to the inherently indexical nature of the photographic process, which cre-
ates an illusion of a physical, causal connection with the represented reality, and 
which can effect a degree of realism and accuracy of representation unattained by 
purely iconic forms of displaced visual communication such as painting, drawing, 
or sculpting. I also emphasized the fact that the need to create permanent images 
is a consequence of the uniquely human extended working memory, and of the 
resulting awareness of the passage of time, with the accompanying feelings of anx-
iety and nostalgia. Important as memory is as the foundation of consciousness and 
as a prerequisite of material culture (the latter as a form of collective memory aid), 

	
Chapter 6.  Photography plus movement, or even more magic	 
at least as vital for human experience of the world is contiguous communication, 
resulting from our instinctive alertness to events happening in our proximity – 
disposition we share with all other species, mainly engaged in contiguous transac-
tions with their environment.
The primary system of contiguous visual communication is provided by the 
visual pathway, consisting mainly of the eyes, the optic nerve, and the occipital 
cortex in the brain, where the visual stimuli are interpreted. This natural system 
can be enhanced by such man-made optical devices as the spectacles, the binocu-
lars, the microscope, and the telescope. On top of that, largely as a result of our 
consciousness and the capacity for meta-thinking, there is a possibility of creating 
a culturally mediated secondary system of contiguous visual communication. One 
of the manifestations of this uniquely human possibility is social ritual and drama, 
where the contiguously enacted body movements, gestures, costume, facial expres-
sions, including the voice, music and other sound effects, can code iconic and sym-
bolic meanings referring to events, ideas and emotions that are spatio-temporally 
displaced from their contiguous audio-visual ritual and dramatic enactments.
Other examples of secondary contiguous visual communication include such 
indexical representations as reflections of objects in the water or in the mirror, the 
shadow theatre, and the camera obscura. The mirror in particular holds a special 
place in culture as an object aiding introspection, contemplation, and self-knowl-
edge, as well as encouraging self-delusion and related magical beliefs resulting 
from the indexical nature of the image reflected in the mirror. Interestingly, of all 
possible types of indexical representation the mirror reflection is perhaps closest 
to the thing it represents, not only because of its fully contiguous nature but also 
for optical reasons. Namely, a plane mirror sends to every eye the actual light flux 
which comes from the real scene. Consequently, what we see in the mirror is not 
just a reflection but reality itself: according to the physiologist Maurice H. Pirenne, 
“the mirror does not represent reality, it presents to us reality” (Pirenne 1970: 11). 
The ancients believed that the image in the mirror originated from physical con-
tact, from an imprint made from the eye to the object through rays of light – which 
is why the mythical basilisk could be killed by its own poisonous stare reflected in 
the mirror (Melchior-Bonnet 2002: 103). The mirror also provides a unique case 
of fully contiguous visual communication not with another system but with one-
self, including an otherwise unattainable, psychologically important opportunity 
to examine one’s face. As such, for self-conscious systems such as humans the mir-
ror can be an instrument enhancing self-awareness, a sense of being unique and 
different from other systems in the environment. Incidentally, the ability to recog-
nize the creature in the mirror as oneself is not confined to humans, but has been 
observed among other primates and, more controversially, in experiments with 
dolphins and elephants. While these animals are able to recognize themselves as 

 From Interaction to Symbol
themselves in the mirror, other animals apparently see only a rival or a friend 
(Pendergrast 2003: 362–364).
The illusion of splitting or doubling of the object reflected in the mirror can 
also encourage beliefs in split personalities or immaterial souls existing separately 
from the body. The writer Sabine Melchior-Bonnet interprets the myth of Narcissus 
in terms of an archaic belief in the existence of a double, or of a soul taking a sub-
stance, a concept found in many traditional cultures (Melchior-Bonnet 2002: 102). 
In The Golden Bough Frazer recounts similar widespread folk beliefs in souls being 
captured in mirrors, with the resulting fear of losing one’s soul when looking at 
one’s reflection in the water (Frazer 2002: 357). A corresponding, equally popular 
belief is that breaking a mirror will cause someone’s death or bring bad luck. In 
ancient Greece, just looking at one’s reflection, the “soul” captured in the mirror, 
could invite death, as the myth of Narcissus famously illustrates.
At the same time looking intensely into a mirror or some other reflective sur-
face was widely believed to encourage contemplation, introspection, and mystical 
insight. In ancient and medieval times scryers (gazers into reflective surfaces) 
peered into mirrors, crystals, waters, or polished metal to allegedly gain super-
natural knowledge. Roman scryers were called specularii, after speculum, the Latin 
for “mirror.” Both words stem from specere, “to look,” as in speculation. As Mark 
Pendergrast shows in his fascinating account of the cultural history of the mirror, 
all cultures on record believed in scrying and had some sort of magic beliefs and 
practices associated with mirrors (Pendergrast 2003:  29–52). In the Christian 
Middle Ages, for example, scrying was sufficiently popular to be officially con-
demned in numerous treaties of demonology, which spoke of such reprehensible 
magical practices as hydromancy (divination by water), catoptromancy (by mir-
rors), and crystallomancy (by crystal balls). In his Polycraticus (1159) John of 
Salisbury went as far as to attack all polished and brilliant objects, from blades of 
daggers to polished fingernails and metal. Experiments conducted today reveal 
that the mirror’s reflection can trigger a hypnosis or trance, if gazed at for a suffi-
ciently long time. In the Middle Ages such hypnotic visions were seen as commu-
nications with the devil, which is why the Church condemned all experiments and 
magical practices using mirrors (Melchior-Bonnet 2002: 188).
The images created by mirrors, the camera obscura, or by live performances 
and rituals are fully contiguous with originals, the fact that also limits the social 
range of these communicative devices, as contiguous images can only be perceived 
by viewers present within the same spatio-temporal context. Only a few people 
can simultaneously see their reflections in the same mirror, or an image of a city in 
one camera obscura, just as only so many people can witness a single live theatrical 
performance, a musical concert, or a sports event, compared with a potentially 
unlimited number of people able to see the same events later, by means of 

	
Chapter 6.  Photography plus movement, or even more magic	 
spatio-temporally displaced iconic indexes of film. To allow a mass audience scat-
tered in different places to experience the same event at the time of its happening 
other communication devices had to be invented, and were: they are radio and 
television. In semiotic terms live radio broadcast, similarly to the telephone, com-
municates spatially displaced, simultaneous auditory indexes, whereas live televi-
sion communicates both the above and spatially displaced, simultaneous animated 
iconic indexes.
Contiguous experience and the birth of television
Compared with the mirror, the function of painting, photography, and film is to 
provide temporally displaced rather than contiguous visual representations. The 
awareness of this particular limitation of photography, of its inability to commu-
nicate what happens here and now, probably lay behind the invention of the 
Polaroid camera in 1947, which created a sensation by being capable of developing 
and producing a finished print in just a few seconds, almost simultaneously with 
the photographed event. The camera’s ability to produce near-contiguous images 
was perceived as attractive enough to counterbalance such disadvantages as its 
bulky size, greater weight, and a much higher price as compared with an ordinary 
camera (Freund 1980: 205). Today the near-contiguous photographic images are 
produced cheaply and in abundance by digital cameras equipped with little LCD 
(Liquid Crystal Display) screens, capable of showing pictures taken just seconds 
earlier. In this sense digital cameras can be seen as (almost) bringing together the 
function of traditional photography with that of the mirror: a paradoxical combi-
nation of temporal displacement and simultaneity.
The unattainable paradox of obliterating the difference between the present 
and the past, in other words, of “stopping” the passage of time, underlies Oscar 
Wilde’s brilliant visualization of the relations between life (contiguous events) and 
art (displaced fixed icons) in the form of a painted portrait which supernaturally 
exchanges properties with its subject, the beautiful young man Dorian Gray (Wil-
de 1994: 46). As a result of this exchange, the man in the painting wanes and grows 
old and ugly with time, while the living equivalent retains his youth and physical 
beauty despite the passage of many years. In another magical paradox, the nor-
mally iconic painted portrait becomes an indexical mirror reflecting, through the 
increasing ugliness of facial features, the moral decline of the man represented in 
the painting. The portrait of Dorian Gray is Wilde’s version of the dream of eternal 
youth, a manifestation of human paradoxical desire to combine the much wished-
for timelessness with the objectively unstoppable passage of time: to freeze the 
contiguous moment by transforming it, magically, into a temporally displaced 

 From Interaction to Symbol
image that retains the effects of contiguity. In works of fiction, such as Wilde’s 
novel or the myth of Faust, the impossible paradox can only be attained by break-
ing natural laws, which is probably why for didactic reasons both Dorian Gray and 
Faust are punished for their “unnatural” wishes.
What the magical portrait of Dorian Gray and live television have in common 
is that both are instances of spatially displaced but simultaneous iconic indexes. 
The feature that distinguishes “typical” television from other visual media such as 
photography or film is precisely the ability of the former to provide many geo-
graphically scattered viewers with images that are simultaneous with the repre-
sented events. As a temporally contiguous medium live television has thus more in 
common with the old camera obscura than with film. Indeed, when television was 
invented in the late 1920s its images, of very poor quality when compared with 
photography or cinema pictures, caused a thrill precisely because of the new me-
dium’s power of contiguity: its ability to transmit simultaneously images of spa-
tially displaced events to many viewers. Contiguity was the one dimension lacking 
in the otherwise perceptually and cognitively attractive photographic indexicality 
of moving pictures. As the historian of mass media Peter Kramer has pointed out, 
from its inception in the late nineteenth century cinema was caught up in the tel-
evision imagination – a vision of the important events taking place around the 
world being made available to everyone in the privacy of their homes, by means of 
the technologies of sound and image reproduction capable of transmitting events 
at the time or shortly after they were happening (Kramer 2000: 39).
Television that is, “seeing at a distance” or, in semiotic terms, providing spa-
tially displaced but simultaneous animated iconic indexes, had been a human 
dream long before the medium was actually invented. In 1879 George du Maurier 
drew a cartoon for Punch showing a mother and father watching, on the wall of 
their English home, a tennis match in Ceylon in which their daughter was playing. 
The parents were also able to speak to her over as yet uninvented long-distance 
telephone (Wheen 1985: 12). Before John Logie Baird’s first public demonstration 
of television in London in 1926, experiments with capturing simultaneous images, 
using a combination of photo camera and a device to convert light into electric 
impulses, were conducted in late nineteenth century in Germany, Russia, and the 
United States. The most important of these devices was an electronic cathode-ray 
tube, invented by a German called Karl Braun, in which the image could be picked 
up on a thin plate coated with a photosensitive substance. The plate would be 
bombarded with electrons from a “gun” at the end of the tube. This fusillade, 
sweeping from side to side and up and down, would provide electrical impulses 
matching the image being received on the plate – impulses which could then be 
transmitted by radio. At the other end of the apparatus, the image-receiver, that is, 

	
Chapter 6.  Photography plus movement, or even more magic	 
a TV set, would convert the impulses back into a picture on a fluorescent screen 
(Wheen 1985: 13).
Despite poor picture quality, the main advantage and thrill of early television 
was precisely its live transmission, which enabled distant viewers to witness the 
events occurring far away at the time of broadcast. It is interesting, but not surpris-
ing in view of human perceptual preferences, that the first ever experimental televi-
sion transmissions conducted in Britain, Russia, and the USA included images of 
human faces rather than land- or cityscapes. Most of the early television pro-
grammes from the 1930s consisted of live broadcasts, while films, especially silent 
cartoon, were used only occasionally (Kramer 2000: 28). The first public demon-
stration of television in America, organized in 1927, was a live broadcast from 
Washington and watched in New York, which contained a speech by Herbert 
Hoover, US Secretary of Commerce, and a show featuring a comedian A. Dolan, 
the first television entertainer. The New York Times emphasized on that occasion 
the importance of television to bring “news-reels flashed before audiences at the 
moment of occurrence, together with dramatic and musical acts shot on the ether 
waves in sound and picture at the instant they are taking place in the studio” (Wheen 
1985: 16, 20). Unlike the cinema, better suited to convey dramatic visual narratives 
relating to actual or fictitious events spatio-temporally displaced from the viewers’ 
experience, television was from its inception perceived as a visual extension of the 
radio, broadcasting “news,” that is, showing images of real events at the time their 
occurrence, or reported verbally live as soon as possible after they happened.
Actuality and topicality, and whenever possible live transmission of events 
thus became the defining features of early television, and to a large extent have 
remained so to this day. The first regular television broadcasting service in the 
world started in Germany in March 1935, sixteen months before BBC Television. 
Dr Goebbels, Germany’s Minister for Propaganda, was said to be very interested 
in television as a means of promoting Nazism, although the Führer himself never 
spoke live from a television studio. Largely due to the cumbersomeness of early 
television equipment and the resulting problems with mobility, most of the early 
programmes did not present events live but as soon as possible afterwards on film 
as newsreels and short documentaries. Early German television broadcasts also 
included half-hour extracts from feature films, as well as a regular show called 
Mirror of the Day, which was shot in the streets of Berlin by a mobile unit. As tel-
evision sets could not be bought in the shops, anyone who wished to see these 
programmes had to go to one of Berlin’s eleven public viewing rooms, which were 
run by the Reichspost. Berlin also had a “tele-cinema” with a large screen, four feet 
by three. In 1936 Germany staged the most ambitious outside live broadcast in the 
world – the Berlin Olympics. As many as three cameras covered the event, placed 
in the stadium, the gymnasium, and the swimming pool. The audience of these 

 From Interaction to Symbol
broadcasts, watching in the public viewing rooms, was estimated to be as high as 
150,000 (Wheen 1985: 31).
In Britain the regular service of BBC Television started in August 1936, with a 
programme called Here’s Looking at You, which introduced the “magic of televi-
sion,” in the announcer’s words, to the general public. The “magic” consisted of 
previously filmed material, including a newsreel and a discussion about books 
with Rebecca West, T. S. Eliot, and Somerset Maugham, as well as a live variety 
show featuring a Chilean tap-dancing duo, a singing group, a comedy act, and a 
solo song, specially written for the broadcast. As in Germany, whenever important 
public events were planned, television cameras were on location to broadcast them 
live. In May 1937 television viewers could watch a direct transmission of the coro-
nation of George VI, and in 1938 the public could witness live Neville Chamberlain’s 
arrival at Heston Airport from Munich, waving a piece of paper which Hitler had 
signed, a supposed guarantee of peace. In September 1939, before TV broadcast-
ing was stopped with the outbreak of World War II, about 20,000 people in Britain 
owned sets (Wheen 1985: 25, 34).
Television today – contiguity still reigns supreme
Despite the fact that the golden age of live television broadcasting in Europe and 
the USA, the 1950s, has long been over, media critics argue that “liveness” still 
remains the defining feature of television and a fundamental part of the viewers’ 
expectations. Television broadcasts are still associated in public perception with 
“authenticity” and “truth,” qualities not expected in fiction films screened in cine-
mas or on television (Bourdon 2004: 182). As the film critic Charles Barr puts it, 
“if there isn’t this intermediate process, and time gap, between capturing the image 
and showing it, then this is not what we call cinema. Television, in contrast, was 
developed as a device for capturing and showing images simultaneously, or virtu-
ally so: images of the present, not of the (distant or recent) past” (Barr 2000: 53). 
Even when television produced its own films in the pioneer pre-war years it was, 
paradoxically, in order to simulate the record of a live transmission – they were 
repeats or reconstructions before a film camera of what had originally gone out 
live. Direct transmission was thus seen as television’s dominant mode, especially 
in view of the fact that initially there was no way of recording the TV camera’s own 
directly-transmitted images either on film or on tape. Despite its visual mode, 
which television shared with film, the medium had more affinity with radio – an 
auditory medium likewise broadcasting live, that is, simultaneous if spatially dis-
placed indexical signs (Barr 2000: 57).

	
Chapter 6.  Photography plus movement, or even more magic	 
Thus both in the early days of television and today, the most popular pro-
grammes remain live broadcasts of news, major weekly prime-time variety shows, 
reality TV, and major sports events – this despite the fact that news reports for 
example are in fact made of edited visual material referring not to simultaneous 
but to recent events. In the age of private video and DVD collections of fiction 
films, and with a competition for the viewers’ attention from television drama and 
vintage cinema, polls show that most people still prefer to watch TV news and 
“live” reality programmes: chat shows, game, quiz and dating shows, as well as 
surveillance, voyeuristic productions such as Big Brother. As with news and sports 
programmes, however, the “reality” of these shows is really a misnomer, because 
the format of these programmes is designed by producers, who in fact create a 
completely fabricated world, with carefully prepared scenarios and settings to pro-
voke in what looks like “real time” particular behaviours in invited, non-profes-
sional participants. According to media critic Jérôme Bourdon, liveness is unlikely 
to disappear from television, and indeed the present tendency is towards extend-
ing news programmes to cover global events, as evidenced by the popular CNN 
and BBC World channels. Non-stop television news channels have opened in 
many countries (France, Germany, Italy), and similar broadcasts are planned in 
other countries. Studying remote control switching patterns also reveals that even 
the viewers watching other programmes such as films, television drama, docu-
mentaries and sport, regularly check up the news channels with their live broad-
casts of current or recent events (Bourdon 2004: 193).
As media critics have also observed, the principles of simultaneity and liveness 
are extended in television even to types of programmes historically inspired by 
film drama, such as sitcoms and soap operas, that is, fictional entertainment shows 
not designed to communicate news or show actual recent events. A typical televi-
sion drama show achieves the effect of liveness first of all by a contemporary set-
ting, and by being concerned with every-day human action. According to the 
critic John Fiske, contemporary, every-day realism is particularly suitable for tel-
evision, because its audiences are wider and more random than the statistically 
narrower, selective viewers of theatre or cinema shows. The small screen and com-
paratively poor definition of television also lead it to concentrate on mid-shots and 
close-ups of people talking and interacting, rather than on wide views of open 
spaces. The repetitiveness of series television programmes and their origins in stu-
dios rather than on exterior locations result in shows that rely on familiar interior 
settings of a domestic scale such as the home or a pub frequented by the same, 
socially closely integrated people. Also, despite the inevitable time gap between 
production and transmission, television drama constantly promotes the impres-
sion of “nowness,” the sense of being always “live.” While film undisguisedly 

 From Interaction to Symbol
presents itself as a record of what has happened, television insists on presenting 
itself as a relay of what is happening (Fiske 1987: 22, 273).
In television drama contiguity determines for example the temporal structure 
of individual episodes, so organized as to resemble continuous, real time of the 
viewers as much as possible. Sitcoms and soap operas are not broadcast live of 
course, but they are often recorded in front of a live studio audience as a more or 
less continuous show, as in the theatre. The episodes are usually shot with multiple 
cameras, and unlike film they have limited or no post-production editing. The ef-
fect of this mode of production is that the time taken to perform an action on tel-
evision coincides precisely with the time taken to perform it in “real life,” with 
many “dead moments” in the middle of the action which cannot be edited out as 
they are routinely in film. This absence of editorial intervention adds subtly to the 
sense of realism, with the camera merely recording what happened, creating a sense 
of liveness, an illusion that the action is happening “now.” Even when recorded 
weeks in advance, in the perception of television viewers drama programmes still 
take place “today” by observing the unity of time, as in ancient Greek tragedy whose 
action was limited to one day, as close as possible to the viewers’ perception of a 
natural flow of time, with minimum omissions or jumps forward. Soap operas, like 
the BBC Coronation Street, the longest-running and still the most popular of Brit-
ish television dramas, all observe in a residual way the convention of both live the-
atre and live television. For instance, editing allows actors “time” to change clothes, 
or to move from set to set, with time and space management that preserves the ef-
fect of continuity and “real time” – a single day compressed to a half-hour show. By 
contrast, film viewers accept as “normal” time jumps and frequent changes of loca-
tion from shot to shot – spacio-temporal displacements difficult to tolerate in tele-
vision drama and frequently perceived as “unnatural” (Barr 2000: 70).
Contiguity goes global
The preference for contiguous or near-contiguous communication, even with 
sender and receiver separated by distance, remains therefore a default state in hu-
man interactions with the outside world, mainly because of our evolutionary bag-
gage which predisposes us primarily towards direct, face-to-face interactions with 
other people and elements of the environment. Whenever possible therefore, even 
indirect, technologically mediated communication remains in the service of the 
social need for contiguous exchange of information between spatially separated 
communicators, as was the case with the early telegraph or the telephone, and 
even more so with today’s mobile phones, text messaging, and electronic mail, 
which allow for practically instantaneous two-way, individual simultaneous 

	
Chapter 6.  Photography plus movement, or even more magic	 
communication across the globe. In the sphere of the public media traditional 
television still remains the main channel of communicating globally near-contig-
uous news, despite the competition since the early 1990s from the new, digital 
medium of mass communication, the Internet and its child the World Wide Web.
Launched in 1991, the Internet combined the already existing media, such as 
the printed text and photography, in more recent years supplemented by digital 
video, recorded music and television, eventually creating what has been termed as 
“cyberspace,” the “virtual world,” and the “network society.” Technically, the Inter-
net constitutes the electronic network of networks that link people and informa-
tion through personal computers, and allow both for interpersonal communica-
tion (via e-mail) and public information retrieval (via Internet sites). Internet 
usage thus involves person-to-person communication, group communication, 
and global publishing and information provision, via electronic mail, news groups, 
chat rooms, mailing lists, and the World Wide Web. The latter allows for the dis-
play of colourful pictures, music and audio, as well as data and text, utilizing the 
hypertext principle, in which links from one information source provide easy 
point-and-click access to related information available from other sources. Com-
pared with the traditional mass media such as the press, radio, or television, the 
Internet offers several communicative advantages, including freedom and person-
al control in accessing information from multiple sources, as well as greater degree 
of interactiveness and anonymity, which reduce the barriers to participation based 
upon gender, age, race, social class, nationality, disability, or economic status. Oth-
er communicative advantages include the exponential growth of both people and 
information shared through the network, the ability to quickly access multiple and 
interconnected information sources through the hypertext Web structure, and the 
ability to continuously update the available information, especially the current 
news (Flew 2002: 16). With well over a billion (23,5 per cent of world population) 
of Internet users estimated in 2009, the World Wide Web could soon replace tele-
vision as the chief mass provider of current news, as a means of interpersonal 
communication, and a source of social, historical, and scientific information – all 
available cheaply and democratically to all literate users around the world 
(www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm).
One of the buzz words of today is “globalization,” denoting a process of pan-
national, round-the-world integration of trade and culture, which in practice 
means free and unlimited exchange of information, mainly via the Internet. The 
benefits of thus understood globalization may be unevenly distributed among the 
participating nations, which is why the trend towards global economic integration 
has both ardent supporter and vehement opponents. The erosion of local, indige-
nous cultures, and curtailment of economic and political independence that glo-
balization can bring to some nations are among the reasons why the process is 

 From Interaction to Symbol
contested in some quarters, with the film critic Michael Gove for example com-
menting that “globalization may make it easier for peoples to encounter new cul-
tures, but it makes the journey less worthwhile as individual cultures become more 
like each other” (Briggs and Burke 2005: 257). The need to protect national cul-
tures is one of the reasons why some people would wish to curb, if not to halt 
globalization, but what the opponents of globalization often fail to realize is that 
trade and other forms of social exchange (personal contacts, tourism, cultural 
cross-fertilization and so on) are probably the most effective ways of reducing ten-
sions and possible violence among individual people and nations. With expanding 
networks of reciprocity and the lifting of economic and political isolation, people 
all over the world are more likely to treat people of different cultures and races as 
fellow human beings worthy of respect and friendship, rather than as “alien” or 
“inferior.” As the journalist Robert Wright put it: “Among the many reasons I don’t 
think we should bomb the Japanese is that they built my minivan” (Wright 
1995: 87). Global trade, even with countries one has never visited and with people 
one has never met, induces positive, tolerant, and mutually respectful attitudes in 
international relations, both on official political level and in popular perception. 
On purely economic level globalization, with its inherent reciprocity of exchange, 
increases material prosperity both for developed and developing countries, en-
hances civil liberties, and leads to a more just and efficient allocation of resources. 
On the other hand isolation deepens the existing economic differences, breeds 
ignorance and prejudice about foreign cultures and people, inducing distrust, sus-
picion, or downright demonization and irrational fear of “the Other.”
We also must not forget that global technology and computerization in par-
ticular played an important part in dismantling the totalitarian structures of com-
munism. For instance, in 1980–1 the Soviet authorities introduced cheap efficient 
TV aerials so that everyone could watch the expected Soviet triumphs in the Ol-
ympic Games in Moscow. Instead, everyone in the western parts of the USSR 
found that by turning their aerials round 180 degrees they could pick up the 
uniquely uncensored programmes from Poland which the independent trade un-
ion Solidarity had briefly succeeded in wrestling from the state-run television. 
More recently the Chinese authorities have learned similar lessons through the 
spread of personal computers, despite the state’s attempts to limit the freedom of 
the Internet (Davies 2007: 280). Global technology and communication mean that 
totalitarian political systems are on their way out and are not likely to return, at 
least not in their familiar form.

chapter 7
From mimicry to metaphor
The origins of art
As I argued in the previous chapters, photography and painting can be regarded as 
paradigmatic examples of indexical and iconic types of visual representation re-
spectively. A photograph, like a footprint or odour, is produced (often uninten-
tionally) by the sender (the photographed object), with which the photograph 
maintains a direct, physical and causal if temporally removed relationship. This 
physical connection at origin is responsible for what can be described as an irra-
tional psychological response elicited by index, when it is identified (as in conta-
gious magic) with the object that produced the index. On the other hand a repre-
sentational painting is produced fully intentionally by the receiver (the painter), 
and like all icons it has no physical, causal relationship with the represented object, 
which may or may not even exist objectively (Peirce 1998: 143; Greenlee 1973: 70). 
The only real connection between icon and the object it represents is indirect and 
mental, and any beliefs as to the alleged physical link between the two underlie, as 
we have seen, homeopathic magic which like all magic offers a subjectively com-
pelling but objectively false description and interpretation of reality.
Iconicity in animal communication
Probably less powerful in their emotive response than indexes, icons are nonethe-
less ubiquitous in human communication, mainly because they result from certain 
basic perceptual and cognitive mechanisms which, incidentally, humans share 
with the rest of animals. Exchanging information with the environment begins 
with perception which, as defined by Derek Denton, relies on discriminating an 
object or event through one or more sensory modalities; in other words, on sepa-
rating an object from the background (something is picked out). A stimulus thus 
perceived is then subject to cognitive processing, which includes categorization, 
when non-identical objects or events are treated as equivalent on the basis of se-
lected categories, that is, elements common to the objects. Categorization then 
leads to generalization, when different perceptual categories are combined to con-
struct a concept, or a “universal” (Denton 2005: 102). As the cognitive anthropologist 

 From Interaction to Symbol
Pascal Boyer also points out, a concept results from the recognition of a certain 
generalized similarity, when different singular objects are mentally related because 
they share some property or properties (Boyer 1994: 62; Nöth 2001: 25). For exam-
ple, the concept of a “car” brings together different objects that share certain ob-
servable characteristics: a large (relative to the human body), laterally symmetrical 
box-like shape, four wheels on which the car is rolling, a steering wheel, seats for 
the driver and passengers, the capacity of self-propelled movement under the 
driver’s control and so on. The more abstract concept of “friendship” on the other 
hand denotes various behaviours and mental states that share less physically per-
ceptible but still psychologically identifiable properties such as companionship, 
reliability, trust, understanding, willingness to help and so on. Concepts thus 
formed are buildings blocks out of which instinctive as well as conscious knowl-
edge is constructed; they are generalized mental representations of the relevant 
elements of the outside world (Boyer 1994: 67; Deacon 1997: 71, 77). For instance, 
the sea gulls appear to have an innate generalized concept of an egg, which does 
not just refer to their own specific eggs, but it extends to all egg-like objects. If an 
egg is removed by an experimenter from the sea gull’s nest and put nearby, the gull 
will retrieve it. It will also retrieve other round objects – pebbles or potatoes, if 
they are sufficiently close in shape and touch to the egg – but it will leave angular 
and soft shapes untouched. For the gull, the concept of an egg is apparently larger 
than the class of eggs, and includes other similar, egg-like objects (Gombrich 
2003: 86). For similar reasons fish react to dummies of worms used by anglers as if 
they were real worms. Animals, in other words, are instinctively able to perceive 
similarity, or structural equivalency, between an external object and a concept ex-
isting a priori in their nervous systems.
The principle of generalized similarity as the basis of iconicity plays a para-
mount role in animal communication, and involves all the available sensory chan-
nels: chemical (olfactory and gustatory), auditory, and visual. The iconic function 
of the chemical signal, for example, is illustrated by the alarm substance used by 
the ant Pogonomyrmex badius: if the danger to the colony is momentary, the signal 
– a quantum of released pheromone – quickly fades and leaves the bulk of the 
colony undisturbed. If however the danger persists, the substance spreads propor-
tionately, involving an ever-increasing number of workers. The chemical signal is 
iconic inasmuch as its intensity and duration vary in analogous proportion to the 
waxing or waning of the danger stimuli (Sebeok 1994: 30). Chemical signals used 
by insects can also be iconic in relation to another adaptively important function 
– nourishment. The intensity of insect odour trails laid by successful foragers in 
various species of ants depends directly on the amount and quality of the source of 
food. Here the pheromone acts as an iconic signal inasmuch as it relates in analo-
gous fashion to the increase and decrease of the guiding odour spots. A particularly 

	
Chapter 7.  From mimicry to metaphor	 
impressive example of iconicity in animal communication in relation to food is the 
dance language of honeybees, as revealed by the classic experiments conducted by 
Karl von Frisch in the 1940s. Within the honeybees dance language important 
information is conveyed about the distance to food, its location, and its quality. 
The informational channel encompasses four sensory modalities: visual, auditory, 
olfactory, and tactile. The dance system requires first the ability to encode in the 
dance the information about the distance and direction of the flight to food. Sec-
ondly, hive mates must have developed the perceptual and cognitive capacity to 
interpret motor patterns associated with the dance, and to use such patterns to 
narrow their own foraging paths.
In von Frisch’s experiment food was placed at different distances from the 
hive, and then the waggle dance of returning foragers was quantified. Results 
showed a negative correlation between the number of turns in the waggle dance 
and distance to the food source, such that distant foods were associated with rela-
tively longer dances (fewer turns) (Hauser 1998: 497). In other words, the number 
of turns in the waggle dance served as an iconic signal communicating the infor-
mation necessary to return to the discovered source of food. What is truly impres-
sive about the honeybees’ waggle dance is that these extremely small creatures, 
with their relatively simple nervous systems, are able to communicate quite ex-
plicit information about the distance, direction, and location of food, and also that 
the communicated information refers to objects (food source) that are to some 
degree displaced in space and time, the fact that indicates the presence of special-
ized short-term working memory in the honeybees’ small brains. Still, the honey-
bees use their elaborate communication system to talk only about one thing: food. 
In this sense, they appear to be more limited than other nonhuman animals.
Genetically programmed iconicity also plays a pivotal role in deception prac-
tised by animals, involving smell and taste, colour and shape, sound and behav-
iour. Sometimes an insect even alters its surroundings to fit its own image, by 
fabricating a number of dummy copies (icons) of itself to misdirect predators away 
from its body, the live original, to one of several iconic replicas it constructs for 
that very purpose (Sebeok 1994: 84; Brandon and Hornstein 1986: 171). Deceptive 
fabrication is here designed to create an icon closely resembling the original object 
to elicit in another organism the same kind of response. A more familiar term for 
iconic deception practised by living organisms is mimicry, that is, a naturally se-
lected resemblance between two or more animals or plants (Hinton 1973: 99). For 
example, bee orchids induce bees to copulate with their flowers because of their 
strong resemblance to female bees. What the orchid has to gain from this decep-
tion is pollination, for a bee which is fooled by two orchids will incidentally carry 
pollen from one to the other (Dawkins 2006a: 65). Among the more impressive 
examples of animal mimicry, or deceptive iconic communication, are spiders 

 From Interaction to Symbol
mimicking ants they prey on: one spider species can even carry a dead ant, mim-
icking an ant carrying another ant to look innocuous to its prey. The larva of a 
South American hawk moth, Leucorhampha, mimics a snake, while the bug Fulgo-
ra lucifera from Brazil has the head resembling that of an alligator. The bug can 
apparently scare off a bird or monkey approaching near enough to resolve the 
features of the head (Hinton 1973: 112, 121). The angler fish attracts its prey by 
means of a lure – a wriggling, worm-like piece of flesh on the end of a long “fishing 
rod” projecting from the top of the head. When a small prey fish comes near, the 
angler will dance its worm-like bait in front of a little fish, and lure it down to the 
region of the angler’s own concealed mouth. Then it suddenly opens its jaws, and 
the little fish is sucked in and eaten (Dawkins 2006a: 64; Allen and Saidel 1998: 193). 
The angler fish is using iconic deception, exploiting the little fish’s generalized con-
cept of the “worm,” which makes it approach all wriggling worm-like objects as if 
they were real worms.
These and countless other instances of mimicry among plants and animals 
show that iconic communication, far from being an exclusively human domain, is 
possible in the absence of conscious intentionality. As Richard Dawkins explains, 
animal or plant mimicry is a result of natural selection, which in certain ecological 
situations increases the survival of organisms that resort to mimicry, as when a 
harmless and edible species mimics a harmful non-edible species to avoid being 
eaten. For instance, some unusually brightly coloured butterflies taste nasty, and 
birds learn to avoid them by their “warning” marks. Now other species of butterfly 
that do not taste nasty mimic the nasty ones in their appearance (although not in 
taste). They frequently fool human naturalists as well as birds. A bird which has 
once tasted a genuinely nasty butterfly tends to avoid all butterflies that look the 
same, including the mimics. In this way genes for mimicry are favoured by natural 
selection (Dawkins 2006a: 31). Animal mimicry is an example of the type of de-
ception defined in Chapter 2 as substitution, combining suppression and fabrica-
tion, when a system manipulates the receiver into accepting meaningless informa-
tion in the place of meaningful information. On the other hand the type of 
deception defined earlier as suppression is often found in the animal kingdom in 
the form of camouflage, or crypsis, as when a caterpillar “hides” from potential 
predators by developing a resemblance to an inedible dead twig. Suppression thus 
occurs when a system purposefully fails to communicate meaningful information. 
While in mimicry the prey is seen but not distinguished by the predator from 
something inedible, in camouflage the prey is not seen at all (or is seen but not 
distinguished from its background) (Hinton 1973: 100).

	
Chapter 7.  From mimicry to metaphor	 
From mimicry to imitation
When we say that something is iconic of something else we usually mean that there 
exists a structural equivalence, a perceived resemblance between otherwise differ-
ent objects. As we have seen, the perception of that resemblance among animals is 
either genetically programmed and automatic, or learned as a conditioned reflex, 
as in the case of birds that learn to avoid brightly coloured butterflies. The cognitive 
process that generates iconic reference is what is literally meant by the term “recog-
nition” (“re-cognition”), in applying an a priori existing concept of an object onto 
the perceived object whose appearance corresponds in some measure with the 
concept. Iconic recognition in the form of camouflage and mimicry is thus wide-
spread in animal perception of their environment, just as it is ubiquitous in human 
cognition – so much so that it is usually simply taken for granted as the basic per-
ceptual automatism underling both our innate and learned responses to environ-
ment. For Terrence Deacon, as earlier for Peirce, iconic representation lies at “the 
bottom of the interpretive hierarchy,” as “the base on which all other forms of rep-
resentation are built” (Deacon 1977:  77). On top of this automatic iconic (re-
)cognition the meta-thinking humans also have at their disposal other, more ad-
vanced cognitive faculties linked to reflexive consciousness, the extended working 
memory, and the resulting perception of the flow of time. While animal iconic 
communication is rigidly programmed by the genes and refers to a few adaptively 
important contiguous situations, the cognitively more fluid humans use iconic rec-
ognition to code consciously observed and remembered knowledge about the 
world both in material artefacts such as tools and works of art, and in language. In 
this way in the course of human evolution instinctive mimicry has given rise to 
conscious imitation, and later to metainformational mimesis, as in representation-
al art, which codes information referring to objects and events displaced in space 
and time.
Imitation is one of the most basic and relatively unsophisticated ways of learn-
ing new things, especially practical skills, but it still requires the human-type con-
sciousness and extended working memory that for example the apes, our nearest 
animal cousins, appear to lack. The verb “to ape,” describing mindless copying, is 
actually misleading, because the apes are not really good at imitating behaviour: 
humans are much better at aping than the apes themselves. In fact, some prima-
tologists argue that even chimpanzees, the highest apes, cannot imitate – all that 
happens is that their attention is drawn to certain objects and then learning takes 
place on a trial-and-error basis (Mithen 1999a: 77). The apes’ inability to imitate 
objects, actions, or behaviours explains why they cannot produce iconic, pictorial 
representations, even in experimental conditions. The psychologist Desmond 
Morris presents the results of research with chimpanzees, gorillas, orang-utans, 

 From Interaction to Symbol
and capuchin monkeys producing drawings and paintings. During research the 
animals received no assistance or guidance from the experimenters, except for the 
provision of and familiarization with the drawing or painting equipment. The ani-
mals received no reward for picture-making, and the response was – reports Mor-
ris – not only self-rewarding but very powerful in many cases. Some of the chim-
panzees produced between 200 and 400 pictures. The painting techniques included 
a tendency to fill a blank page, but not to scribble outside it; a tendency to mark a 
central figure; a tendency to balance an offset figure; a tendency to become calli-
graphically bolder as time went on, starting with simple lines and changing them 
into multiple scribbles. However, no ape has been able to develop graphically to 
the pictorial stage of even the simplest representation. While clearly in possession 
of primary representations of the world around them (the concepts corresponding 
iconically with the familiar objects and situations), the apes are incapable of re-
membering and reproducing these concepts in displaced secondary representa-
tions such as those found universally in human art. As Morris’ experiments have 
revealed, drawing and painting are for the apes a form of play – a self-rewarding 
activity that unleashes surplus nervous energy, keeping the animal mentally and 
physically healthy, probably not unlike the sensations felt by modern, Jackson 
Pollock-style artists producing their abstract paintings (Morris 1962: 141).
Conscious imitation (in contrast to animal mimicry acquired through natural 
selection) appears therefore to be limited to humans. It is an important cognitive 
adaptation enabling humans to learn quickly and accurately new, non-genetically 
transmitted knowledge and skills, and as such it is an essential component of the 
development of culture (Workman and Reader 2004: 358, 369). In this the human 
capacity to imitate is fundamentally, if not uniquely different from what has been 
observed in all other animals, including other primates. As said above, nonhuman 
primates raised under natural conditions have provided no convincing evidence of 
imitation. At the same time imitation is probably the most powerful pre-linguistic 
learning mechanism among humans, because it enables individuals to accurately 
reproduce a particular motor action in the absence of a demonstrator (Hauser 
1998: 650). Imitation thus understood is clearly a function of extended working 
memory: to imitate means to be able to perceive a motor action, store it as a men-
tal representation, and then repeat the motor act observed in the absence of the 
original performer. It is the basic mechanism of transmitting new information 
rapidly and faithfully within a human population. Culture understood as a non-
genetic transmission of knowledge is therefore only possible in organisms that 
exhibit an imitative capacity based on memory. According to Marc D. Hauser, 
even before the appearance of syntactic speech imitation must have represented a 
fundamental step in cognitive sophistication, one with far-reaching implications 
for human culture and communicative faculties (Hauser 1998: 651).

	
Chapter 7.  From mimicry to metaphor	 
Mimetic culture
According to Merlin Donald the modern human mind evolved from the primate 
mind through a series of major adaptations, each of which led to the emergence of 
a new representational system. Donald argues that each successive representation-
al system has remained intact within our current mental architecture, so that the 
modern mind is a mosaic structure of cognitive vestiges from earlier stages of hu-
man phylogenesis (Donald 1991: 2; 2001: 3–15). First in his evolutionary model of 
culture Donald includes what he calls “episodic culture,” which humans inherited 
from their ape ancestors, and which in my classification of types of communica-
tion appears to correspond with contiguous interactions with the environment. 
Episodic culture (if “culture” is indeed the appropriate term) relied on direct com-
munication with the environment, in which symptomatic representations of body 
language and emotive vocalizations were verified with direct reference to adap-
tively relevant objects and events (which meant that episodic culture did not in-
volve spatio-temporally displaced referents). The fixation on contiguous stimuli 
and absence of collective memory also meant that the episodic culture of our an-
cestors showed a very slow rate of change: it took Homo erectus (1.8 million-300,000 
years ago) half a million years to domesticate fire, and three-quarters of a million 
years to adapt to colder climates (Donald 1991: 210).
The first major transition, according to Donald, introduced what he calls “mi-
metic culture,” characteristic for late Homo erectus. In Donald’s view mimesis (or 
imitation in my sense) offered the first if primitive form of displaced representa-
tion, still tied closely to concrete, episodic culture. It did not, as far as archaeo-
logical record can tell, involve the invention of iconic artistic artefacts, still less of 
arbitrary symbols. The mimetic representation involved mostly bodily signals and 
emotive vocalizations of the kind discussed in Chapter 4 as delayed, that is, already 
displaced reactions to or re-enactments of adaptively important events: emotions 
such as triumph or anger expressed immediately after the event through postures, 
facial expressions, gestures, and sounds mimicking the event.
Despite the advantage of referential displacement, mimetic culture was in many 
respects a less efficient form of representation than the later syntactic, symbolic 
language (see Chapter 10), because it was slow-moving, ambiguous, still restricted 
to a concrete event or specific subject matter, and conservative. But even with these 
limitations iconic, imitative representations did contribute to the spread of practi-
cal skills such as tool production. Iconic representations can in fact be even more 
efficient than symbolic language in diffusing certain kinds of knowledge, as in 
modelling social roles, communicating emotions, and transmitting rudimentary 
skills used in crafts. This is why it is easier to teach someone how to set an animal 
trap or how to make a flint axe through visual demonstration than through purely 

 From Interaction to Symbol
verbal instruction. For the same reason it is easier to learn how to operate computer 
programmes such as Word by using small icons displayed on the screen, rather 
than by learning arbitrary mathematical codes or by following linguistic commands 
(Barker 2000: 15). The iconic signs we click on or drag across the computer screen 
visually resemble the functions they control, and their use requires quick and easy 
learning based largely on innate perceptive automatisms rather than on symbolic 
codes requiring concentrated and conscious mental effort.
Iconic, visual instructions and demonstrations are still used today in situa-
tions in which safety or survival depend on the speed and accuracy in communi-
cating relevant information, as in leaflets and cards familiar to us from air travels, 
which contain pictorial instructions about what to do in an emergency. The un-
derstanding of these images is no doubt vastly facilitated by the addition of verbal 
explanations, and even more so by live, visual demonstrations by cabin personnel, 
but verbal, that is, symbolic explanation alone would not be as efficient in com-
municating certain practical instructions quickly and accurately. In pictorial in-
structions words are kept to the minimum, not only for the benefit of people un-
familiar with the language but also because iconic instruction, through pictures or 
better still through live, bodily and gestural demonstration, is didactically more 
efficient, because based on more archaic perceptive and cognitive predispositions. 
Ernst H. Gombrich sums up the problem commonsensically: “In real life, the per-
formance of a particular task is usually learned by imitation and trial and error. 
You are shown how to ride a bicycle and then you try it until you get the hang of 
it. Whether you can verbalize, let alone illustrate, the necessary movements is an-
other matter” (Gombrich 1999: 229). According to Merlin Donald, mimetic skills 
led to a variety of important social structures, including a collectively held model 
of the society itself. They also provided a new vehicle for social control and co-
ordination, as well as the cognitive underpinnings of pedagogical skills, especially 
those related to tool making, hunting and crafts. Mimetic culture was a successful 
and stable adaptation, a communicative survival strategy for hominids that en-
dured over a million years (Donald 1991: 198).
Steven Mithen also stresses that imitative skills have been a key ingredient of 
culture throughout history, as evidenced today by children, who are spontane-
ously apt at imitating the behaviour of others. Early human hunters would simi-
larly act out the roles of animals, mimicking their sounds and movements. Per-
forming mimes of animals is pervasive among modern hunter-gatherers as part of 
their hunting practices and religious rituals. As has been observed, hunter-gather-
ers stalk their game in silence, and visual mimicry is often the only effective way of 
communication (in addition to conventional, arbitrary or partly iconic signs made 
with the hands for example) (Mithen 2005: 168). People can be mimicked as well 

	
Chapter 7.  From mimicry to metaphor	 
as animals, as in fighting or sporting pantomimes, still used in martial arts and by 
boys pretending to be David Beckhams on a football field.
As I demonstrated in Chapter 4, early indexical culture was focused on the 
human body and its modifications and adornments. It can be speculated that ear-
ly iconic, or mimetic culture was likewise focused primarily on the human body, 
now used as an instrument to imitate, through ritual pantomime, other people, 
animals, inanimate elements of the natural environment, and possibly supernatu-
ral beings. The body-based iconic culture could lead in time to conceptual anthro-
pomorphization of the entire world, including the cosmos, a feature attested in 
probably all archaic cultures. Ascribing mental states to inanimate objects, as in 
believing that trees, springs, rocks hills and so on have spirits, is one of the remark-
able characteristics of the human mind (Dunbar 2005:  53). Modern humans 
(Homo sapiens, from about 170,000 years ago) universally reason about the natu-
ral world as if it were a social being. For example, a hunting-gathering tribe of the 
Mbuti in Zaire conceive of the forest as “parent,” and as a “giving” environment. 
The landscapes of modern hunter-gatherers do not consist merely of animals, 
plants, trees, rivers, rocks and caves: they are socially constructed through per-
sonification of all non-human environmental features. In this way the natural, so-
cial, and psychological domains became intimately connected by a system of anal-
ogies based on the human body and cognition, the phenomenon that Steven 
Mithen interprets in terms of human cognitive fluidity, which enables our species 
to integrate mental modules from different experiential domains, here social life 
and natural history (Mithen 1999a: 47, 49, 166).
From imitation to mimesis
What distinguishes Homo sapiens from other primate species is not only the abil-
ity to imitate and to think in terms of resemblances and analogies, but even more 
so the faculty of consciousness based on extended working memory. All animals 
are capable of generating primary representations of the part of the environment 
available to them, and posses what the psychologist Gerald Edelman calls “pri-
mary consciousness” – a state of being aware of things in the world, of having 
mental images cued in to the present, but without any sense of past or future. Hu-
mans are the only species to have at their disposal what Edelman calls “higher-
order consciousness,” or what is referred to by psychologists and philosophers 
simply as “consciousness,” which involves the recognition of one’s own acts and 
affections, and embodies a model of the past and future as well as the present 
(Edelman 1992; Lewis-Williams 2004: 188). Thus understood consciousness ena-
bles us to use memory to fashion our own individual identities and mental “scenes” 

 From Interaction to Symbol
of past, present, and future events, and to share those scenes socially both through 
language and through other forms of communication involving displaced refer-
ents such as permanent secondary iconic images, what we call art, as collective 
memory aids coding socially important knowledge about the world. From an 
adaptive viewpoint one would also predict that the first iconic artefacts should be 
focused on subject matter related to human survival: hunting, as the main source 
of highly nutritious food, and fertility, which is indeed what we find in the earliest 
visual art of our hunting-gathering ancestors.
The human higher-order consciousness is thus responsible for two things: the 
fact that – uniquely in the animal kingdom – we are capable of creating and com-
municating secondary images recorded on durable materials, and that these im-
ages, by virtue of their permanency, refer to objects and events displaced in time 
and space. The earliest attested art works come from Europe of the Upper Palaeo-
lithic period (approximately 35,000–10,000 years ago), when modern humans still 
co-existed in the same environment with Homo neanderthalensis, the famed “Ne-
anderthal Man,” a more primitive human species that did not make art and had a 
much simpler tool kit than their cognitively more advanced Homo sapiens (Lewis-
Williams 2004: 39). It is by comparison with the Neanderthals that it is possible to 
appreciate fully the Upper Palaeolithic cultural revolution that the human higher-
level consciousness was able to produce. As argued by the paleoethnologist David 
Lewis-Williams, the Neanderthals had at their disposal developed imitative skills, 
which placed them above the other primates, but they had no iconic or symbolic 
culture, which placed them below modern humans. They could use red ochre and 
a range of body adornments that they may have imitated after the Homo sapiens, 
which means that they possessed indexical culture based on ornamental exten-
sions of their bodies, but they were not able, in the absence of higher-level con-
sciousness, to imitate the permanent pictures and carvings produced by modern 
humans (Lewis-Williams 2004: 90).
An important archaeological index of fully human cognitive faculties is the 
presence of burials, as they presuppose an extended working memory, with the 
resulting concept of the future and the possible idea of an afterlife. Burial practices 
are among the human universals, and Steven Mithen assumes that the Neander-
thals too buried their dead, at least some of them (Mithen 2005: 225). David Lewis-
Williams is more cautious, arguing that the archaeological evidence for Neander-
thal burial practices is often questionable. It is true that many Neanderthal 
skeletons have been found complete, which may indicate that they were deliber-
ately placed in the ground and thus protected from human, animal, and physical 
factors that would otherwise have scattered the bones. Still, argues Lewis-Williams, 
the presence of articulated skeletons is not in itself a conclusive proof that Nean-
derthal burials were intentional, because certain natural depositional circumstances 

	
Chapter 7.  From mimicry to metaphor	 
can also produce the same effect. The evidence for Neanderthal grave goods, or 
“offerings,” is also “unquestionably weak” to Lewis-Williams. His sceptical conclu-
sion is that “it seems likely that some comparatively late Neanderthals may have 
buried their dead, though there is little evidence in any of these burials to suggest 
ritual or religious beliefs; burial alone might have been done for hygienic reasons 
if people did not wish to abandon a rock shelter in which someone had died” 
(Lewis-Williams 2004: 81). Lewis-Williams’ scepticism is echoed by the archaeol-
ogist Iain Davidson, who likewise finds no evidence that any Neanderthals buried 
their dead (Davidson 2003: 154). This conclusion ties in logically with the appar-
ent absence of fully human consciousness in the Neanderthals, which precludes 
cultural memory, including the notion of an afterlife or religion. Out of the ques-
tion is also the spatio-temporal displacement of referents found abundantly in hu-
man iconic and linguistic communication. This means that even if the Neander-
thals saw the cave paintings executed by humans, not only would they not 
understand what the images represented, but they most probably would not have 
been able to recognize them as “paintings” at all, or as anything distinct from the 
surface of the rock. For similar reasons (absence of consciousness and the inability 
to understand displaced reference) animals, with their stereoscopic, three-dimen-
sional vision, are incapable of perceiving two-dimensional images such as paint-
ings as representations of solid objects. The stories about sparrows coming to peck 
at the grapes painted by the Greek Zeuxis, designed to emphasize the life-like nat-
uralism of the paintings, must otherwise remain purely anecdotal (Gombrich 
1982: 286; Arnheim 1974: 136). Likewise, human syntactic speech would have 
sounded to the Neanderthals as purely emotive and iconic vocalizations, of the 
kind the Neanderthals themselves probably used, but the possibility that these vo-
calizations could refer to things not currently present in the speakers’ vicinity 
would simply not have occurred to them (Mithen 2005: 221, 226–228, 234).
The type of consciousness that the Neanderthals appear to have possessed was 
therefore different in important respects from that of the Upper Palaeolithic Homo 
sapiens, a difference that decisively precluded, for the Neanderthals, both image-
making and elaborate burials. Because of the neurological structure of their brains 
and the type of consciousness that that structure allowed, the Neanderthals were 
unable to remember and entertain mental imagery, and were consequently unable 
to socialize and store that imagery in external artefacts, which is so fundamental 
to human culture. By contrast, the fully human higher-order consciousness, with 
its capacity for meta-thinking, includes the ability to entertain mental images, to 
generate mental images in various states of consciousness, from waking to vision-
ary states, to recall those images, to discuss them with other people within an ac-
cepted ideological framework, and to make pictures of mental images in the form 
of permanent, material secondary representations coding the socially shared 

 From Interaction to Symbol
knowledge of the world. The combined capacity for meta-thinking and the ex-
tended working memory also enabled early humans to plan actions with reference 
to abstract concepts not limited in time and space, a cognitive capacity likewise 
unavailable to the Neanderthals.
Once making permanent secondary images was cognitively possible, their 
production and use must have given their practitioners an evolutionary edge over 
ecological competitors such as the Neanderthals, who did not produce and use 
permanent images. The severe demands of hunting-gathering lifestyle of the Up-
per Palaeolithic probably did not allow for purely superfluous activities such as 
“art for art’s sake,” despite the “aesthetic” pleasure that creating and also looking at 
pictures must have produced, as even evidenced by the excitement experienced by 
the apes taught to draw and paint (Morris 1962: 141–145). The pleasure-principle 
involved in all artistic activities (in visual arts as well as in music) for producers 
and recipients alike can be viewed in terms of proximate and ultimate causes as 
distinguished by evolutionary science. The proximate cause motivates a particular 
action in an individual, usually through pleasant sensation, as in eating, socializ-
ing, having sex, playing or listening to music and so on. The ultimate causation on 
the other hand explains the innate character of the pleasure associated with these 
activities, which in our evolutionary past have increased the likelihood of human 
survival and procreation (Workman and Reader 2004: 2, 176). Ultimate causation 
thus generates the proximate causes, although among the conscious humans it is 
possible in certain circumstances to engage in pleasurable activities only for the 
sake of the accompanying pleasure, and not to fulfil the activity’s evolutionary 
function, as in using contraception to enjoy sex for recreation rather than for pro-
creation. Similarly with art: whatever its original evolutionary significance, pro-
ducing works of art and contemplating them are usually sources of considerable 
pleasure, cognitive rather than physiological, for those involved.
The birth of pictorial realism
What kind of meaning did the first permanent images communicate? The evolu-
tionary perspective indicates that the earliest durable secondary visual representa-
tions of art should be closely linked to the lifestyle of the prehistoric hunters, who 
were interested primarily in chasing large game to obtain high-protein meat, in 
avoiding predators, and naturally in procreating to ensure inter-generational sur-
vival. The available archaeological evidence shows that the Upper Palaeolithic art 
was indeed part of the social exchange of information about objects and situations 
in the hunter-gatherers’ environment related to the above problems and challenges.

	
Chapter 7.  From mimicry to metaphor	 
The best-known and most spectacular examples of early iconic culture are the 
Upper Palaeolithic cave paintings discovered in southern France and northern 
Spain, but there are grounds to suspect that the earliest permanent visual repre-
sentations yet to come to light were not two-dimensional paintings or carvings, 
but three-dimensional sculpture. As we remember, the first human material arte-
facts, and for about two million years the only ones, were stone tools, and possibly 
wooden and bone implements which disintegrated over time. The immemorial 
practice of stone-knapping thus provided the necessary motor skills for carving, 
whereas painting on flat or curved surfaces probably began much later, following 
the indexical body decorations discussed in Chapter 4. It is possible therefore that 
with the appearance of fully human consciousness the need to create external 
iconic representations was first fulfilled by sculpture based on carving skills al-
ready well developed for hundreds of thousands of years, rather than by a newer 
and perceptually more abstract two-dimensional painting.
To date, the earliest three-dimensional imagery, from about 35,000–32,000 
years ago, was found in Geissenklösterle and in Vogelherd in southern Germany. 
These are statuettes only about five cm long, nearly all of them carved from mam-
moth ivory, sometimes from mammoth bone. The small size of the pieces no doubt 
testifies to their portable nature, in keeping with the nomadic lifestyle of prehis-
toric hunter-gatherers. The statuettes are realistic representations of animals, in-
cluding in the order of frequency felines, mammoths, anthropomorphic represen-
tations of animals, bison, bears and horses. The realism of representation suggests 
the instructive purpose – to help identify the species – while the choice of animals 
appears to reflect the main preoccupations of the Upper Palaeolithic hunters: 
avoidance of danger, hence the predominance of representations of large felines, 
human main animal foes, and hunting big game as the chief source of nutritious 
food, as represented by the other animal species. Other portable artefacts from the 
period, found in France, comprise similar small realistic sculptures, including a 
spear-thrower carved in the shape of a leaping horse (from Bruniguel, Tarn-et-
Garoune), another spear-thrower carved in the form of an ibex looking over its 
shoulder (from Mas d’Azil, Ariège), and a mammoth ivory carving of a bison ap-
parently licking its flank (from La Madeleine, Dordogne). All are small, decorated 
objects that the prehistoric hunter-gatherers would have carried around with 
them. Many of these pieces bear engraved or carved images of other animals, fish, 
birds, and sometimes what looks like half-human half-animal figures (Lewis-
Williams 2004: 26, 197).
Iconic sculpture, precisely by virtue of its three-dimensional solidity, is more 
realistic and therefore more iconic than painting, whose flatness always involves 
some degree of non-iconic abstraction and conventionality. For stereoscopic vi-
sion natural perception is three-dimensional, which means that a realistic sculpture 

 From Interaction to Symbol
is more iconic, more like the original in rendering both the outline, shape and 
solidity of the represented object. As the anthropologist Edward Hall also points 
out, sculpture is a tactile and kinaesthetic medium as well as a visual one, while 
painting is mostly visual, and tactile sensations involved in producing and han-
dling sculpture are evolutionarily older and therefore more “natural” (Hall 
1966: 77). Compared with realistic, solid, three-dimensional sculpture, the ability 
to paint two-dimensional figures that disregard the conformations of the surface 
they are painted on, and to recognize their correspondence with real figures (ani-
mals or humans) must have been a momentous development in prehistoric art, 
completed by the representation of the third dimension in the form of rudimen-
tary perspective (e.g. an overlap of legs to indicate that one is behind the other). 
The anthropologist John Halverson likewise argues that the earliest works of art 
must have been three-dimensional sculptures; the next step would be high and 
low relief, engraving and incising; and finally, in the Upper Palaeolithic, two-di-
mensional painting, the medium that for technical reasons is less realistic and 
more abstract than sculpture (Halverson 1987: 66).
This would mean that the prehistoric cave paintings, such as those found in 
Chauvet and Lascaux, ancient as they are, probably do not represent the absolute 
beginnings of art. As Ernst H. Gombrich observes, the cave paintings are too con-
trolled and too deliberate, and must have been preceded by thousands of years of 
image-making, mostly probably carved (Gombrich 2003: 91; Donald 1991: 278). 
The paintings also combine relief, and in many cases the natural unevenness of the 
rock surface may have suggested the outline of the animal superimposed upon it. 
Moreover, cave images were not only painted but also carved on the walls to create 
bas-reliefs. One of the most intriguing techniques was to use a natural rock fold, a 
crack or step to provide the outline of an animal’s body, while a few strokes of paint 
would then supply the missing parts (Lewis-Williams 2004: 28). Whenever possi-
ble therefore, the uneven rock surface would be availed of to create the effect of 
solidity and three-dimensionality, perceptually more “natural” than flat paintings.
The remarkable realism of cave art suggests its primarily communicative and 
instructive function – to encourage and facilitate the comparison between the im-
ages and their real-life equivalents: predators to be avoided and game animals to 
be pursued. It is possible therefore to view the prehistoric art primarily in the con-
text of pictorial representations disseminating practical knowledge contributing 
both to survival and to the efficiency and success of hunting. Indeed, in harmony 
with the portable sculpture, the dominant theme in cave art, uniformly in Asia, 
Europe, and Australia, is the hunt, rendered with remarkable realism, focusing on 
the vital man-weapon-animal relationship. Given also the propensity of the hu-
man mind, all the more so in prehistory, to identify an iconic image with the object 
it represents, it can be surmised that the purpose of cave art was also utilitarian in 

	
Chapter 7.  From mimicry to metaphor	 
a magical sense – both to depict the hunt by instructing in its technique, and to 
exercise “control” over the depicted animals by a process of homeopathic magic 
(Morris 1962: 146).
As said earlier, the oldest caves painted with images of animals and anthropo-
morphic figures found in southwest Europe date to about 32,000 years ago, and 
one of the most spectacular is the cave in Chauvet in the Ardêche region of France, 
discovered in 1994. The cave contains over 300 paintings of animals: rhinoceroses, 
lions, reindeer, mammoths, horses, bison, bears, and an owl, many of them highly 
naturalistic, even depicted in action: one bison has seven or eight legs, as if to 
evoke movement, while other animals appear to be stalking or running. Some 
animals are rendered in perspective or shaded for relief, and many are executed 
with great detail, including eyes, ears, nostrils, and mouth. The overwhelming ma-
jority of the species represented are either hunted animals or dangerous animals, 
that is, all crucial to the survival of hunting-gathering groups (Chauvet and 
Deschamps 1996: 104–110, 114). Other Upper Palaeolithic caves with paintings, 
such as Altamira or Lascaux, reveal a similar preoccupation with hunting, often 
with scenes showing spears and arrows embedded in the bodies of the prey. Some 
drawings depict men dancing in animal disguises standing with heads bowed in 
front of animals. One suspects that the cave paintings had a similar psychological 
purpose to that identified in Chapter 5 for photography: to create a sense of con-
trol, reassuring if illusory, over the represented objects, here hunted or dangerous 
animals, both important to the existence of prehistoric hunter-gatherers. Both the 
act of painting and of contemplating the images would encourage, following the 
principle of homeopathic magic, an identification of the image with its real-life 
original, whereby what is done with the image would come to pass with the real 
thing (Wilson 1978: 172).
The other major theme of prehistoric art, of equal importance to the life of 
hunter-gatherers, is fertility, reflected in countless drawings and sculptures of the 
female figure, usually with great emphasis placed upon the breasts and reproduc-
tive organs (Donald 1991: 281). The archaeologist André Leroi-Gourhan surmises 
that not just individual images but entire cave settings represented spatially the 
theme of fertility as centred on male-female dichotomy. Leroi-Gourhan finds the 
human female represented metonymically by a vulva, the breasts, the belly, the 
pelvic region, or the thighs with a pubic triangle, often situated in the central area 
of the compositions, alone or accompanied by large herbivores, which 
Leroi-Gourhan interprets as “female” animals, including species such as the bison 
or the mammoth. On the other hand representations of the human male are more 
numerous and more varied in character, and include profile silhouettes, ithyphallic 
figures, isolated phalluses, or faces in frontal or profile view. Their topographical 
position is in nearly all cases at the back of the caves or on the periphery of a 

 From Interaction to Symbol
central composition, that is, inversely to the location of the female figures. 
Leroi-Gourhan also observes that the male human figures occur in the vicinity of 
what he interprets as “male” animal species, such as horses, ibexes, and stags. Inte-
gral to the cave representations is also the metonymic iconicity of the phallus-like 
spear and the vulva-like wound: icons of sexual union and of death, of the cycle of 
life’s renewal, the actors of which would form two parallel and complementary se-
ries, including man/horse/spear, and woman/bison/wound (Leroi-Gourhan 
1968: 113).
Incidentally, by focusing on the main distinguishing anatomic differences, the 
Palaeolithic metonymic icons for men and women, the phallus-like and vulva-like 
patterns respectively, seem more natural and universally recognizable than, say, 
today’s more conventionalized toilet door signs used in the West, in the form of a 
schematized icon of the whole human figure in two variants: one with forked, 
separate legs indicating trousers for men, and the other with a skirt, indicating 
women. Here the sexual differentiation is not based on natural anatomical fea-
tures, but on cultural, conventional, and generalized gender differentiation that 
works even in societies where some men wear kilts and many women wear trou-
sers. Despite this culturally biased generalization, iconic signs for men and wom-
en, like many other iconic signs used today, such as traffic signs, are more easily 
learned and more intelligible, if only because they ignore language barriers 
(Sassoon and Gaur 1997; King 2000: 20).
In Leroi-Gourhan’s model the entire cave can thus be seen as an iconic repre-
sentation of the female body, the fact that would explain, he suggests, why the 
caves’ narrow passages, oval-shaped areas, clefts and smaller cavities are often 
marked in red, even sometimes painted entirely in red. These particular topo-
graphic features are also marked with signs from the male set, which thereby be-
come complementary. In this way all of Upper Palaeolithic figurative art can be 
viewed as an early expression of iconic culture, one that combines the specifically 
human imitative capacity with the need to produce durable external vehicles of 
cultural knowledge, focused on themes most crucial to the life of early hunting-
gathering societies, or indeed of any society: nourishment, survival and procrea-
tion. Although not all caves conform, or conform neatly, to Leroi-Gourhan’s sys-
tems of binary male/female oppositions, Lewis-Williams regards his hypothesis of 
the patterning of the caves’ iconography as correct in the main (Lewis-Williams 
2004: 65). Whatever the specifics concerning the distribution and ordering of the 
“male” and “female” elements in the caves, the themes of fertility and survival that 
Leroi-Gourhan insists on in his structuralist model are also exactly what one 
would expect from an evolutionary point of view.
For Terrence Deacon in turn the Upper Palaeolithic cave paintings give us the 
first irrefutable and direct expression of a cognitive process that is capable of 

	
Chapter 7.  From mimicry to metaphor	 
conveying a rich cultural heritage of images and probably of verbal stories handed 
down from generation to generation. (Deacon refers to the Upper Palaeolithic cul-
ture as “symbolic,” although its imitative, figurative character, at least in visual arts, 
makes “iconic” a more appropriate description, “symbolic” being reserved for arbi-
trary, conventional signs, such as those used in syntactic language.) The cave paint-
ings are also the first concrete evidence of the storage of culturally important icon-
ic information outside the human brain. They mark a change in the structure of 
human cultures by providing evidence of the use of media that have persisted to the 
present (Deacon 1997: 374). Steven Mithen also emphasizes the fact that during the 
Upper Palaeolithic for the first time in human history material culture became a 
means by which the mind was extended beyond the biological limits imposed by 
the brain itself. Together with syntactic speech – which probably developed at the 
same time – the material artefacts extended the mind by allowing ideas to migrate 
between minds, hence enabling new ideas to be developed which could never have 
emerged from a single mind alone. An index of society that created it, material 
culture provides therefore a form of non-biological memory, by preserving ideas 
that could only have a transient existence in the mind. As Mithen puts it:
In little more than 50,000 years, by having “given up” their near-total reliance on 
the brain alone, humans have mentally evolved from having thoughts about no 
more than stone tools and acquiring food, to having thoughts about subjects no 
less that the origins of the Universe and the nature of the human mind itself 
(Mithen 2000: 217).
For Merlin Donald on the other hand the early iconic culture was simply a missing 
cognitive link between the apes and humans. Iconic (or mimetic in Donald’s ter-
minology) culture predates in his view symbolic language, and can still be found 
in such cultural activities as trades and crafts, games, athletics, in many art forms, 
in the theatre, especially pantomime, and in most of social ritual. As a pre-linguis-
tic ability iconic expression is primarily visual-motor; it is used in the acquisition 
and transmission of skills basic to child rearing, tool making, co-operative gather-
ing and hunting, the sharing of food, constructing and sharing a shelter, express-
ing social hierarchies and so on (Donald 1991: 162, 167, 177). The pre-symbolic 
iconic representations of the Upper Palaeolithic art must have played a similar role 
in social education, especially of the young hunters, in which oral instruction into 
hunting techniques was aided by visual icons, not unlike in today’s classrooms 
with their overhead projectors and other audio-visual aids.

 From Interaction to Symbol
Fantastic representations
The predominantly realistic representations of cave art are complemented by a 
small number of fantastic images which, interestingly, relate not to animals but to 
humans, whose images are not only comparatively rare but are also consistently 
non-realistic, involving a visionary combination of anthropomorphic and zoomor-
phic features. The rarity of human iconic representations is surprising, given the 
working of the postulated innate social modules, including the face-recognition 
module, which ought to prioritize secondary representations of humans over ani-
mals. In Chauvet for instance there is not a single image of a complete human 
figure, although there is a number of “signatures” in the form of negative and pos-
itive hand prints – personal indexes most probably of people who produced the 
cave paintings. As noted earlier, in other caves there are numerous metonymic 
representations of male and female human figures, focused on the reproductive 
organs and implying the theme of fertility. As Leroi-Gourhan also points out, there 
is a limited number of schematic representations of complete male bodies, often in 
tragic situations. In Lascaux there is a painting of a man lying on the ground, with 
arms outstretched, in front of a wounded bison, while in the cave of Le Péchialet 
there is a similar scene of a man lying on the ground, apparently struck by a bear’s 
paw (Leroi-Gourhan 1968: 131). Unlike in the images of animals, so naturalistic 
and detailed as to enable the viewer, then as today, to identify the species, the rep-
resentations of the human figures are schematic and generic, focusing not so much 
on individual identity, still less on the personality of the figure, as on adaptively 
important types of situations involving fertility, danger, and survival.
The oldest anthropomorphic art work on archaeological record is the ivory 
statuette from Hohlenstein-Stadel in southern Germany, dated to about 33,000–
30,000 years ago, showing a man with a lion’s head, carved from the tusk of a mam-
moth (Mithen 1999b: 155; Lewis-Williams 2004: 202). Among the most debated 
Upper Palaeolithic cave paintings is also the outline figure of an ithyphallic man 
from Lascaux (the only anthropomorphic figure in this cave), who appears to be 
falling backwards, his arms spread out. The most remarkable thing about this man 
is that he has a bird’s head and four-fingered bird-like hands, which would suggest 
that the figure is bird from the waist up and human from the waist down. Lewis-
Williams interprets this image as representing a shaman transformed into his 
bird-like spirit helper at the moment of death, his erect phallus suggesting the role 
that shamans play in the fertility of their communities (Lewis-Williams 2004: 264). 
In the cave of Trois-Frères in France there is also a painted anthropomorphic fig-
ure of a “sorcerer,” with an upright posture, with human legs and hands, with the 
back and ears of a herbivore, the antlers of a reindeer, the tail of a horse, and a 
phallus positioned like that of a feline. The composite nature of this anthropomorphic 

	
Chapter 7.  From mimicry to metaphor	 
figure seems to result from what Steven Mithen describes as the cognitive fluidity 
of early humans, who were able to make mental connections across different expe-
riential domains and associated types of intelligences, here related to social life 
and natural history (Mithen 1999a: 164). Cognitive fluidity thus understood also 
illustrates another step in iconic thinking that goes beyond realistic, faithful repre-
sentation of what is actually there in the natural world. The Palaeolithic artists who 
painted the “sorcerer” and other composite figures brought together a number of 
realistic elements observed in humans and several animals, and created a fantastic, 
combined image of a creature that has no original outside the artist’s mind.
Such meta-icons, consisting of isolated realistic (that is, referential) elements 
found in different objects, and combined into non-realistic representations will 
become common in the art of the Neolithic, Bronze and Iron Age civilizations, to 
continue until modern times in folklore and fantasy genres, giving rise to dragons, 
satyrs, sphinxes, griffins, the Pegasus, centaurs, mermaids, unicorns, werewolves 
and other monsters. The particular meanings of such fantastic creatures can be 
described in terms of metainformation arrived at by combining the primary mean-
ings, or parainformation, normally attached to the real objects in their original 
contexts, and creating a new, more conceptual and abstract meta-meaning. For 
example, the Greek Pegasus, or the winged horse, combines the anatomical fea-
tures of a domesticated mammal used for draught work and riding with the wings 
of a bird, to create a fantastic meta-animal that can carry its rider as fast as the 
flight of a bird over land and in the air – an ancient version of James Bond’s super-
car doubling as a private aeroplane.
The relative scarcity of human figures in cave art is also surprising given the 
anthropomorphic way of thinking of early humans, which would suggest not only 
a strong interest in the human figure, but also a tendency to endow non-human 
elements of the environment, both animate and inanimate, with human-like qual-
ities. As I mentioned earlier, anthropomorphization of the natural and cosmic en-
vironments is in itself a spectacular example of iconic thinking, and appears to be 
universal among humans, including the prehistoric hunters. Steven Mithen sug-
gests that projecting human qualities onto the natural environment was a useful 
adaptive illusion, in that it could substantially improve the hunters’ prediction of 
animal behaviour (Mithen 1999a: 166). Anthropomorphic thinking still pervades 
our everyday lives, as evidenced for example by a habit of attributing human feel-
ings, purposes, and intentions to pet animals. Ancient fables, that is, stories in 
which animals think and act like humans, as well as modern animated cartoons 
full of speaking animals also exploit our compulsive anthropomorphization of 
animals, first attested in prehistoric art.

 From Interaction to Symbol
Iconic roots of metaphors
The ability to make associations across different mental and experiential domains 
(psychological, social, biological, physical) facilitated by human cognitive fluidity, 
combined with iconic, or imitative thinking, is what enables us to draw analogies 
and create metaphors, visual or verbal. For example, to call a boxer “the raging 
bull,” as in Martin Scorsese’s film from 1980, does not imply of course that the 
boxer is literally a bull, despite the affirmative mode of the expression, which seems 
to establish an illusory identity between the two: what the title of the film is really 
implying is that the boxer is like a raging bull. The metaphor here is an instance of 
iconic thinking: it draws on an analogy, or comparison, between two otherwise 
different objects, the representatives of humanity and of the animal kingdom re-
spectively, which are brought together because of certain perceived common traits, 
such as physical strength, ferocity, determination and so on.
For Pascal Boyer metaphor is similarly motivated by the actual dissimilarity 
and perceived tension between the subjectively associated terms, as when calling a 
devious person (a human being) a “snake” (an animal). Listeners or readers of the 
Bible, or viewers of a painted Biblical serpent designed to represent “evil” obvi-
ously do not literally identify a human (or a human-like figure such as Satan) with 
a reptile species, but the imagined analogy between generically different objects in 
a metaphor is what sustains our attention and stimulates our imagination. The 
inherent incompatibility (due to lack of identity) between compared objects is also 
what, according to Boyer, accounts for the vagueness and elusiveness of meta-
phors, especially of so-called religious symbols, with their “superficial brilliance 
and hidden vagueness,” which is “both persuasive and question-begging,” by “sug-
gesting a lot but demonstrating very little” (Boyer 1994: 53). The meaning of icon-
ic visual signs is more quickly and more easily if intuitively identified than the 
meaning of arbitrary symbols of language, but iconic signs also tend to be more 
ambiguous than verbal language, which may explain the preference for iconic im-
ages in magic and divination, where they are designed to create deliberately vague 
and oracular meanings (King 2000: 21).
Incidentally, what we call religious symbols are not really “symbols” in the 
semiotic sense of entirely conventional, arbitrary signs; “religious icons” would be 
a more appropriate term, but again not in the historic sense of images of saints and 
other holy personages worshiped in the Eastern Orthodox Church. Religious signs 
such as the cross or the lotus, the signs of good luck such as the horseshoe, the sign 
of danger such as the skull with crossbones, the national flags and heraldic devices 
such as the stars and stripes or the eagle and so on, are all conventionalized but still 
largely iconic, that is, figurative in their schematized resemblance to the repre-
sented object. The iconic quality of religious, national, or otherwise socially 

	
Chapter 7.  From mimicry to metaphor	 
significant visual signs makes it easier to identify their meaning than would be the 
case with purely arbitrary symbols, even if that meaning remains ambiguous, elu-
sive, and “mysterious.”
The visual or verbal metaphor as a universal expression of iconic thinking is 
also one of the two most important ways (in addition to metonymy) of organizing 
linguistic discourse, according to Roman Jakobson’s celebrated formulation. For 
Jakobson speech implies a selection of certain linguistic entities and their combi-
nation into linguistic units of a higher degree of complexity. At the lexical level, for 
instance, the speaker selects words and combines them into sentences according 
to the syntactic rules of a particular language. Thus any linguistic sign (word) in-
volves two modes of arrangement: combination, which means that any sign always 
occurs in combination with other signs (words) in a sentence; and selection, which 
implies the possibility of substituting one sign for another. The addressee thus 
perceives an utterance as a combination of constituent parts (sentences, words, 
phonemes) selected from the repository of all possible constituent parts. The con-
stituent parts in turn are in a state of what Jakobson refers to as contiguity, which 
implies the same semantic context. On the other hand in a substitution set signs 
are linked by various degrees of similarity, which fluctuate between the equiva-
lence of synonyms (semantic identity) and antonyms (semantic opposition). De-
veloping the discourse along the lines of substitution or similarity is what Jakob-
son calls the metaphoric pole of language, as when one word, phrase, sentence, or 
the whole topic leads to a semantically different but similar one. In practice, mak-
ing comparisons based on similarity between semantically different and function-
ally incompatible domains means engaging in metaphoric discourse, as exempli-
fied by poetic language, Surrealist painting, or the Montage school in Soviet cinema 
(Jakobson and Halle 1971: 72–75, 90–92). As a structural linguist Jakobson was 
concerned primarily with the synchronic, present-day view of language, but it is 
illuminating to realize that from a diachronic, or even broader evolutionary per-
spective, the metonymic and the metaphoric poles of language are ultimately root-
ed in the practice of using language to communicate both the immediate, contigu-
ous experience and displaced, iconic associations, respectively, as evidenced for 
the first time by the visual culture of the Upper Palaeolithic.
Verbal metaphors pervade human language, not just in poetry but frequently 
in everyday speech, as probably the most obvious expressions of the human capac-
ity to engage in metainformational communication. In Steven Pinker’s example, 
when we use language we “gather our ideas to put them into words, and if our 
verbiage is not empty or hollow, we might convey or get these ideas across to a lis-
tener, who can unpack our words to extract their content” (Pinker 1995: 246). In 
this sentence the invisible mental process of coding meaning into words, saying 
those words to the listener who then invisibly decodes them in his mind, is related 

 From Interaction to Symbol
by way of analogy to the visible physical action of gathering objects, putting them 
into containers, and passing the full containers to someone else to open and re-
trieve the objects. For all we know, non-human animals are incapable of creating, 
still less expressing metaphoric meanings, even if the impulses in their brains ac-
cidentally “jump” between different experiential domains. Except in tales of fan-
tasy animals also lack consciousness, extended working memory, verbal language, 
and other meta-cognitive phenomena such as humour, sarcasm, or irony. As one 
human character says about an unusually smart mouse in the film Mouse Hunt 
(1997): “Mice don’t mock, they don’t have a sense of humour or irony. He’s not sit-
ting in his hole in a smoking jacket, sipping cognac and giggling to himself.”
While meta-thinking remains a defining characteristic of human cognition, 
one must not overstate the case by constantly and obsessively looking for “hidden 
meanings,” “esoteric symbolism,” and “secret codes” in all human artefacts, espe-
cially in those produced by societies dominated by magical and religious thinking. 
Visual metaphors such as those found in fantastic, composite images remain a viv-
id testimony of human cognitive fluidity, or what we usually call imaginativeness 
and inventiveness, but equally thrilling to produce and to contemplate are realistic 
representations of familiar objects, especially of humans and animals, in recogniz-
able settings. As the most spectacular periods in the history of art demonstrate, 
from the Upper Palaeolithic cave paintings, through Greeko-Roman antiquity to 
the Italian Renaissance, most attractive to contemplate are the realistic, life-imitat-
ing representations of familiar and existentially important elements of human en-
vironment, rather than the fantastic or the strange. For the greatest artists the world 
as they saw it was fascinating and wondrous enough, for as Oscar Wilde once said: 
“it is only the unimaginative who ever invent anything” (Wilde 1994: 495).

chapter 8
The thrills of visual realism
The style of visual representation in art that emerged in the first urbanized centres 
of the civilizations of Mesopotamia and Egypt was quite different from the natural-
ism of the Upper Palaeolithic art: still iconic, that is, representational, but much 
more schematic, stereotyped and rigid. Indeed, nothing to equal the naturalism of 
cave art was to appear again in Europe until Greeko-Roman antiquity, and later 
during the Italian Renaissance when realistic sculpture and life-like perspective 
drawing and painting were reinvented following the classical model. The depar-
ture of pictorial representation from naturalism and towards schematic and geo-
metric simplification began in the Neolithic period, probably due to the introduc-
tion of agriculture and its technology, and in particular due to the engineering 
skills developed by the builders of the early settled communities (Gombrich 
2003: 93). The psychologist Desmond Morris also associates the rigid style of the 
Neolithic art with early urbanization and the invention of writing. As hunting gave 
way to farming, storing of goods and trading, the need to keep records and to draw 
up inventories arose, eventually giving rise to writing – a more conventional and 
less pictorial system of coding information, more efficient in communicating pre-
cise quantitative data involved in commerce (Morris 1962:  149; Humphrey 
2002: 150). For example, a single symbolic sign for twenty cows could be used in-
stead of an iconic picture of twenty cows, or of more conventionalized notches or 
other marks representing cows. Realistic pictures were thus gradually losing their 
informative and instructive value, although one suspects that their magical sig-
nificance remained, especially in the context of religious art. As the arbitrary signs 
used in writing and numerical notation became more common, iconic representa-
tions dwindled in importance in practical life, remaining confined either to the 
purely artistic, decorative sphere, as in ancient Greece and Rome, or to the magico-
religious, ideological domain, as evidenced by Egyptian and later Christian art.
The importance of pictures in social communication outside art and religious 
life was further diminished in early modern times following a major boost to the 
culture of the written word caused by the advent of printing. In the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries in turn the invention of photography and film revived the 
iconic, mimetic culture on an unprecedented scale, due to the unique combination 
of iconicity and indexicality that gave the photographic media a degree of accu-
racy and naturalism of representation hitherto unattained in the history of visual 

 From Interaction to Symbol
culture. At the same time the increased realism of the photographic media, includ-
ing the life-simulating movement and ambient sound of film and television, ef-
fectively sent traditional painting on a path away from realistic representation to-
wards abstraction and non-iconic visual experimentation, especially in the realm 
of colour, as evidenced by European painting from Impressionism onwards. Una-
ble to compete for accuracy and realism with the photographic media, twentieth-
century visual arts steered towards non-iconic imagery, abstraction, conceptual-
ism, or metaphoric surrealism. However, despite the radical departure of modern 
painting and sculpture towards non-realism, taken as a whole contemporary visu-
al culture remains overwhelmingly naturalistic, mainly due to the ubiquity of 
iconic-indexical representations of reality as communicated through still photog-
raphy, cinema, and television.
Art and ideology
Historical oscillations between realistic and non-realistic conventions in art ap-
pear to reflect shifts in ideological systems that define the prevailing values, and 
consequently the social role of art. Thus realistic representations dominate when-
ever the main purpose of visual culture is to reflect the empirical, physically expe-
rienced world, rather than to express the invisible, supernatural reality as postu-
lated by religious beliefs. The life-like naturalism of animal imagery in the Upper 
Palaeolithic art would therefore be due to the largely practical, instructive and 
non-religious character of these highly iconic representations, designed primarily 
as an aid to recognition and possibly magical control of both game and predatory 
animals encountered in the real world. With the advent of agriculture in the Neo-
lithic period hunting declined in importance, both as the main source of food and 
as the reason for nomadic lifestyle, being gradually replaced by permanent farm-
ing that eventually produced the first urbanized centres of ancient civilizations. 
With the increasing size and structural complexity of agricultural societies and the 
ancient states, the role of organized religion, with complex cosmologies, panthe-
ons, systems of dogma and elaborate rituals increased accordingly, providing ideo-
logical justification for social hierarchies and political control of larger and more 
stratified societies. The supernatural world with its hierarchical pantheons de-
scribed in religious myths of ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt for example, became 
more and more removed from the empirical reality as people knew it from their 
daily lives, just as art – now almost exclusively religious in character – was losing 
its iconic, mimetic quality in relation to the physical world in favour of abstraction 
and schema that reflected the non-empirical, metaphysical reality.

	
Chapter 8.  The thrills of visual realism	 
This is why ancient Egyptian painting and relief avoided the naturalistic ren-
dering of the third dimension: as argued by Ernst H. Gombrich recession and 
foreshortening would have introduced a subjective, human, life-like element, 
which it was not the purpose of religious art to do (Gombrich 2003: 15). Indeed, 
for several thousand years Egyptian representational art never made use of linear 
perspective that injected such realism into Greek art beginning with the middle of 
the sixth century BCE. Like the Cubist painters of the early twentieth century, the 
Egyptian artists drew what they conceptualized or imagined rather than what they 
saw. Their technique of representation was to draw separately the main features of 
the objects, animals, humans, or anthropomorphic deities. These features, each of 
which roughly regarded as flat, were drawn one by one in the plane of the picture, 
independently of their relative orientation in space – hence the well-known fact, 
for instance, that the Egyptian picture of a human head combines the profile of the 
head with a frontal view of the eye (Pirenne 1970: 175). In 1867 the art historian 
Ernst Mach observed that the principle employed by the Egyptians might best be 
described by saying that their figures are pressed in the plane of the drawing like 
plants in a herbarium. The Egyptians, as well as the Babylonians, early Greeks, and 
Etruscans avoided realistic foreshortening and perspective, but not because they 
found them too difficult, or were unaware of them (Arnheim 1974:  112). The 
Egyptian style of representation can in fact be described as more objective than the 
perspectival, that is, more subjective style of visual representation developed by 
the Greeks, and later perfected by Renaissance artists. The Egyptian model insisted 
on highlighting what was considered the most important features of an object (the 
silhouette of the body, the profile of the head) in a timeless, unchanging aspect, 
which produced the effect of lifeless rigidity, apparently more suitable for the an-
thropomorphic figures of the deities inhabiting the eternal, divine world.
By contrast, the classical (Greek and Renaissance) pictorial convention, which 
has shaped modern European visual culture, is based on the concept of the three-
dimensional object perceived subjectively from one fixed point of observation – 
roughly the procedure of the photographic camera. Interestingly, however, this 
realistic convention is not “truer” to the object than the method employed in 
Egyptian religious art; it is simply more subjective and more individualistic – in 
other words more humanistic. When the figures in Egyptian art look “unnatural” 
to a modern observer, it is not because the Egyptians failed to present the human 
body the way it “really is,” but because today’s observer judges their work by the 
standards of a different procedure: a subjective one that presents the figure from a 
fixed point of view of a single observer, not objectively in one unchanging, univer-
sal aspect (Arnheim 1974: 113). The Egyptian and the classical Greek methods 
thus represented different solutions to the problem of rendering three-dimension-
al objects in a two-dimensional plane, what Gombrich refers to as “pictographic” 

 From Interaction to Symbol
(flat, schematic), and “photographic” (three-dimensional, realistic) styles, respec-
tively (Gombrich 1999: 49).
An advance towards the third dimension, which grants the eye its share in the 
perception of modelling, was indeed made for the first time by the ancient Greeks, 
whose concept of art as a mirror up to nature and as a purely visual mode of ren-
dering objects, especially of the human body, remains to this day the chief artistic 
expression of classical humanism, with its insistence on strictly human faculties of 
mind, body and the living space, as opposed to the supernatural beings and the 
divine world. The growing tendency towards naturalistic representation was en-
couraged by a steady decline in religious outlook which culminated in Greek hu-
manism, rational philosophy, and early science. Gombrich also links the rise of 
realistic art with the birth of the critical attitude in Greek culture, and with science 
as its practical consequence, especially the sciences of anatomy and of projective 
geometry and optics, which were called in to hasten the experimentation towards 
recognizable images. In modern times science overtook art in this respect through 
the invention of photography and especially of film, with its realistic movement, 
colour, sound, and the wide screen to match human wide horizontal vision 
(Gombrich 1982: 11, 27).
There are few more exciting spectacles in the whole history of art than the 
awakening of realism in Greek sculpture and painting between the sixth and fourth 
centuries BCE. Not just in static arts: the same scientific and humanistic impulse 
that encouraged the evolution of mimesis in sculpture and painting, with their 
increasing approximation of visual representations to natural appearances, also 
resulted in the development of drama: the demand to see the events narrated by 
the poets and historians re-enacted as if they were happening in front of the audi-
ence, what Gombrich calls the “eye-witness principle” as a manifestation of mi-
metic and humanistic culture. In painting this insistence on authenticity and veri-
similitude must ultimately have led to the mastery of foreshortening, the rendering 
of a unified space, of light and shade, as seen on Greek painted pottery among 
other things (Gombrich 1982: 252; 2003: 99–101).
The tendency, truly unique in the ancient world, towards increasing “photo-
graphic” naturalism characterized Greek sculpture and painting from the archaic 
to the Hellenistic periods (seventh to first century BCE). After the middle of the 
seventh century the Greeks began to carve large figures of men out of marble, mod-
elled initially on statues made in other hard stones in Egypt. Unlike the Egyptian 
models, however, the Greek statues were less religious in character – the most pop-
ular type was a nude male figure standing facing front, so-called kouros, “young 
man,” which would be either a representation of a god, or a memorial of a man, 
sometimes placed upon his tomb. The development of the kouros from the seventh 
to fifth century shows increasing naturalism of bodily anatomy and posture: the 

	
Chapter 8.  The thrills of visual realism	 
early rigid and schematic figures become more relaxed and life-like, with their 
heads turned slightly and the body in contrapposto, with the weight shifted onto 
one leg, the other relaxed and placed forward (Woodford 1982: 7–12). The adop-
tion of bronze casting in the early fifth century BCE allowed for even more natural-
istic sculpture, because the new technique was more flexible, offering a possibility 
to render the human body in a wider, more realistic range of poses and attitudes 
(precisely the reason why the bronze-casting technique was invented). Sculpted 
figures could now hold their arms outstretched, a posture impossible to achieve in 
heavy marble, which cannot support its own weight. For instance the bronze statue 
of Zeus of Artemisium from the fifth century shows the god with his left arm ex-
tended forward, his right arm reaching behind to throw a thunderbolt – a dynamic, 
life-like pose impossible to achieve in marble, as the outstretched arms would sim-
ply break off under their own weight. As the art historian Susan Woodford demon-
strates, the tendency in Greek sculpture of the classical period was decisively to-
wards imitation of natural appearance, that is, towards increased iconicity, with 
sculptors trying to capture in stone or bronze the subtle qualities that distinguish 
people of different ages and temperaments. The sensitivity of these characteristics 
had given a breadth of humanity to Greek art, whose naturalism far outdistanced 
anything that had been seen before in the ancient world (Woodford 1982: 56).
In the Hellenistic period the humanism and naturalism that define ancient 
Greek art deepened even more. In sculpture human beings were characterized not 
only in terms of sex, age and personality, as they had been during the classical 
period (fifth century BCE), but now also in terms of emotion and mood. Sculptors 
began to specialize: some became adept in the rendering of passion, and others in 
portraying more lyrical moods and gentler emotions. Hellenistic painters also de-
veloped greater interest not just in mythological figures or historical personages 
but in ordinary people and their everyday life. A certain Peiraikos earned artistic 
distinction by painting barbers’ shops, cobblers’ stalls, asses, eatables and similar 
mundane and ordinary objects. A Roman mosaic, a copy of a Greek painting from 
the third century BCE, shows a commonplace scene: a group of street musicians 
wearing masks, and a poor boy who either accompanies them or is just an on-
looker. The modelling of the figures is very realistic, and the play of light is handled 
with consummate skill. There is also an accurate rendering of the shadows cast by 
the players on the pavement and on the wall, as well as the bright highlights and 
deep shadows in the shiny clothes of the musicians (Woodford 1982: 70–74). Hel-
lenistic painters also broadened their subject matter to include flora, fauna, and 
landscape – the secular genres subsequently reinvented in post-Renaissance Eu-
rope nearly two thousand years later.
In painting the Greeks were also the first to introduce perspective as a way of 
mimicking a “photographic” perception of space. From the end of the sixth century 

 From Interaction to Symbol
the Greek vases depict the human body in foreshortening, with shading to give the 
appearance of mass, and with perspective effects of a kind quite unknown in ear-
lier times. Before the Greeks no culture (the Upper Palaeolithic cave art being un-
known at the time) produced illusionistic pictures showing three-dimensional ob-
jects in space on a flat surface. For example, the paintings by Polygnotos (mid fifth 
century BCE) show some figures higher than others as an indication of distance 
from the observer. In the late fifth century the painter Agatharchos experimented 
with vanishing points (receding lines in architectural drawings that converge at a 
point), which apparently stimulated contemporary philosophers Democritos and 
Anaxagoras to make a theoretical study of perspective (Woodford 1982: 49). Dur-
ing the Hellenistic period, around the middle of the second century BCE, artists 
became interested in the representation of space in its own right, not just as the 
ambience in which people and things exist. This encouraged a vogue for painting 
architectural vistas in Roman houses beginning with the first century CE, which 
showed cities, palaces, and sanctuaries, but without human figures. In these paint-
ed vistas, skilfully applied shadows within the wide tonal range of reds, yellows, 
whites and blues helped to convey a sense of depth and distance. The receding lines 
of buildings also strongly suggested space although, as Susan Woodford observes, 
the perspective was neither unified nor consistent. Each architectural element 
would be foreshortened more or less independently, without any regard to the 
whole (Woodford 1982: 71–74). Such a piecemeal perspective schema suggests that 
however evocative the Greeks made their architectural vistas, they never fully de-
veloped a single-point perspective system such as was later formulated in the Ren-
aissance. Once this quasi-photographic rendition of space had been widely used 
and accepted in Greeko-Roman art, there was no return to the purely pictographic 
mode of representation, even after the suppression of classical humanism during 
the Christian Middle Ages. Elements of foreshortening remain present in Byzan-
tine and in Western medieval art, even though the paintings with their sacred con-
tent are no longer constructed on the basis of a central projection from a single 
point, in imitation of the point of view of a human observer (Pirenne 1970: 182).
Religion and realism in art
The dominance of either the pictographic or the photographic style in artistic rep-
resentation depends therefore on the prevailing ideology: the less religious and 
dogmatic it is, the more iconic, that is, more realistic and photographic the visual 
arts become. And conversely, the greater the influence of religious dogma on so-
cial life the more rigid, schematic, and pictographic, that is, less iconic art be-
comes, to the extent that in cultures dominated by religious fundamentalism, as in 

	
Chapter 8.  The thrills of visual realism	 
Judaism, Islam, or early Puritanism, representational art can disappear altogether. 
On the other hand, as evidenced by the art of classical Greece and post-Renais-
sance Europe, the more humanistic, philosophic, and scientific the dominant out-
look, the more realistic artistic representations become, as the secular ideology 
encourages the artists’ interest in the life in this world, in a defined socio-historical 
context, in all manifestations of human experience. As Nietzsche put it: “Art raises 
its head where creeds relax.” By contrast, in religion-dominated epochs or cultures 
whatever art is permitted is focused on the transcendental and the supernatural, 
while iconic representations are either reduced to non-realistic schemas and ab-
stractions, or are eliminated altogether.
The unique appearance of mimetic arts in classical Greece has always puzzled 
historians, Ernst H. Gombrich among others: “If only the tricks of naturalistic 
painting result in convincing images that make for effortless recognition, how can 
we explain the fact that most cultures are quite happy with schematic representa-
tions?” His answer is that “the purpose of [Greek and Renaissance] art that led to 
the discovery of illusionistic devices was not so much a general desire to imitate 
nature as a specific demand for the plausible narration of sacred events,” now pre-
sented “on an imaginary stage as they might have looked to an eye-witness” 
(Gombrich 1982: 20). It is true that the subject matter of much of Greek and most 
of Renaissance art is still religious, despite the naturalism and humanism of the 
manner in which the sacred scenes are depicted. But Gombrich’s explanation of 
the origin of mimetic art in terms of “a specific demand for the plausible narration 
of sacred events” only begs another question concerning the origin of that de-
mand, and why it had to arise in Greece and not, for example, in Egypt or else-
where in the ancient world. And why should the demand for naturalistic represen-
tation of religious scenes reappear in fifteenth-century Italy, after almost a thousand 
years of pictographic schemas of medieval art?
The demand in question must have been the result of ideological shifts from 
religion-dominated to philosophy-dominated societies, whatever the broader his-
torical reasons for these shifts and for the relative rarity of their occurrence. We 
admire the ancient Greek and early modern Italian artists for their skills in render-
ing the human body and the physical space with life-like accuracy, but those skills 
could only flourish in ideologically relaxed regimes, under the influence of hu-
manistic philosophies which not only permitted but actually encouraged and ex-
pected naturalism in art. By the same token, the fact that we are lacking Leonar-
dos, Botticellis, and Michelangelos in the Middle Ages has less to do with the 
dearth of potential artistic geniuses prior to the Renaissance, than with the fact 
that talented individuals happened to live in the times when religious dogmatism, 
with its glorification of divinity on the one hand, and with its ideals of asceticism, 

 From Interaction to Symbol
humility and self-effacement on the other hand, positively discouraged individual 
expression and humanistic attitude in art.
For almost a thousand years following the fall of the Roman Empire in the fifth 
century CE, the contact of art with the visible, empirical world was indeed ex-
tremely tenuous. As a result of the insistence of the Christian religion on the invis-
ible, supernatural reality, naturalism in artistic representation was effectively ren-
dered irrelevant for a millennium. The art historian Erwin Panofsky documents 
the gradual disintegration at the close of antiquity of the freely extended, natural-
istic landscape and the geometric interior space found in Roman painting. Repre-
sentation of depth gives way to superposition and juxtaposition, while the indi-
vidual pictorial elements, whether figures, buildings or landscape motifs, are 
transmuted into forms oriented towards schematic plane rather than three-di-
mensional space. These forms now stand in relief against a gold or neutral ground, 
and are arrayed without respect to realistic compositional logic. The principle of 
space begins to give way to the principle of the surface bounded by the picture’s 
edge, a surface not to be “seen through,” as in perspectival paintings, but rather to 
be filled. Space is robbed of its solidity, becomes homogenous, immeasurable, and 
dimensionless: the “reduction of space to surface” evidenced in particular in Ro-
manesque painting (Panofsky 1991: 49–51). The departure from representation 
that would create a verisimilitude to empirical, sensory perception of space and 
objects in it thus coincided with the growth of ideological control of the Christian 
Church, with its vision of the transcendental, divine world that was by definition 
qualitatively different from the human and natural worlds. In the cultural climate 
dominated by strict religious dogma, whatever artistic representation of the super-
natural reality was permitted did not include any recognizable resemblance of that 
reality to the world that people knew from their everyday experience, which ef-
fectively ruled out naturalism from art. Judaism and Islam, as we know, went even 
further by actually banning not just religious art but all image-making as blasphe-
mous (Mann 2000: 21, 24, 30). The fact that medieval Christian art still presents 
the divine and holy figures in anthropomorphic, if schematized and rigid form, is 
probably to be seen as a compromise between the demands of the religious doc-
trine which expressly prohibits the making of images, and the didactic require-
ment to bring the Christian message across to the illiterate masses by means of 
more easily absorbable iconic instruction.
Indeed, the “magical” power of the visual image posed a dilemma for the 
Church, which feared idolatry but hesitated to renounce the image as an effective 
means of communication. Neither the Church nor the artists of the Middle Ages 
could ignore the second commandment, which enjoined them not to make “any 
graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the 
earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth” (Exodus 20:4). In the light of 

	
Chapter 8.  The thrills of visual realism	 
this doctrine it is indeed a miracle that, unlike Judaism and Islam, Western 
Christianity continued to tolerate the making of images in religious contexts. 
Erwin Panofsky suggests the influence of Byzantine art and Eastern Christianity, 
which managed to preserve the individual components of antique perspectival 
space, and so to hold them in readiness for the Renaissance (Panofsky 1991: 50). 
The Church’s concession to continue making images is found early in the pro-
nouncement of Pope Gregory the Great (?540–604), which acknowledges the di-
dactic purpose of images: “Painting is to those who cannot read what letters are to 
those who can” (Freedberg 1989: 164; Gombrich 1999: 24). Pictorial religious in-
struction was precisely the task assigned to the visual arts by the Church to avoid 
the charge of idolatry, and it thus enabled Christian art to survive at all. Writing in 
1435, when art was taking a more naturalistic, that is, a more “idolatrous” turn, the 
architect Leon Battista Alberti could still feel the need to justify image-making on 
religious grounds, by considering it “a very great gift to men that painting has 
represented the gods they worship, for painting has contributed considerably to 
the piety which binds us to the gods, and to filling out minds with sound religious 
beliefs” (Alberti 1972: 61).
Didactic reasons aside, even in its doctrine Christianity appears to be more 
anthropomorphic, or humanistic, than Judaism or Islam, for apart from monothe-
ism which Christianity shares with the other two universalistic religions, it also 
talks about the incarnation of god’s son in an earthly woman. Likewise its mythol-
ogy, as exemplified by the story of Christ, is set in the context of the all-too-human 
experience of joy, love, suffering, betrayal, grief, mercy, forgiveness and so on. The 
doctrine of the incarnation, whereby the indescribable divine element became cir-
cumscribed by empirical, historical human form can thus be partly at least respon-
sible for the relaxed attitude of the Church towards the scriptural prohibition on 
all visual representation. By contrast, Judaism does not believe in god’s incarna-
tion, and consequently in the visual limitation of the deity. In 1422 a Spanish Jew, 
Rabbi Moses of Arragel, the translator into Spanish of the Hebrew Bible, wrote 
that “the Jews... do not think or believe that God took on a human form. Everyone, 
scholar and peasant, women and children, must know that God has no human 
face or image, and that there is nothing that resembles him” (Mann 2000: 28). In 
view of the comparatively more humanistic character of Christianity, it seemed 
more natural to support doctrinal teaching with anthropomorphic, iconic repre-
sentations, thus conveying the religious message in cognitive categories that most 
people could relate to and understand, as in presenting the divine but also very 
human figures in situations of joy (the nativity) or sorrow (the crucifixion). The 
reduced, schematic iconicity of Christian art in the Middle Ages was thus a com-
promise between the Old Testament blanket ban on any pictorial representation of 

 From Interaction to Symbol
the deity, and the need to educate the masses in the Christian doctrine by appeal-
ing to their humanity.
The rediscovery of the body
Once the dogmatic constraints were relaxed during the Renaissance following the 
revival of ancient humanism, and artists were again permitted to render the world 
as it presented itself to their senses, realism and imitation of nature were relatively 
quickly “reinvented,” allowing the artists to sculpt and paint the bodies, including 
the sacred figures, with anatomical accuracy and natural beauty as observed in life. 
This humanizing tendency can already be seen in the art of the high Gothic, espe-
cially in sculpture, which is beginning to re-emerge out of the wall as an independ-
ently developed structure of considerable realism. Panofsky interprets the Gothic 
“renaissance of a feeling for the body... as a kind of rapprochement with antiquity” 
(Panofsky 1991: 53). It is also an interesting fact that the three discoveries of real-
ism in art on historical record: in the Upper Palaeolithic, in ancient Greece, and in 
fifteenth-century Italy, should start with the three-dimensional medium of sculp-
ture, before artists developed the convention of rendering space in the two-dimen-
sional medium of painting. As we saw earlier, the Upper Palaeolithic portable 
sculptures most probably predated cave paintings, just as the ancient Greek prac-
tice of carving human figures in marble or casting them in bronze developed be-
fore painted pottery and murals. Similarly in the Italian Renaissance: the emerging 
realistic style first manifested itself in sculpture and in architecture, and only later 
in painting. For instance, the three most prestigious artistic personalities in early 
fifteenth-century Florence, the capital of Renaissance culture, were not painters; 
all were trained as goldsmiths and to varying degrees worked as sculptors. The 
oldest, Filippo Brunelleschi (1377–1446) became the most original architect and 
engineer of his generation, and was besides the inventor of linear perspective, the 
sine qua non for Renaissance narrative painting. His system was utilized in paint-
ing by Masaccio (1401–28), perhaps under the direct guidance of Brunelleschi, as 
exemplified famously by a fresco of The Trinity in the church of Santa Maria 
Novella, and by a fresco cycle on the life of Saint Peter in the Brancacci Chapel, 
both in Florence. Brunelleschi’s contemporary Lorenzo Ghiberti (1378–1455) also 
remained devoted exclusively to sculpture throughout his lifetime, as was Ghiberti’s 
slightly younger contemporary Donatello (1386?-1466), who turned to monu-
mental sculpture in marble and bronze, producing among other things the famous 
bronze David (1430), the first male Renaissance nude. According to the art histo-
rian James H. Beck, both Donatello and Ghiberti exerted a powerful effect on the 
painters who came after them. Masaccio probably could not have developed his 

	
Chapter 8.  The thrills of visual realism	 
perspectival painting without the example, instruction, and possibly collaboration 
of Donatello and Brunelleschi. As Beck observes, at the beginning of the fifteenth 
century the sculptors were about half a generation in advance of the painters, 
working in an idiom whose spatial and figurative qualities are inseparably tied to 
our notion of Renaissance art (Beck 1999: 37, 41; Holmes 1996). For technical 
reasons also it was easier to develop linear perspective within the three-dimen-
sional media of sculpture and architecture first, and then apply it to a more con-
ventional and less iconic medium of painting, the more convincingly to create the 
illusion of space on a two-dimensional surface.
Realistic rendition of space went hand in hand with interest in the anatomy 
and realistic appearance of human body and face, which now appears to take prec-
edence before any doctrinal, ideological considerations. For instance, neither 
Donatello’s nor Michelangelo’s statue of David strikes one as particularly religious, 
despite the obviousness of the Biblical theme; what seems to have been unembar-
rassingly more important to the sculptors was the beauty and natural attitude of a 
young, well-built, male nude body, with the religious reference thrown in almost 
by accident as it were. In his treatise De Pictura (1435) Alberti stresses repeatedly 
that the “noble and beautiful art [of painting and sculpture] arises from roots 
within Nature herself.” Expressing the view already prevalent in the early Renais-
sance Alberti states that “painting aims to represent things seen” (pictura studeat 
res visas repraesentare), and also that “the painter is not concerned with things that 
are not visible” (Alberti 1972: 33, 67, 75). The imitation of nature, that is, repro-
ducing what the artist sees in front of him rather than what he imagines or concep-
tualizes, was a revolutionary discovery, or rather rediscovery, of the fifteenth cen-
tury. When Giorgio Vasari (1511–1574) praised the early Renaissance painters in 
his Lives, it was in proportion to the life-like naturalism achieved by them. For 
example, artists were commended for painting a human figure so that it seemed to 
breathe, or appears not painted but three-dimensional – as if in relief. Every time 
Vasari talks about excellence, perfection or grace in art, he means the convincing 
verisimilitude of visual representation of human figures, its closeness to the “pho-
tographic” ideal. His view of art is therefore entirely humanistic and aesthetic, not 
doctrinal; for him art must imitate nature and give pleasure: “the origin of the 
arts... was nature itself, and the first image or model was the beautiful fabric of the 
world” (Vasari 1987: 30).
Vasari traces the historic beginnings of the new mimetic style in art to Giovanni 
Cimabue (c. 1240–1302?), who was the first to break decisively with the picto-
graphic tradition of Byzantine art, whose style Vasari describes as “crude, stiff, and 
mediocre,” with its “unbroken outline, as well as staring eyes, feet on tiptoe, sharp 
hands, absence of shadow, and other Byzantine absurdities” (Vasari 1987: 50, 88). 
In the place of rigid and schematic Byzantine figures Cimabue used fresh colours 

 From Interaction to Symbol
to render flesh, and he painted scenes from the life of Christ rather than isolated 
figures against a plain background, thus achieving dramatic, vivid, and emotion-
ally charged effect. When the Florentines flocked to see Cimabue’s paintings they 
were thrilled and awed by their life-likeness, probably not unlike people centuries 
later when they first saw a photograph, a moving picture, or the first television 
programme.
After Cimabue his pupil Giotto (1266–1337) further developed the mimetic 
convention by introducing the technique of drawing accurately from life and in-
fusing his religious figures with human emotions. In Vasari’s account Giotto de-
picted the Virgin Mary as “fearful and trembling” before Archangel Gabriel, and in 
his painting of the presentation of the Christ-child to Simeon in the Temple from 
the church of Santa Croce in Florence Giotto depicted “the emotions of the child 
Himself, who is frightened of Simeon and all timidly stretches out his arms and 
turns towards his mother” (emphasis added). On a fresco in the church of San 
Francesco at Assisi Giotto “painted the various costumes worn at that time and his 
observation and imitation of nature are marvellous to see. One of the most beauti-
ful scenes is of a man showing signs of great thirst kneeling down to drink eagerly 
at a fountain; the incident is conveyed so exactly and movingly that one might be 
looking at a real person” (Vasari 1987: 59, 61). Vasari conveys the persuasiveness 
of Giotto’s realistic style in an anecdote in which the painter, still a young man in 
Cimabue’s workshop, once painted on the nose of one of the figures a fly, which 
was so life-like that Cimabue tried several times to brush it off with his hand, un-
der the impression that it was real, before he realized his mistake (Vasari 1987: 80; 
Gregory and Gombrich 1973).
Physical space rediscovered
The same preoccupation with mimetic realism was applied to the rendition of 
physical space, where the use of geometric perspective, also initiated by Giotto, 
injected the painted scenes with a more natural, “photographic” quality. In this 
Giotto revolutionized representative art because in his Biblical narratives he aimed 
not so much at doctrinal instruction but more at a dramatic evocation of scenes 
painted as if viewed by an eye witness. His paintings of interior spaces are already 
based on geometrical perspective, so that the surface is no longer the wall or the 
panel bearing the forms of individual things and figures, but rather is once again 
that transparent plane through which we are meant to believe that we are looking 
into a space, even if that space is still bounded on all sides (Panofsky 1991: 55). 
This change of representative style, however, would not have been possible with-
out the doctrinal relaxation, which now allowed for a direct bringing together of 

	
Chapter 8.  The thrills of visual realism	 
the human and the divine by including a hypothetical human observer in the sa-
cred scene. The novel effect of Giotto’s art was a surprise to his contemporaries at 
the degree of like-likeness his paintings could achieve. For example, Boccaccio 
(1313–75) tells in the Decamerone that Giotto
was a genius of such excellence that there was no thing of nature... that he did not 
depict with the pencil or the pen or the brush in a manner so similar to the object 
that it seemed to be the thing itself rather than merely resembling it; so much so 
that many times the visual sense of men was misled by the things he made, believ-
ing to be true what he only painted (Boccaccio 1984: 157).
It is easy for a modern viewer, overexposed to the naturalism of the omnipresent 
photographic culture, to be less appreciative, even blasé at Cimabue’s and Giotto’s 
once revolutionary paintings, but we must not forget that these painters’ contem-
poraries had nothing equally realistic with which to compare the paintings. For 
similar reasons it is easy to feel condescending towards the technically crude, as 
judged by today’s standards, first motion pictures by the Lumière brothers made in 
1895. However, to the original audiences the mere addition of movement to pho-
tography sufficed to send the spectators screaming with fear when the train on the 
screen rushed headlong towards them.
The new naturalism of style in the Renaissance had its ideological conse-
quences, as the implication of the presence of a human witness at a sacred event 
presupposed a degree of humanization of religion still impossible during the 
Christian Middle Ages, and even less possible in iconoclastic Judaism and Islam, 
where not just the image itself but even a suggestion that a human onlooker could 
be present at a sacred event would have been considered a blasphemy. The divine 
world envisaged in medieval art was by definition qualitatively different from the 
human world, which meant that the categories of sensory perception normally 
involved in negotiating this world did not necessarily apply to the postulated di-
vine reality. This is why medieval painters made little attempt to render space real-
istically, with three-dimensional perspective, as if to discourage any comparisons 
between the divine and the human worlds. In medieval pictorial art there is usu-
ally little sense of depth, and the relative sizes of figures are disregarded as cues of 
distance from the observer for the sake of emphasizing doctrinal importance 
through scale. Thus the figure of the Virgin Mary or Christ will be much larger 
than the figures of the saints or disciples surrounding them. In pictographic style 
the sacred event is not depicted with all the detail and complexity found in the 
empirical world, but in clear and simple hieroglyphics, very much like the concep-
tual and schematic art of ancient Egypt, which made the viewers understand the 
doctrine rather than visualize it. In medieval pictographic art there is no pretence 
of presenting, as Giotto did later, a snapshot of a given scene such as might have 

 From Interaction to Symbol
been seen and photographed by an imaginary witness (Gombrich 1982: 21, 88, 
156; Gombrich and Hochberg 1972).
Impressive as spatial realism in Renaissance art is when compared with its 
absence for nearly a millennium during the Middle Ages, its achievement was 
probably less a matter of artistic genius than of the changed historical and ideo-
logical circumstances, in which naturalism in artistic representation of religious 
figures and scenes stopped being considered inappropriate, doctrinally incorrect 
or blasphemous. It does not necessarily take a genius to notice that objects appear 
to diminish in size the further they are situated from the observer, or that the par-
allel horizontal lines of a road or building seem to converge proportionately to the 
distance from the eye. It is also difficult to imagine that even before the scientific 
study of visual perception and geometric perspective anyone would ever believe 
that an object moving away from the eye was really becoming smaller in size. As 
the physiologist M. H. Pirenne explains, the principle of psychological constancy 
makes sure that the observer does not perceive the subjectively diminishing object 
as becoming really smaller (Pirenne 1970: 59). The peculiar stabilizing tendency 
– promoted by the co-operation of vision with the tactile sense – is what ascribes 
to perceived objects a definite and proper size and form, and thus tends not to take 
notice of the distortions which these sizes and forms suffer on the retina (Panofsky 
1991: 31). So when Plato says in The Republic that “the apparent size of an object, 
as you know, varies with distance from our eye,” he does not formulate a scientific 
discovery or a profound philosophic insight, but states a more or less obvious ob-
servational fact (Plato 2003: 345). Ernst H. Gombrich may thus be overestimating 
the difficulty of attaining naturalism of representation in Renaissance art, when he 
states that “this imitation of visual reality must be a very complex and indeed a 
very elusive affair, for why should it otherwise have taken so many generations of 
gifted painters to learn its tricks?” (Gombrich 1982:  12). It certainly required 
learning new skills and techniques to paint realistically, as evidenced by the devel-
opment of Florentine painting during a hundred years between Giotto and 
Masaccio, but just as important was the relaxation of doctrinal constraints on art 
due to the rise of humanism, which allowed the artists to focus on the “photo-
graphic” quality of the painted scenes, and to represent bodies, objects, and space 
in the way they saw the empirical world around them, rather than as imagined ac-
cording to abstract religious doctrine.
Revolutionary as the discovery of geometric perspective and anatomical ac-
curacy in Renaissance art was, it was probably not on a par with, say, the Copernican 
revolution in astronomy. For most people it was very difficult to even consider as 
a possibility, let alone accept as true, Copernicus’ heliocentric cosmology, because 
from the point of view of a subjective observer the theory seemed so illogical, un-
commonsensical, and unempirical – the idea that the earth that appeared flat and 

	
Chapter 8.  The thrills of visual realism	 
immovable should actually be a gigantic ball hurtling through space and revolving 
around the sun. By comparison, geometric perspective in painting was more of an 
application of a familiar way of looking at things than a discovery of an entirely 
new and perceptually hard-to-believe phenomenon. M.H. Pirenne demonstrates 
that a picture made by a representational painter must, at least in some respects, 
act upon the eyes of the spectator in the same manner as the actual scene he wish-
es to depict would act upon them (Pirenne 1970: 10). The genius and skill of Ren-
aissance artists notwithstanding, their discovery of naturalism was a bit like real-
izing: “so now we can paint in the way we actually see the world: cool!” The subject 
matter was still predominantly religious, as in the Middle Ages, but paintings were 
gradually ceasing to look like cardboard cut-outs, flat and schematic, and were 
beginning to resemble two-dimensional tableaux vivants of naturalistic, fully hu-
man (not just anthropomorphic) figures in period dress, placed in often fanciful 
and theatrical but geometrically realistic interiors or open spaces.
In fact painting realistically, with perspective, was not that devilishly difficult 
once artists put their minds to it, and they all did it with relish and enthusiasm. 
Around 1420 Filippo Brunelleschi solved the problem of realistic perspective fol-
lowing the simple principles of Euclidean geometry. His experiment took the form 
of a peepshow in which one could see through the eyehole a view of the Florentine 
Baptistery as seen through the open doors of the Cathedral. He showed that it was 
possible to work out theoretically and practically what aspect of any object could 
be seen from any particular point in space (Gombrich 1982: 224). In 1435 Alberti 
stated in De Pictura that “the function of the painter is to draw with lines and paint 
in colours on a surface any given bodies in such a way that, at a fixed distance and 
with a certain, determined position of the centric ray, what you see represented 
appears to be in relief and just like those bodies” (Alberti 1972: 95). To achieve a 
mechanically correct reproduction Alberti adopted the notion of the visual pyra-
mid, or cone, to explain the optical relation between the eye of the observer and 
the object at which he looks. He represented that relation by a system of straight 
lines issuing from each point of the object’s frontal surface and meeting in the eye. 
The result is a kind of semi-horizontal pyramid, whose apex is at the point of the 
eye. If this pyramid of light rays is intersected by a plane of glass perpendicular to 
the line of sight, the image on the glass will be a projection of the object, so that by 
tracing on the glass the outlines of the object as seen from the point of observa-
tion, the viewer can record an exact duplicate of the image. If this procedure is 
applied to a geometrically simple environment, such as the interior of a church or 
a fragment of urban space, the resulting image will conform roughly to the rules 
of central perspective (Kemp 1990: 9–23; Arnheim 1974: 284). Leonardo da Vinci 
devised a similar method, elaborated by many other Renaissance artists such as 

 From Interaction to Symbol
Albrecht Dürer for example, of painting a scene by taking account of foreshorten-
ings to imply depth:
Place a sheet of glass firmly in front of you, keep the eye fixed in location and trace 
the outline of a tree on the glass.... Follow the same procedure in painting... trees 
situated at the greater distances. Preserve these paintings on glass as aids and 
teachers in your work (Hochberg 1972: 49; Bartrum 2002: 219).
Leonardo’s window is a surrogate for the scene because it affects the viewer’s eye in 
a way that is similar to that in which the scenes itself does. Of course, flat pictures 
will not cause us to see three-dimensional depth, but even with our two eyes we 
will not always correctly perceive depth in a real three-dimensional scene, if that 
scene is viewed with a fixed head from one position in space, or with one eye 
closed. This means that a painted scene showing correct, photographic perspective 
is a fairly good approximation to what we actually see in front of us, and will gen-
erally evoke instant and effortless recognition, even though what we see extends in 
depth while painting surface is flat. Leonardo described perspective as the “rein 
and rudder of painting,” and the painter Paolo Uccello is reported to have said to 
his wife’s request to finally come to bed: “Oh, but what a lovely thing this perspec-
tive is!” (Vasari 1987: 104).
Perspective has often been called a “convention” which does violence to the 
way we see the world, almost like all other stylistic conventions, such as the sche-
matic, pictographic style of Egyptian or Christian medieval art, or the cubist or 
surrealist distortions of perception of early twentieth-century art. Indeed, realistic 
representation in art is by no means obvious and “natural.” As the psychologist of 
art Rudolf Arnheim observes, the mechanical projection of the visual pyramid 
leads in fact to radical distortions in the visual understanding of the build of the 
human body, an animal, a tree or a house. Guided by the optical “correctness” of 
geometric perspective with its foreshortenings and convergences, artists twisted 
the axes of objects, destroyed the symmetrical correspondences of parts, altered 
proportions, and rearranged the relative location of things. In a “realistic” painting 
a human figure could reach above the trees into the sky, the feet could adjoin the 
face, and the outline of the body could assume almost any shape (Arnheim 
1974: 134). This is why when we consider the emergence of creative thought in the 
drawings of children, we find that they are conceptual rather than illusionistic in 
the earliest stages. Illusion of realism does not start until the age of seven or eight, 
when the child begins to consciously copy from others or from nature itself 
(Penrose 1973: 282).
However, for all its conventionality mimetic art reinvented in the Renaissance 
still remains the closest approximation to our natural vision: it only demands that 
we stand still, look in one direction with one eye closed, and analyse the flat picture 

	
Chapter 8.  The thrills of visual realism	 
in front of us accepting all its foreshortenings and other distortions. What 
Gombrich calls the “eye-witness principle” appears thus to be the best method to 
map precisely what anyone could see from a given point, or what the camera could 
record (Gombrich 1982: 258, 281). Realistic, perspectival painting is indeed more 
“natural,” or less conventional from the perceptual point of view, very much like a 
photograph, which automatically and mechanically flattens three-dimensional 
space but is still perceived as naturalistic and easily recognizable. David Lewis-
Williams writes that the Abelam tribe of New Guinea, unfamiliar with two-di-
mensional representations, at first had difficulty in “seeing” photographs shown by 
an anthropologist, but not because the tribesmen were inherently incapable of un-
derstanding photographs, but simply because of unfamiliarity with the medium. 
After some tuition, however, the tribesmen were able to understand the conven-
tion of representing depth on a flat surface, and could recognize themselves and 
their village on the photographs (Lewis-Williamson 2004: 183). Rudolf Arnheim 
also quotes the experience of a nineteenth-century artist, who was sketching the 
house of a German peasant while the owner watched him. As the artist was draw-
ing the oblique lines required by perspective, the peasant protested: “Why are you 
making my roof so crooked – my house is quite straight!” But when he later saw 
the finished picture, he admitted with surprise: “Painting is a strange business! 
Now it is my house, just the way it is!” (Arnheim 1974: 115). The relative ease with 
which anyone can learn the convention of central perspective demonstrates that 
photographs and realistic paintings remain a close approximation to the natural, 
unmediated view of reality. For instance in today’s Islamic countries, with their 
absence of tradition of representational art, people have no problem enjoying fam-
ily photographs or television programmes. Important as the discovery of geomet-
ric perspective was in the Renaissance, the new visual convention was not so dif-
ficult to understand once artists realized that they could paint religious scenes as if 
seen by an imaginary human observer. As Gombrich remarks, the rapid spread of 
naturalistic style throughout Europe during the Renaissance suggests that the 
closer the realistic code came to the evocation of a familiar reality, the more easily 
could the faithful contemplate the re-enactment of the religious story and identify 
its participants (Gombrich 1982: 23).
Interestingly however, this “easy” and “natural” style of representation was dis-
covered at only one time and place in history (outside classical antiquity), and it 
came about in response to very particular cultural needs that arose uniquely dur-
ing the European Renaissance. Paradoxically central perspective, by far the most 
realistic way of rendering optical space, should be the method suggesting itself 
most naturally to everyone by the evidence of visual experience, rather than re-
maining an esoteric refinement reserved to the sophisticated few, hailed as the 
greatest achievement of Renaissance art. As I pointed out earlier, the achievement 

 From Interaction to Symbol
was not due to a unique success in overcoming a technically difficult problem of 
realistic representation (the problem was not that difficult), but due to a combina-
tion of unique historical factors that made Renaissance science and humanism 
possible, and without which it would never have occurred to artists that their task 
was to create images closely matching what they saw in the real world. The method 
of tracing faithful images on a transparent surface using the principle of the visual 
cone, as practised by Alberti, Brunelleschi, Da Vinci, or Dürer, would certainly 
have been within the range of any reasonably advanced civilization. If nevertheless 
we have no evidence of this kind, this probably means that there was no demand 
for such mechanical exactness of representation in civilizations where scientific 
rendition of space was not invented. Realistic representation of space came as a 
result of an ideologically motivated shift in the understanding of the purpose of 
art, which in fifteenth-century Italy included holding a mirror up to nature instead 
of metaphysical reality. In the words of Rudolf Arnheim:
Central perspective came about as one aspect of the search for objectively correct 
descriptions of physical nature – a search that sprang during the Renaissance from 
a new interest in the wonders of the sensory world, and led to the great voyages of 
exploration as well as to the development of experimental research and the scien-
tific standards of exactitude and truth. This trend of the European mind generated 
the desire to find an objective basis for the depiction of visual objects, a method 
independent of the idiosyncrasies of the draftsman’s eye and hand (Arnheim 
1974: 283).
Central perspective makes the picture’s central axis coincide with the viewer’s line 
of sight, and by explicitly acknowledging the viewer it becomes a supreme mani-
festation of Renaissance individualism and humanism. In this way realistic per-
spective nobilitated the subjective, human, and empirical visual impression, while 
its scientific principles translated psycho-physiological space into painted space 
with mathematical exactitude. Renaissance art may thus be said to have largely 
returned to a function it fulfilled in Greece of the classical period. It was still main-
ly religious in character, but its role was not just to tell the sacred story to the il-
literate but rather to evoke it in a convincing and imaginative way to those who 
already knew it. As Vasari repeatedly emphasizes in his Lives, the artist’s mastery 
in conveying human emotions now comes to the fore, so that the illustration of a 
sacred story becomes more of an occasion for the exercise of such a mastery. It was 
the “how” and not the “what” that art connoisseurs admired and pondered. What 
was revolutionary about Renaissance art was that without losing its religious char-
acter it began to acknowledge and delight people rather than serve the invisible 
god; in other words, art humanized religion.

	
Chapter 8.  The thrills of visual realism	 
Photography and the decline of realism in painting
Linear perspective and naturalism of representation introduced and perfected by 
Renaissance art defined the artistic style of the subsequent centuries in Europe, 
initiating a tradition referred to as “classicism,” with its implication of original in-
spiration by the art of ancient Greece and Rome. Classicism thus understood drew 
to a close towards the end of the nineteenth century, not because of the return of 
religious dogmatism but, to the contrary, because European culture became more 
secular than ever, and had just invented the most realistic methods of visual repre-
sentation in the form of the photographic media.
Since the Renaissance visual art had been pushing towards realistic, objective 
representation of the world, a goal that corresponded exactly with the essence of 
photography. Even before the nineteenth century cityscape painters such as 
Canaletto, aided with the camera obscura, injected scientific precision and quasi-
photographic accuracy in their highly objectified representations of reality. The 
artistic movement referred to as Realism, launched in France in 1855 at the World’s 
Fair and Industrial Exposition, was no doubt partly influenced by the growing 
popularity of the photographic copies of nature. As the historian of photography 
Gisèle Freund points out, the positivist aesthetics of the first Realist painters, as 
represented primarily by Gustave Courbet (1819–77), was indistinguishable from 
the aims and practice of photography. When Courbet declared that “painting is an 
art of sight and should therefore concern itself with things seen,” he was inadvert-
ently referring to what the camera was doing (Freund 1980: 71). The Realist pro-
gramme demanded of painters to develop a totally impersonal attitude toward 
nature, and to abandon artistic pretences by thinking of themselves merely as 
skilled craftsmen. Their aesthetic equation of visual reality with the reality of na-
ture was also the premise of the photographer, for whom reality in nature was de-
fined only by the optical image produced by the camera. The resulting picture 
could only reproduce what the photographer saw. Imagination had little role in his 
work, which consisted only in choosing the subject matter, evaluating the best way 
to frame it, and selecting the pattern of light and shadow. The photographer’s work 
thus ended even before the shutter clicked.
The mechanical and almost automatic nature of the photographic process, 
compared with the deliberate and thought-out character of traditional painting 
with its dependence on the artist’s imagination, intellect, and skill, was what at first 
prejudiced the established artistic world against the new medium. The Academi-
cian Jean-August-Dominique Ingres (d. 1867), for example, found photography 
despicable and its practitioners the desecrators of the “sacred temple of art.” Simi-
larly, for the poet Charles Baudelaire (d. 1867) photography was a form of industry 
that had nothing in common with art, but was simply an “invention resulting from 

 From Interaction to Symbol
the mediocrity of modern artists and a refuge for all unsuccessful painters” 
(Trachtenberg 1980: 94). In 1858 the poet Alphonse Marie Louise de Lamartine 
condemned photography as a “chance invention which will never be art, but only 
a plagiarism of nature through a lens.” However, after seeing the photographs of 
Antoine Samuel Adam-Salomon, who carefully used light effects to enhance con-
tours and plasticity of the photographed image (usually portraits), Lamartine 
changed his mind and wrote that photography is “more than an art; it is a solar 
phenomenon in which the artist collaborates with the sun” (Freund 1980: 77–79). 
Indeed, while most serious artists denied the artistic merits of photography, the 
juste milieu painters were enchanted by the new technique. Upon seeing the first 
photographs Paul Delaroche, a historical painter of the Academie Française, is 
reported to exclaim: “From today, painting is dead.” In a letter of 1839 to the scien-
tist Françoise Arago Delaroche asserted that
this new medium reproduces nature not only truthfully but also artistically. The 
lines are correct, the forms are exact – all is as precise as possible. A composition 
as rich in tone as in effect.... When this technique becomes widespread, the most 
accurate picture of any scene will easily be obtained in a few moments (Freund 
1980: 81).
Unable to compete with photography in the field of realism, visual art from the 
end of the nineteenth century onwards turned decisively towards non-realism, or 
at least away from the kind of “photographic” realism invented in the Renaissance, 
by introducing new ways of rendering space and the human body. As noted by 
Susan Sontag, “by taking over the task of realistic picturing hitherto monopolized 
by painting, photography freed painting for its great modernist vocation – ab-
straction” (Sontag 1978: 94). Painting’s first radical departure from photographic 
(black-and-white) realism came with the Impressionists who, in the words of the 
painter-photographer László Moholy-Nagy, “were the first to give colour back to 
civilised man” (Moholy-Nagy 1969: 19). The next important departure from post-
Renaissance naturalism came with Cubism and its changed perception of the hu-
man form, of objects in general, and of physical space, as exemplified by Picasso’s 
painting Les Demoiselles d’Avignon (1906). Together with Georges Braque, Picasso 
abandoned traditional notions of perspective, foreshortening, and modelling, in a 
desire to represent solidity and volume in a two-dimensional plane without con-
verting the flat canvas illusionistically into a three-dimensional picture-space. In-
sofar as they represented real objects, the Cubist painters aimed at depicting them 
as they are known and not as they partially appear at a particular moment and 
place from a particular viewpoint. For this purpose they combined views from 
several angles in the same whole, as if to give a more complex, and therefore prob-
ably “truer” view of an object. Many different aspects of the object might be 

	
Chapter 8.  The thrills of visual realism	 
depicted simultaneously, as in showing the female form dismembered and re-as-
sembled in a manner that allows the viewer to see back and front at the same time. 
The technique implied not only an acquired knowledge of the object, but also the 
movement of the observer around the object. In this sense Cubism was still to 
some extent realistic, but it was a conceptual realism rather than optical or Impres-
sionistic realism. Cubist painters did not depict objects photographically, from a 
fixed point of view, but imaginatively complemented the visible elements with 
what the eye did not see but what the painter knew was there.
In evoking depth on a two-dimensional surface the Cubists at first denied 
themselves the well-tried techniques of linear perspective. Their compositions 
were deliberately shallow in depth, constructed with the same limitations as sculp-
ture when it is compressed into a bas relief. The result was that the painting had the 
appearance of a compact object existing in its own right. In this respect, with the 
image obscured by the analytical process of dissection and systematic reconstruc-
tion, Cubist paintings became related to African tribal art, or even to the “concep-
tual” image of medieval art. Eventually, as the art historian Roland Penrose ob-
serves, Cubism retraced its steps back to a more easily recognized relationship 
with the objective world. Picasso’s and Braque’s work from the 1920s re-introduced 
a greater sense of depth and other representational elements. For example, Picasso’s 
Mandolin and Guitar (1924) depicts the schematized but recognizable musical in-
struments, a table, a room, and an open window with a view of clouds in the sky. 
The objects are distorted but identifiable, and they interlock with their shadows 
and intervening spaces in such a way that they appear to be solid objects united by 
clear, semi-realistic spatial relations (Penrose 1973: 257).
Freed from the post-Renaissance expectation to serve as a mirror up to nature, 
twentieth-century painting subsequently took off in a number of unpredictable 
experimental directions, eventually to become an elitist art form, leaving main-
stream visual culture to the more democratic and naturalistic photographic me-
dia. As evidenced by photojournalism, family photographs, book illustrations, 
film, television, video and DVD, the indexical medium of photography became 
the prototype for much of popular and commercial visual culture, relegating the 
traditional iconic media of painting and sculpture to galleries, museums, and pri-
vate, elitist collections. The characteristic form of traditional fine arts is its unique-
ness and individualism, whereas the modern photographic media, with their 
cheap, easy, and fast duplication of images, are essentially democratic and popu-
list. Traditional arts also rely on the distinction between authentic and fake, be-
tween original and copy, between professionalism and amateurism, between good 
taste and bad taste, while the modern media blur or abolish these distinctions. 
Even photography’s huge educational role in disseminating traditional works of 
art by means of printed reproductions has the side effect of devaluing art, precisely 

 From Interaction to Symbol
by turning a rare commodity into something common and perhaps too easily ac-
cessible. Before the invention of photography artworks had been accessible only to 
an elite few; when paintings could be reproduced by the millions, art became avail-
able to everyone. Despite the fact that photography misrepresents a work of art by 
distorting its dimensions, often depriving it of colour, and reducing a sculpture to 
a two-dimensional image, it has been, on balance, immensely helpful in removing 
art from its elitist isolation and in democratizing it (Friday 2002: 60).
At the same time, the over-saturation of our living environment with innu-
merable images, static and moving, constantly competing for our attention through 
billboards, posters, public signs, book covers, colour magazines, leaflets, shop win-
dow displays, mobile ads, television, cinema and theatre, to say nothing of tradi-
tional museums and galleries, has the inevitable effect of numbing our visual sen-
sitivity. There is only so much attention that individual viewers can devote to the 
visual stimuli surrounding them, and with so much to look at the inescapable re-
sult is to spread that attention more thinly, losing the concentration required to 
absorb the full informational content of any single image. Gone therefore is the 
deep suggestiveness and emotive, even “magical” power of images characteristic of 
pre-industrial cultures with their relative scarcity of secondary visual representa-
tions. In a society where the only man-made images are religious paintings in a 
near-by church, their contemplation, especially in the spatial context of the church’s 
architecture and the emotionally heightened atmosphere of the ritual, can produce 
a more powerful aesthetic effect than the ephemeral, constantly changing images 
that bombard us from everywhere during our waking hours in our post-industrial, 
media-saturated environment. Of course the choice is much wider now, but we 
have to exercise more self-control in focusing our attention selectively on some 
images while ignoring others, to avoid becoming desensitized and blasé about an 
important part of Western culture.
Why we enjoy pictures
Despite our over-exposure and habituation to intense and varied visual stimuli, 
our attention and sensitivity to man-made images are never likely to disappear, 
firstly because sight is by far the strongest, most efficient sense in humans, and 
secondly because of our species-specific fascination with secondary visual repre-
sentations, often at the expense of attention paid to primary representations. 
Strange as it may seem, in certain situations iconic signs, which are part of indirect 
communication, can be preferable to contiguous signs, which belong to direct 
communication. Commenting on the growing popular culture Henry James 
pointed out in his 1890 short story The Real Thing that mass media encouraged the 

	
Chapter 8.  The thrills of visual realism	 
general public’s “perversity – an innate preference for the represented subject over 
the real one” (James 1945: 194). Over two centuries earlier the philosopher Blaise 
Pascal also remarked: “What vanity is painting, which attracts admiration by the 
resemblance of things the originals of which are not admired” (Pascal 1985: 189). 
In the early fifteenth century the Byzantine philologist Manuel Chrysoloros ad-
dressed the same question at greater length:
Why is it that when we see a live horse or a dog or a lion (as we may do every day), 
we are not roused to admiration, are not delighted by its beauty and attach little 
value to its appearance – and the same applies to a tree, a fish, a cock and even to 
human beings... – but when we see the picture of a horse or a bull or a plant or a 
bird or a man, or even of a fly, a worm, a mosquito or some other foul animal, we 
are greatly moved by the sight of such pictures and make much of them?... we 
neglect the existing models for all their beauty, while we admire their representa-
tions.... Furthermore, it is not considered shameful to gaze upon the beauty of 
statues and paintings (on the contrary, this indicates a certain nobility of spirit on 
the part of the admiring spectator), whereas to gaze upon beautiful women is a 
licentious and shameful act. What is the reason for this? It is that in images we are 
admiring the beauty not of bodies, but of the maker’s mind (Mango 1972: 254).
The apparent preference for secondary representations (in certain situations) 
seems paradoxical, considering the adaptive importance of responses to contigu-
ous situations: a painted or a well photographed lion can be aesthetically preferable 
to a real one, but it obviously pays in survival term to exert fully our attention to a 
live predator in our vicinity. The alertness and emotional arousal caused by real 
threat cannot therefore compare in intensity with a mere thrill or passing interest 
in watching animal predators on paintings, photographs, or in television nature 
films. At the same time what probably motivates our interest in pictures is that well 
executed, aesthetically appealing secondary representations give us the thrill of 
emotion and excitement of surrogate experience at no real cost in terms of serious 
life consequences or risk to our life or safety. As Oscar Wilde said, “Art does not 
hurt us. The tears we shed at a play are a type of the exquisite sterile emotions that 
it is the function of Art to awaken. We weep, but we are not wounded. We grieve, 
but our grief is not bitter,” because “emotion for the sake of emotion is the aim of 
art, and emotion for the sake of action in the aim of life” (Wilde 1994: 1135).
If contiguous emergency is what for adaptive reasons alerts our senses, lack of 
immediate threat or emergency has the effect of numbing our sensitivity to ordi-
nary, repetitive, and therefore familiar stimuli, often to the point of making us ig-
nore them altogether, despite the fact that objectively speaking there is nothing 
“ordinary” about anything that surrounds us. Seen from a less desensitized per-
spective our immediate living environment, and by extension the wider world, the 
phenomenon of life in it, the existence of the human species and the universe are 

 From Interaction to Symbol
nothing short of a miracle. Over-familiarity may dull both the senses and the intel-
lect but, as André Gide said, “a wise man is astonished at everything.” On the 
other hand secondary representations seem to attract our attention for reasons 
other than immediate threat or emergency. First of all, as the Byzantine scholar 
quoted above suggests, in admiring images we do not admire the represented ob-
jects themselves but “the maker’s mind.” In other words works of art, iconic as they 
are in relation to the objects they depict, are indexical in relation to their authors’ 
talent, skill, and imagination – all manifestations of exceptional cognitive abilities 
which we are innately predisposed to appreciate in fellow humans. Also, as I ar-
gued in the previous chapters, secondary images such as paintings, photographs, 
or film constitute spatio-temporally displaced signs that activate our specifically 
human meta-cognitive faculties, offering a compelling illusion of control over the 
represented objects, based on the instinctive desire, underlying the homeopathic 
magic, to deny the working of time by subjectively converting contiguous signs 
into temporally displaced icons. Temporal or spatial separation between image 
and original uncouples stimulus from response, rendering dangerous objects 
harmless and more “under control.” The painted lions from the Chauvet cave, awe-
some as they may look, are “tame” compared with their displaced live equivalents, 
just as the petrifying gaze of Medusa is disarmed by being displaced through the 
reflection in Perseus’ magic mirror.
Another possible reason why we find secondary representations attractive is 
that their informational content is usually of a different kind than that of the sur-
rounding environment, precisely by virtue of being mediated by the artist’s vision 
and skill rather than created spontaneously by natural laws. A work of art, even the 
most realistic one, is always in some important respects uncannily different from 
the object it represents. For example, a live moving human figure or animal is pre-
sented in a painting or a photograph as unnaturally and eerily still, giving the 
viewer an opportunity, unavailable in relation to a live object, of examining the 
object closely and for as long as the viewer wishes. Moreover a painting, a well 
composed photograph, a theatrical play or a scripted and edited film communi-
cate information with a concentration and structure far above what, on average, 
surrounds the viewer in the spontaneous, uncontrolled flux of life. The prehistoric 
cave paintings contain a far greater concentration of animals of different species in 
a given space than can possibly be encountered in real life. Carefully selected and 
thoughtfully arranged visual elements within the limited space of a panel painting 
can also create meaningful tensions lacking in a haphazard arrangement of objects 
normally surrounding us in our living space, just as dramatic tension in a play or 
film offers a version of life experience far exceeding the emotional intensity and 
concentration usually found in our daily, and for the most part dramatically une-
ventful lives.

chapter 9
Linguistic iconicity and the limits 
of arbitrariness
One of the general points I make in this book is that types of communication, as 
distinguished in Chapter 2, appear to form an evolutionary hierarchy based on the 
increasing complexity of cognitive processes involved in exchanging information 
and producing meaning. In the simplest case a direct physical interaction between 
spatio-temporally co-present systems is the basis of contiguous communication, 
which can exist on its own (as in animal communication), but is also a prerequisite 
of indirect communication, that is, communication involving displaced referents 
(as in much of human communication). The simplest form of indirect interaction 
between spatio-temporally separated systems is by means of a physical change 
produced by the sender in the environment – what I called indexical communica-
tion. Another type of indirect interaction between spatio-temporally separated 
systems is by means of a physical change produced by the receiver in the environ-
ment, in which the change physically resembles the sender – what I called iconic 
communication. Finally, I distinguished another type of indirect interaction be-
tween spatio-temporally separated systems, also by means of a physical change 
produced by the receiver in the environment, except that this time the change does 
not bear any perceptual resemblance to the sender, but only refers to it in an ab-
stract, arbitrary way. The arbitrary, structurally non-equivalent relation between 
original and image is correspondingly the basis of symbolic communication, while 
a physical change produced by the receiver in the environment and referring to the 
original is called symbol.
As Terrence Deacon also reminds us the indexical, iconic, and symbolic forms 
of reference reflect a classic philosophical trichotomy of possible modes of asso-
ciative relationship: physical correlation, similarity, and law or convention, respec-
tively. The great modern philosophers of mind such as John Locke, David Hume, 
Immanuel Kant and others had each in one way or another argued that these three 
modes of relationship describe the fundamental forms by which ideas can come to 
be associated. The philosophic trichotomy with its ascending order of associative 
relationships also lies at the basis of Peirce’s hierarchic semiotic triad of icon-in-
dex-symbol, in which more complex forms of reference are built upon simpler 
forms. Deacon tacitly accepts Peirce’s sequence of icon-index-symbol, with its 

 From Interaction to Symbol
implication of increasing complexity of referential competence: “indexical refer-
ence depends upon iconic reference, and symbolic reference depends upon in-
dexical reference” (Deacon 1997: 70, 74). However, I want to argue that if referen-
tial competence is to reflect the evolutionary complexity of the nervous system, 
indexical communication should probably come first (as a spatial extension of 
basic contiguous communication), followed by iconic communication (already 
presupposing a more advanced organism capable of “imagining” an external ob-
ject), before we can talk about symbols with their perceptual indifference to ob-
jects or concepts they refer to. The simplest autonomous systems, such as single-
celled organisms, interact with their environments solely through contiguous 
mechanical forces and through contiguous indexes in the form of secreted chemi-
cal substances. By comparison iconic communication, even in the form of primary 
representation, is only available to animal organisms equipped with “concepts” as 
generalized representations of adaptively important elements of the environment, 
accumulated in the animals’ brains by trials and errors of natural selection. As I 
demonstrated in Chapter 7, human higher-order consciousness makes it possible 
to translate primary representations into secondary representations in the form of 
spatio-temporally displaced material iconic images of art. Icons cannot therefore 
precede indexes in the evolutionary sense; rather, the reverse is more likely the 
case, as is even reflected (intuitively and correctly in my view) in the earlier-cited 
classical myth of the origin of portrait painting (icon) from a person’s shadow 
(index). If this evolutionary sequence is correct, symbols will be expected to have 
arisen from icons rather than from indexes.
Defining symbol
For Peirce, “A Symbol is a sign which refers to the Object that it denotes by virtue 
of a law, usually an association of general ideas, which operates to cause the Sym-
bol to be interpreted as referring to that Object” (Peirce 1998: 143). The “law” that 
Peirce mentions in his rather vague definition is what is usually referred to as so-
cial convention, a specifically human, culture-related capacity to establish and so-
cialize an arbitrary, perceptually unmotivated, spatio-temporally displaced con-
nection between sign and its meaning (Saussure 1974: 67; Sebeok 1976: 45; Deacon 
1997: 71; Bertalanffy 1981: 44). Thus understood arbitrariness is the cornerstone 
of Ferdinand de Saussure’s structural linguistics, which on the one hand stresses 
the social nature of the linguistic sign (in the sense that it is not created by an in-
dividual speaker but by a linguistic community), and on the other hand it high-
lights the arbitrary, unmotivated character of the sign, which “has no natural con-
nection with the signified (i.e. meaning)” (Saussure 1974: 69, 113). By contrast, 

	
Chapter 9.  Linguistic iconicity and the limits of arbitrariness	 
indexes and icons do possess a natural connection with their originals (contiguous 
and pictorial, respectively), and it is this non-arbitrary origin that determines and 
delimits the outward appearance of these types of signs. On the other hand, in the 
case of the arbitrary sign the outward form (image) becomes irrelevant, because it 
has no natural connection with its referent (original), and in itself it does not sug-
gest what the sign is referring to.
But if the form of the sign does not suggest the sign’s meaning, how is meaning 
produced and communicated, in human verbal language for example? Structural 
linguistics tells us that meaning is generated not by signs alone, because their arbi-
trary nature precludes any inherent semantic value, nor even by concepts as the 
signs’ mental equivalents, but by relations between signs; more specifically, by per-
ceptual differences between signs, because the source of the signifying power of 
signs, we are told, is solely the linguistic system to which they belong. In other 
words, for structuralists meaning lies neither in the physical form of the sign, nor 
inside the speaker’s mind, nor is it produced as an interaction between the two, but 
is determined only within the linguistic system itself by the sign’s opposition to 
other signs. This effectively implies that linguistic meaning has nothing to do with 
the speakers’ minds and behaviour, because it is generated in the meta-sphere of a 
linguistic system existing independently from individual speakers. For Raymond 
Tallis this de facto “denial of the pre-linguistic reality of the signified” is the most 
revolutionary and controversial aspect of Saussure’s theory. In structuralist thought 
the meaning (signified) is not a “thing” “out there,” nor is it a pre-linguistic psy-
chological entity: rather, the signified is purely relational (Tallis 1999b: 274; Saus-
sure 1974: 117). Arbitrary signs, the only type of signs that structuralists appear to 
be interested in, thus exist independently both from human minds and from the 
external, extra-linguistic world.
This indeed looks like a revolutionary view of communication, one that in 
some important respects contradicts what I said in the earlier chapters about the 
psychological and adaptive function of signs and their role in the social exchange 
of information about important facts of life; that is, facts existing “out there” be-
yond language. But does the notion of the arbitrariness of the linguistic sign really 
justify the conclusion that language forms a closed semantic system, unrelated to 
the extra-linguistic reality and to human experience? And what about an even 
bolder and in fact improbable structuralist claim that human mind and thinking 
are solely determined by arbitrary linguistic signs unconnected with the external, 
physical world. According to Saussure:
Psychologically our thought – apart from its expression in words – is only a shape-
less and indistinct mass... without the help of signs we would be unable to make a 
clear-cut, consistent distinction between two ideas. Without language, thought is 

 From Interaction to Symbol
a vague, uncharted nebula. There are no pre-existing ideas before the appearance 
of language (Saussure 1974: 111).
It is an amazing and in fact largely unproven assertion, impossible to accept today, 
especially in view of the well-documented evolution of human communication 
from contiguous interactions with the environment, through indexical and iconic 
signs, all of which Saussure’s structuralist theory appears to ignore, proposing in-
stead a truly “arbitrary” and indeed unsubstantiated view of language as a deus ex 
machina, miraculously springing out of nowhere, fully formed, connected with 
nothing except itself, unrelated to evolutionary earlier forms of communication, 
and taking full possession of the human mind that has allegedly nothing else at its 
disposal with which to negotiate the world.
Indexical features of language
Nor did Saussure himself invent the idea of “l’arbitraire du signe.” The arbitrariness 
of all linguistic sings was first formulated two centuries before by John Locke, who 
wrote in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690) that words are signs 
of their ideas “not by any natural connection... but by voluntary Imposition” (Locke 
1978: 67). In twentieth-century linguistics and linguistics inspired literary and 
cultural studies, the arbitrariness of the linguistic sign has acquired the status of a 
dogma, in which language is perceived as a closed and autonomous semiotic sys-
tem with its own internal determinants of meaning independent from the extra-
linguistic world (Nöth 2001: 17, 25). However, despite its popularity and influence 
within academia, the structuralist claim remains a non sequitur: namely, while it 
is true that all linguistic signs have arbitrary features, it does not automatically fol-
low that no linguistic signs have non-arbitrary features. As the linguist Earl R. 
Anderson points out, the Saussurian analysis of meaning was incomplete from the 
beginning because it ignored important and ever-present iconic and emotive (in-
dexical) dimensions of language, present in it as residues of the evolutionary ear-
lier, pre-linguistic forms of communication (Anderson 1998:  67; Willems and 
De Cuypere 2009).
Interestingly, unlike his structuralist and poststructuralist followers Saussure 
himself qualified the concept of the arbitrariness of linguistic signs by conceding 
that there are “degrees of arbitrariness,” and that the sign may be “relatively moti-
vated” (Saussure 1974: 131). First of all, grammar and inflections impose partial 
motivation, whereby phonemic allusion can betray semantic proximity, as for ex-
ample in the phonetic closeness of kinship terms: the English father-mother-broth-
er-sister, or the French père-mère-frère. In fact, Saussure calls the principle of the 

	
Chapter 9.  Linguistic iconicity and the limits of arbitrariness	 
arbitrariness of the sign “irrational,” granting that “there is no language in which 
nothing is motivated” (Saussure 1974: 133). Like the other types of signs used by 
humans: contiguous, indexical, and iconic, symbolic linguistic signs are a product 
of cumulative evolution, which means that their arbitrariness is built upon earlier, 
non-arbitrary features, still present in language on the level of phonology, mor-
phology, and syntax.
In Chapter 4 I argued that primate emotive vocalizations and early human bod-
ily adornments represent a transition from fully contiguous communication to con-
tiguously indexical communication, whereby vocal signals and bodily modifications 
externalize by making audible or visible the inner physiological and emotional 
states. Bodily symptoms, cues and signals already involve some spatial displacement 
between original (an unseen inner state) and image (outward bodily expression or 
vocalization), as such representing an early form of referentiality. Among the most 
typical human pre-linguistic, innate emotive vocalizations are laughter (sympto-
matic of joy), shouts of derision, cry of pain, growl of anger, gasp of astonishment, 
cooing in intimate situations and so on. Following the evolutionary and cumulative 
view of communication, whereby the later forms build upon the earlier ones, one 
would expect both the emotive (indexical) and iconic vocal features to be co-present 
among the more recent arbitrary elements of the spoken language.
The most archaic human auditory signals are indeed emotive vocalizations, 
indexical in respect of the speaker’s emotional and physiological states, and con-
sisting of such familiar expressions as interjections, grunts, moans, cries, whistles, 
clicks, coughing, hiccupping, laughing, expressive intonation and so on (Hinton, 
Nichols and Ohala 1994: 2). These vocal signals are usually part of a more complex 
visual-auditory display including bodily posture and facial expression (smiles, 
frown etc.), by means of which humans and other primates communicate such at-
titudes as dominance, submission, appeasement, threat or sexual arousal (Knight 
1999: 229). Visual and auditory emotive displays have arisen in the course of evo-
lution as communicative responses to adaptively important life situations such as 
encounters with predators and human enemies, search for food, mating, rearing of 
offspring, social bonding and so on. As an archaic system of symptomatic com-
munication human emotive language is related to the vocal calls of primates (e.g. 
chimp pant hoots), and is controlled by phylogenetically old, subcortical neural 
structures in the brain stem and limbic system, heavily involved in emotion 
(Hauser 1998: 196; Pinker 1995: 365). Emotive signals are both non-iconic, in the 
sense that an expressed emotion does not “resemble” the situation that caused it, 
and non-arbitrary, in that the connection between vocal expression and the cor-
responding emotional state is not based on learned social convention but is innate 
and more or less automatic. For this reason emotive language is common to all 
humans, revealing cross-cultural intelligibility: for instance, cries of fear, anger, or 

 From Interaction to Symbol
joy are correctly identified as such regardless of race or culture (Badcock 2000: 121). 
Familiar to everyone but rarely the subject of linguistic analysis, emotive vocaliza-
tions hover around the margins of conventional phonology, although they are ef-
fectively exploited in comic strips and cartoons with their onomatopoeic and ex-
clamatory expressions (Crystal 1995: 250; Aitchison 2000: 13).
Communicating factual knowledge about the outside world may be the evolu-
tionary raison d’être of language (the structuralist claims to the contrary notwith-
standing), but at least as strong a case can be made for human innate social need 
for affective expression as the essential motivator of language. The linguist Edward 
Stankiewicz argues that some vocal sounds are for historical, linguistic or extra-
linguistic reasons believed to be emotive, by carrying pleasant or unpleasant con-
notations. For example, /r/ was considered by the Romans a “littera canina,” just as 
the letter “f” is considered by the Russians “indecent,” to say nothing of its place in 
the main English swear word (Pinker 2007: 354–362). The phonemes which occur 
with a high statistical frequency in emotionally charged words may also become 
associated with their emotive content, as for example the Spanish /č/ in word-ini-
tial positions, as in chico, chaparron, chasco, chillar (Stankiewicz 1972: 244). As 
Roman Jakobson also notes, experiments with English speakers have revealed a 
consistent emotive association of the liquid phoneme /r/ with “roughness,” 
“strength,” “heaviness” and “bitterness,” while the other liquid /l/ was perceived as 
“tame,” “peaceful,” “smooth,” “light in weight,” “clear,” “weak” and so on (Jakobson 
and Waugh 1987: 187). In different languages (Yiddish, Basque, Russian, Polish, 
some American Indian languages) expressive palatalization is used in affectionate 
speech, for example in address to children, in child-speech, and in nursery songs, 
possibly because the vowel /i/ and the semivowel /j/ involved in palatalization are 
high-frequency sounds, iconically associated with smallness and infantilism 
(Stankiewicz 1972: 249). Earl R. Anderson also mentions the phenomenon of par-
averbals – emotive noises used in everyday speech that have no grammatical func-
tion (since they do not combine with other morphemes). Paraverbals are com-
posed variously of voiceless vowels, voiceless nasals, ingressives, clicks, tones, 
phonemic glides, vowelless syllables, and consonant clusters like initial [ts-] or 
[ps]. Paraverbals exist outside the parameters of the morphological rules of the 
language, but can in time undergo grammaticalization, as for example psst, sh, 
shush, brrr, ha, huh, ugh, ah, phew, phooey, ahem, aha, tut tut, oh-oh, humph and 
so on (Anderson 1998: 124).
Practically every word can be endowed with emotive connotations if it is 
placed in an appropriate social situation or verbal context. Even speechlessness is 
proverbially the most unmistakable sign of emotion. Depending on the context, 
emotionally neutral words or even nonsense words may acquire pejorative or af-
fectionate connotations, as when an American mother calls her child monkey-face, 

	
Chapter 9.  Linguistic iconicity and the limits of arbitrariness	 
pussycat, cookie, honey-bun, or sugar-plum. Features such as alliteration, rhyme, 
patterned variations of vowels or consonants can heighten the cohesion and 
uniqueness of the message, and can contribute to its emotive intensity, particu-
larly if the message also has a conceptually emotive charge. For example, the Polish 
expression kuku na muniu, meaning “to be crazy,” owes its expressive effect (apart 
from its content) to the diminutive form muniu (from mózg, “brain”), and to the 
repetition of the back vowel /u/. Connotations of irony or sarcasm are also con-
veyed through word-pairs, found for example in Yiddish where any initial conso-
nant may be replaced, and the initial vowel preceded, by the cluster /shm-/, as in 
libe-shmibe (“love”), mojre-shmojre (“fear”). This phenomenon has passed (per-
haps through Jewish humorists) into English, as exemplified by the sarcastic mon-
ey-shmoney, confusion-shmoosion, Oedipus-shmedipus.
Code-switching or the speaker’s selection of elements of foreign, dialectal, 
substandard or more archaic forms of language is another source in the rendering 
of emotional attitudes. The wide diffusion outside original languages of such emo-
tionally charged words as Spanish loco and macho, Yiddish meshuge and chutzpah, 
or Italian basta testifies to the emotive power of foreignisms and to the constant 
need of members of a speech community to replace their own words, paled through 
usage, by fresher, more “exotic” and emotionally more striking expressions, as ex-
emplified by the “soppy French phrases” used by Del Boy, the endearing and ri-
diculously snobbish would-be yuppie from the BBC classic sitcom Only Fools and 
Horses. The “exotic” features of foreign languages, like behavioural peculiarities of 
foreigners, tend to provoke strong emotional reactions, and when imitated they 
may serve to express irony, contempt, derogation, or at times favourable attitudes. 
Sounds or grammatical forms alien to one’s own language are known to have been 
interpreted as affectation, as feebleness of mind, as decadent, or, on the contrary, 
as signs of elegance, confidence, or snobbery (Stankiewicz 1972: 239, 245–247, 
252). In real life as well as in life-simulating drama, the explicit informational con-
tent coded in the arbitrary elements of spoken utterances is also nearly always 
complemented by such implicit, connotative, emotionally charged non-arbitrary 
auditory features as timbre, intonation, pitch and volume.
The emotive features of language and music
Emotive elements of language are mostly indexical and non-iconic, in the sense 
that their outward expression bears no formal resemblance to the emotional states 
that elicit them, but in actual linguistic performance the emotive signs usually 
blend with the more representational, iconic features that mimic their referents. 
Volume, rhythm and pitch are among such iconic auditory features of language, 

 From Interaction to Symbol
also found in music, where they quantify the intensity of communicated emotion 
(Marler 1977: 52). In spoken language as well as in music, the louder the signal the 
more emphasis is given to whatever emotion is being expressed; the softer – the 
less emphasis (Sloboda 1985: 59). Rhythm and tempo in turn add emphasis onto 
particular phonemes or notes within a tonal sequence, qualifying the particular 
emotion expressed. Finally pitch, the “up-and-down” dimension of speech and 
music, is used to grade the emotive quality of sound frequency: rising pitch is uni-
versally described as active, assertive, affirmative, aggressive, striving, protesting, 
aspiring, generally “outgoing,” while falling pitch is considered relaxed, yielding, 
passive, assenting, welcoming, accepting, enduring, generally “incoming” (Ohala 
1994; Mithen 2005: 92). Universally in human languages there is also a statistical 
tendency for vocal sounds of low frequency to relate to objects that are large, heavy, 
hard, masculine, low, slow, and dull, and for sounds of high frequency to connote 
small, light, soft, feminine, high, fast, and sharp objects (Anderson 1998: 102). The 
iconic value of pitch is also used in animal communication, where the frequency 
of the produced sound is negatively correlated with the weight of the vocalizer, 
thus indirectly indicating the animal’s size. Larger individuals will have relatively 
lower pitched voices than small individuals, and therefore lower pitch will be cor-
related with size and consequently with strength and dominance. Universally in 
mammalian kingdom, including human vocal displays, aggressive vocalizations 
are low in pitch, while submissive vocalizations are relatively high in pitch (Hauser 
1998: 19, 177, 476). Thus larger and aggressive animals bellow, growl and roar, 
while smaller, submissive and fearful animals squeal and squeak. In situations of 
domination and subordination pitch can also be combined with equally iconic 
volume, whereby louder voice will express assertiveness and aggression, while 
softer voice will indicate fear and submission.
As Steven Mithen also observes in relation to primate vocalizations, one of 
their important features is their musical character, in the sense of making substan-
tial use of rhythm and melody, involving also synchronization and turn-taking. 
Mithen argues that it is from the holistic, emotive, manipulative, multi-modal, and 
musical characteristics of ape communication systems that human language and 
music ultimately evolved from common ancestors about six million years ago in 
Africa (Mithen 2005: 121). It is a universal of human nature that we respond emo-
tionally to music, especially in groups. As also argued by Robin Dunbar, the emo-
tional response to music is archaic, controlled by the evolutionary old limbic sys-
tem, and it long predates the evolution of language (Dunbar 2005:  132). The 
evolutionist Geoffrey Miller also links the complex and creative acoustic displays 
among animals and humans to sexual selection: accordingly, acoustic signals func-
tion as courtship displays to attract sexual partners, by advertising the performer’s 
health and intelligence, generally fitness (Miller 2000a: 356).

	
Chapter 9.  Linguistic iconicity and the limits of arbitrariness	 
Both spontaneous emotive vocalizations and structured, conventionalized 
music are basically emotive and manipulative rather than referential or communi-
cative in function. For instance, there is the commonly held idea that major scales 
in music express positive emotions such as joy, confidence, love, serenity and tri-
umph, while the minor scales express negative emotions such as sorrow, fear, hate 
and despair, although it is not clear yet whether these correlations are indeed uni-
versal. Steven Mithen quotes an experiment conducted by the psychologist Patrik 
Justin, in which musicians were played five different melodies and were told to 
choose emotions appropriate to them. The result showed considerable concord-
ance among the musicians, indicating that distinct styles of playing were associ-
ated with specific emotional expressions. Thus anger was associated with fast tem-
po and legato articulation; sadness with slow tempo, legato articulation and low 
volume; happiness with fast tempo, high sound level and staccato articulation; and 
fear with a low sound level, staccato articulation, and a slow tempo. Also, Justin 
found a very strong correlation between the emotion intended by the musicians 
and that which the listeners believed was being expressed. Moreover, the listeners 
who were trained musicians had no greater success than those without expert mu-
sical knowledge in attributing emotions to different melodies, and – interestingly 
– women had slightly greater success than men (Mithen 2005: 93).
Phonetic iconicity
The emotive and iconic features of animal vocal signals are still exclusively em-
ployed in the service of contiguous communication, mainly to convey current 
emotive states and intentions. On the other hand, in humans linguistic iconicity 
reveals a much wider and richer scope, in mimicking not just the contiguous emo-
tive and physiological states but also the spatio-temporally displaced objects and 
events. Just as consciousness and extended working memory were the cognitive 
prerequisites for the emergence of visual arts, with their permanent iconic repre-
sentations of remembered objects, so the same uniquely human cognitive disposi-
tions will be expected to produce displaced iconic representations of relevant ex-
ternal objects and situations by means of the auditory medium of language 
(Herlofsky 2001: 58).
The easiest way to re-present certain objects and events through displaced au-
ditory signs is to mimic the sounds they produce. Indeed, according to the linguist 
Leanne Hinton onomatopoeic vocalizations (to use just English examples: bang, 
cough, cuckoo, murmur, splash, sizzle, scrape, tap, pop, crash, crunch, groan, purr, 
squeak, roar etc.) are the simplest, the most widespread, and probably the earliest 
auditory iconic signs – primitive names for objects or events in the form of an 

 From Interaction to Symbol
imitation of the sounds produced by them (Hinton, Nichols and Ohala 1994: 3). In 
pre-symbolic, mimetic culture vocal imitations of animal and environmental 
sounds would have very good uses, particularly in a hunting-gathering culture 
that lacked speech. Simulated bird calls and animal cries are still used in hunting 
throughout the world. Among the Huambisa people of the Peruvian rainforest, for 
example, a third of the names for the 206 kinds of birds they recognize are ono-
matopoeic in origin (Donald 1991: 184; Mithen 2005: 169).
Onomatopoeic expressions are often conventionalized into language-specific 
grammatical forms, for which reasons they have been incorrectly included by 
structural linguists among arbitrary signs (Saussure 1974: 56). Thus for example 
the snip of a pair of scissors is su-su in Chinese, cri-cri in Italian, riqui-riqui in 
Spanish, terre-terre in Portugese, krits-krits in modern Greek. The quack of a duck 
is couac-couac or coin-coin in French, cuac-cuac in Spanish, qua-qua in Italian, 
kva-kva in Russian, cac-cac in Vietnemese, but mac-mac in Romanian, ga-ga in 
Japanese, bat-bat in Arabic, ya-ya in Mandarin Chinese, ap-ap in Cantonese (An-
derson 1998: 130). Saussure was the first to argue that translinguistic differences 
among onomatopes prove that these supposedly imitative forms actually are con-
ventional (Saussure 1974: 69). Indeed they are, but as Earl R. Anderson points out, 
arbitrary features of language do not preclude the co-presence of non-arbitrary, 
iconic features, because onomatopoeia depends upon necessarily partial resem-
blance to its referent, not upon complete identity. Since no human can imitate 
non-human sounds exactly due to the constraints both of the language-specific 
phonological system and of the structure of the human vocal tract, one should not 
expect identical onomatopes in different languages. A cow goes moo in English, 
muh in German, boe in Dutch, meuh in French, and ammu in Finnish. Iconic 
signs, as partially resemblant forms, are thus composed of both arbitrary and non-
arbitrary features. Nor are onomatopoeic expressions marginal and therefore neg-
ligible in language, as is sometimes supposed. In Estonian, for instance, twenty 
percent of the vocabulary belongs to the onomatopoeic phono-semantic substra-
tum (Anderson 1998: 29, 129–166; Crystal 1995: 174; Pinker 2003: 173).
Non-arbitrary features of language also include cases of mimicking meaning 
through the physical attributes of articulation – what is known as kinaesthetic ico-
nicity (Anderson 1998: 167–190). Phonemes pronounced with bilabial rounding, 
for example, can be regarded as kinaesthetic when they occur in words whose 
meanings include curvilinearity, as in round, mound, mouth, oral, pool, world, 
whirl, or openness, as in open, door, or broach. Even if the vast majority of words 
pronounced with bilabial rounding do not have meanings relating to curvilinear-
ity or openness, given the human propensity towards mimetic thinking kinesthe-
sia, like onomatopoeia, always remains an iconic possibility, so that a word whose 

	
Chapter 9.  Linguistic iconicity and the limits of arbitrariness	 
articulation somehow “resembles” its meaning will be perceived as more “natural” 
than the entirely arbitrary one.
Thus for example English here, French ici, and Urdu idr are articulated with 
the mouth drawn back, as though toward oneself, while there, là, and udr are ar-
ticulated with the tongue brought forward, pointing as it were to the contiguous 
original. A survey of 136 languages also demonstrated that proximity as opposed 
to distance is associated with high front vowels and with high tone. There is a uni-
versal pattern of vowel contrasts, in which vowels for words of proximity (as in 
here) are relatively high-front, whereas vowels in words for distance (as in there) 
are lower or further back (Anderson 1998: 94). The kinaesthetic expressions nam-
by-pamby and sneer are pronounced with the mouth and nose wrinkling in an 
expression of dislike. Collocations of words with consonant clusters gr-, gn-, gl- in 
English can be interpreted as imitative of grinning, growling, groaning, as can 
other expressions or paraverbals in which the jaw or throat comes into play. Among 
the most common forms of kinesthesia is the association of plosives, fricatives and 
affricates with aspiration and, by metaphorical extension, with the wind or a storm. 
The storm in King Lear is represented in part by Lear’s apostrophe: “Blow, winds, 
and crack your cheeks! rage! blow!” (3.2.1) and actors playing the part can increase 
the explosiveness of bl-, cr-, and ch- sounds in order to make its expressiveness 
correspond to its meaning. Blow, crack, and cheeks are not onomatopes; they do 
not “sound” anything like the wind or a storm, but their articulation requires a 
forceful air flow through the oral cavity as a partial iconic representation of a storm 
(Shakespeare 1997: 263; Anderson 1998: 186).
A particularly rich source of linguistic iconicity is synaesthesia, in which cer-
tain phonological patterns are intuitively perceived to represent visual or tactile 
properties of objects, such as size, shape, softness, temperature, movement, weight 
and so on (Sadowski 2003: 418). Synaesthesia refers to a subjective psychological 
experience of cross modality, that is, of interpreting one sense in terms of another, 
as in “seeing” musical notes as colours, or in “hearing” different colours as musical 
notes. As Leanne Hinton puts it, synaesthetic signs are a result of an “acoustic 
symbolisation of non-acoustic phenomena” (Hinton, Nichols and Ohala 1994: 4). 
As I also mentioned earlier, in phono-semantic experiments subjects would de-
scribe the liquid phoneme [r] transmodally as “rough,” “strong,” “heavy,” “bitter” 
etc., and [l] as “tame,” “peaceful,” “smooth,” “light-weight,” “clear,” “weak” and so 
on (Jakobson and Waugh 1987: 187). In other words, phonetic, acoustic phenom-
ena can be subjectively associated with visual, tactile, and even gustatory sensa-
tions. Synaesthesia represents a significant tendency in languages throughout the 
world: for instance, in almost ninety percent of the languages that have diminutive 
marking, the diminutive is imitated by the use of high front vowels. Analyses of 
vocabulary and psycholinguistic experiments also reveal a significant tendency to 

 From Interaction to Symbol
associate small size with high front vowels and large size with lower or back vow-
els. Jonathan Swift’s names in Gulliver’s Travels provide convenient examples: his 
Lilliput, the diminutive land of midgets, and Brobdingnag, the land of giants, are 
influenced in part by vowel contrasts. As Steven Mithen also observes, the associa-
tion between sound and size may have played a role in the naming of animals. He 
quotes an experiment conducted by the ethno-biologist Brent Berlin, who exam-
ined the names of fish among the Huambisa of Peru and the Malay in Malaysia. 
(Berlin chose fish to avoid any onomatopoeic influence.) In both languages there 
was a very significant association between the size of the fish and the types of vow-
els used in their names. The fish small in size were more likely to have names using 
the vowel [i], while those that are relatively larger were more likely to use the vow-
els [e, a, o, u]. There is an intuitive recognition across different cultures that names 
belonging to certain types of animals rely on unconscious links between the sound 
of the word and the physical characteristics of the animal. The names used for 
animals are frequently not entirely arbitrary but reflect inherent properties of the 
animal concerned, including the sounds they make, their size, and the way they 
move (for example, high frequency sounds are often used for animals, such as 
birds, that move quickly and rapidly, and low frequency sounds are used for ani-
mals moving slowly) (Mithen 2005: 170).
Intuitive associations between sounds and other physical properties of objects 
are just as frequent. A study by the psychologists Robert D. Tarte and Michael W. 
O’Boyle revealed that informants, when asked to match geometric shapes with 
pure tone frequencies, preferred circles and ellipses with lower frequencies, and 
angular figures with higher frequencies. Cross-cultural studies including Ameri-
cans, Navajos, Mexican-Spanish, and Japanese speakers show that people in all 
these groups regard “happy” as “up” and “sad” as “down,” “excitement” as “colour-
ful,” and “calm” as “colourless,” thus suggesting that despite other cultural differ-
ences there is an underlying universality in the affective domain (Anderson 
1998: 197). Physical movement and substance can be suggested phonetically as 
well. The linguist Otto Jespersen noted a cross-cultural connotation of the [l] 
sound with “light movement,” in English found in word-initial clusters such as fl-, 
sl-, or gl-, as in flow, flake, flip, flutter, flicker, flop, fling, flurry, slide, slither, glide, or 
glance (Jespersen 1922: 400). An early French philologist Charles de Brosses ob-
served in his treatise on etymology in 1765 that words beginning with [fl-] have a 
“flowing” or “liquid” quality about them (Anderson 1998: 61). Expressive conso-
nants also have a tendency to group themselves in “colonies” through the agencies 
of rhyme, alliteration, and consonantal or vowel ablaut (e.g. flip-flop). The linguist 
David Reid notes a statistical tendency of the [l] sound in words denoting “light 
objects:” a lance as a light weapon, a latch as a light fastening, lather as light foam, 
a lilt as a light song, lunch as a light meal and so on (Reid 1967: 24). In brief, the [l] 

	
Chapter 9.  Linguistic iconicity and the limits of arbitrariness	 
sound seems to reveal an observable tendency to denote lack of size or substance, 
and the uncertain, repeated, light and sudden movement (Crystal 1995: 251).
A particularly interesting case of synaesthetic phonetic iconicity is the word-
initial gl- cluster, which includes the voiced plosive articulated with the back of the 
tongue at the rear of the mouth cavity, followed by a continuous, sonorant lateral 
sound produced with the tip of the tongue pressed against the alveolar ridge, that 
is, towards the front of the mouth cavity. In this way the phonetic properties of the 
cluster illustrate iconically an abrupt and definite start of a process: a decisive be-
ginning from a single point followed by a smooth, gliding movement away from 
the starting point and continuing in time. The energetic, explosive quality of [g] is 
thus combined with the light movement of [l] to suggest, for instance, immaterial 
light shining away from its source. Indeed, such appears to be the main connota-
tion of the English gl- words, as evidenced by glade, glass, gleam, gleed, glimmer, 
glisten, glent, glitter, and glow. Other English words starting with gl- also have to do 
with light: glance, glare, glint, gloat, glower, or glut, or with darkness: gloaming, 
gloom, glower, and glum. Another series of gl- words indicates light movement: 
glace, glaive, glance, glent, glide, glint, glissade; smoothness: glaborous, gleg, glib, 
glossy; slimy, smooth and shiny substance: glair, gleet, glue; as well as joy and splen-
dour: glad, glee, glamour, and glory. An examination of the entire lexicon of Eng-
lish gl- words (most of them Anglo-Saxon or Scandinavian in origin) reveals that 
nearly eighty percent fall into clearly distinguishable and semantically related clus-
ters of meaning related to light, looking, and movement, a percentage high above 
what one would expect from a purely random and arbitrary distribution of mean-
ing in phonetically related words (Sadowski 2001b: 76).
Nor are the semantic connotations identified for the gl- words confined to 
English, suggesting that phonetic iconicity is neither accidental nor language-spe-
cific. The English words are in fact related historically to semantically similar gl- 
words from Old English as well as Old Norse (e.g. glenten), Middle Dutch 
(e.g. glaren), Middle Low German (e.g. glimsen), all meaning “to shine” and “to 
look.” Old Icelandic, another Germanic language that may have lent several gl- 
words to Middle English, possesses the following rich lexicon of gl- words relating 
to “light,” “brightness,” and “sight”: glaðr, glampi, glas, glap, glit, glja, gloa, gloð, 
glora, glygg, as well as words meaning “illusion,” “vision,” or “image”: glap, glamr, 
and glika. The gl- words referring to “shiny, slimy, half-liquid substance” have their 
equivalents in Old French (e.g. glair, glet, gleu) and Old Irish (e.g. gleimen). One 
suspects the involvement of phonetic criteria in the borrowing of certain foreign 
words, whereby the assimilation of new words is facilitated by the phono-semantic 
intuitions of a speech community. For example in Old Irish, a non-Germanic In-
do-European language with a history of interaction both with English and Latin, 
twenty-seven percent of gl- words likewise refer to “light,” “brightness,” and 

 From Interaction to Symbol
“clarity.” They include glain, glan, glas, gle, gleid, gleoir, glesse, glethach, glicc, glor, 
and gluair. In Slavonic languages the choice of gl- words appears to be narrower, 
possibly due to phonological constraints which are different in different languages 
(Chinese, for example, has no [gl] sound in its phonological system at all). The 
light-related vocabulary includes Russian glazet’, “to stare,” glaz, “eye, eyesight,” 
glanet’, “gloss, lustre,” and the famous glasnost’, “openness,” (from “to make visi-
ble”). While phonetic iconicity belongs to an expressive dimension available to all 
languages, the distribution of particular examples of phonetic iconicity appears to 
depend on the requirements and restrictions of phonological systems that are pe-
culiar to languages (Sadowski 2001b: 82).
The word-initial gl- phenomenon is an example of chromaesthesia, or audition 
colorée, a sub-type of synaesthetic iconicity in which perception of light or colour 
is evoked transmodally through sound, as in iconizing brightness and light colours 
by high or front vowels (e.g. gleam, glitter, glimmer), and darkness or dark colours 
by lower back vowels (as in gloom). The basis for these correspondences seems to 
be acoustic: in psycholinguistic experiments informants tend to match bright col-
ours with high pitch and dark colours with low or soft pitch. Loud tones were also 
found to correspond with light grey colours, and soft tones with dark grey 
(Anderson 1998: 101, 191, 218; Sadowski 2002: 38–40). For Roman Jakobson the 
entire vowel system displays “almost the same fundamental properties as the chro-
matic colours” (Jakobson and Waugh 1987: 188–92). Contrary to a prevailing view, 
transmodal perceptions are not rare or pathological, but are quite common, espe-
cially among artists, musicians, painters, or poets, who often talk about “hearing 
colours” and “feeling their temperature,” as in the sensation of “warm” and “cold” 
colours, or in hearing “sweet” or “heavy” sounds. Whatever the primary medium 
of expression, visual in painting or auditory in music or poetry, artistic success 
often depends on the activation of polymodal experiences through cross-referenc-
es between different sensory perceptions, and on blurring the boundaries between 
the senses in an effort to achieve richer poetic evocativeness and expressiveness.
Linguists also distinguish phonaesthetic iconicity, in which certain sound pat-
terns suggest emotions, but not in a direct, symptomatic way as was the case with 
emotive signs. For example, in phonaesthetic iconicity back vowels are perceived 
as “aggressive,” “bold,” “extroverted,” and “energetic,” whereas front vowels are per-
ceived as “kind,” “just,” and “honest.” Otto Jespersen’s analysis of words with high 
front vowels [i] and [i:] also revealed their connotations with weakness or trivial-
ity as well as with littleness, proximity, and pettiness (Jespersen 1922: 235). In their 
comparative study of English, French, and Hungarian vocabulary the linguists 
Ivan and Judit Fónagy have also shown that high front vowels appear more often 
in words whose semantic fields relate to “light, above, cheerful, pretty, sweet, small, 
quick,” and less often in words whose semantic fields relate to “dark, below, sad, 

	
Chapter 9.  Linguistic iconicity and the limits of arbitrariness	 
ugly, bitter, big, slow.” In like manner in these three languages “hard” consonants 
/t, k, r/ are more frequent in words relating to “anger, wild, hard, bad, bitter,” and 
“soft” consonants /l, j, m/ are more frequent in words relating to “love, tender, soft, 
good, sweet” (Anderson 1998: 224, 226).
Morphological and syntactic iconicity
Word inflections can also be interpreted iconically, as when a morpheme is added 
(never subtracted) to form a plural (e.g. dog, dogs), so that the extension of the 
word mimics the multiplication of referents. Another often cited example of mor-
phological iconicity is that of adjectives in the positive, comparative, and superla-
tive degrees in Indo-European languages: these show a gradual increase in the 
number of phonemes used, as in high, higher, highest; altus, altior, altissimus. Ico-
nicity can also appear in individual words as well as in inflections, as in the case of 
reduplication (e.g. ping-pong, tom-tom, zigzag) which imitates the impression of 
repetitive action or sound. In languages around the world reduplication, often ac-
companied by vowel or consonantal ablaut, can be used to create onomatopoeia, 
synaesthesia, and phonoaesthesia. Synaesthetic reduplication includes eentsy-
weentsy, fuzzy-wuzzy, hurly-burly, teeny-weeny, yo-yo, zigzag, whereas reduplica-
tive words combining onomatopoeia and synaesthesia include dingdong, pitter-
patter, ping-pong, ticktock. Phonoaesthetic reduplication in turn includes words 
suggestive of the comic or of disesteem: claptrap, hocus-pocus, hugger-mugger, 
jeepers creepers, lulu, nitty-gritty, okeydokey, razzle-dazzle, riffraff, shilly-shally and 
so on (Anderson 1998: 240, 256).
At a still higher linguistic level we can talk about syntactic iconicity, in which 
word order can relate variously to chronology, hierarchy, preference, direction, 
duration, or complexity versus simplicity. Syntactic iconicity is perhaps more ap-
parent and less subjective than phonetic iconicity, because sentence structure de-
pends on objective spatial-semantic relations which are easier to observe than the 
more emotive phono-semantic relations. Thus the idiomatic saying age before 
beauty iconizes preference, while expressions such as pride comes before a fall, and 
the calm before the storm iconize chronological sequence. There are irreversible 
binominals that often reflect syntax of preference, in which the positive concept 
precedes the negative, as in friend and foe, good and bad, high and low, great and 
small, heaven and hell, light and dark. Other forms of semantic preference are ap-
parent in man and woman, man and wife, mother and child, heaven and earth, sun 
and moon, north and south, east and west, food and drink, bread and wine, ladies 
and gentlemen (Anderson 1998: 267).

 From Interaction to Symbol
Julius Caesar’s famous Veni, vidi, vici (“I came, I saw, I conquered”) is often 
cited as an example of chronological iconicity, in which the temporal order of 
speech events mirrors the order of narrated events in time. But as the linguists 
Olga Fischer and Max Nänny demonstrate, Caesar’s compact phrase brings to-
gether a number of additional syntactic, morphological, and phonetic iconic fea-
tures, including the asyndetic syntax (lack of syntactic links) which mirrors the 
swiftness of Caesar’s actions, and the repetition of first-person-singular verbs to 
convey an emphatic subjective verve and a sense of personal triumph of the speak-
er. Moreover, the increasing assonance of the three verbs (/i:/ occurs once in veni 
but twice in vidi and vici) may reflect the growing momentum of Caesar’s military 
operations; a gradual loss of sonority on the consonantal level (from /n/ to /d/ to 
/k/) may suggest hastened progression with a final punch in victory; while the 
prosodic repetition of three disyllabic words, each containing a consonant and a 
long vowel, and each alliterating on /v/, may create a rhythmic effect of three spon-
dees which lend the short words weight and impact. Also, the alliteration on /v/ 
can highlight the initial sound of the phrasal climax vici (a kind of Churchillian 
V-sign avant la lettre so to speak), and a combination of an identical initial conso-
nant with an identical final vowel can be interpreted as adding splendour to 
Caesar’s laconic victory message (Fischer and Nänny 2001: 2).
Some forms of syntactic iconicity are universal or at least reveal round-the-
world tendencies. For instance, subject, verb, and object (SVO) are the basic syn-
tactic elements found in all languages, because they reflect the fundamental types 
of functional relationships between adaptively significant elements (agents or re-
cipients of action): who (what) is doing what to whom (what). The linguist R. S. 
Tomlin has conducted a syntactic analysis of 402 languages of the world, and has 
shown that forty-five percent have SOV word order, forty-two percent have SVO 
word order, nine percent have VSO word order, three percent have VOS word or-
der, one percent has OVS, and none has OSV. Languages may differ (but not ran-
domly) in the orders of subject, object and verb, but all languages use these syntac-
tic components, which means that they have structures that perform the function 
of nouns, verbs, adjectives and prepositions. Tomlin’s analysis also demonstrates 
that in eighty-seven percent of world languages subject (agent of action) is more 
important than verb (action) and object (recipient of action), and that in no lan-
guage object ever comes first (Tomlin 1986).
The regularities in basic word order are just one illustration of the natural, 
extra-linguistic motivation in language that qualifies and constrains the arbitrari-
ness of linguistic structures. For example, languages tend to group together syn-
tactically what perceptively belongs together (e.g. a red car, if the perceived car is 
red). Grammatical agreement syntactically connects words denoting propositions 
that “go together” mentally (e.g. he works, in which “he” and “works” are linked 

	
Chapter 9.  Linguistic iconicity and the limits of arbitrariness	 
together by perceived or imagined relationship). All languages must be capable of 
expressing certain ideas: perceptual experiences, social relationships, biological 
and physical facts. At the same time all spoken languages must conform to human 
cognitive, physiological and anatomical limitations, to our limited memory and to 
the way our ears and mouths are constructed.
As the linguists Eve V. Clark and Herbert H. Clark also demonstrate, people in 
all cultures divide the inanimate world, the plant and animal kingdoms, and the 
social world into categories, each of which is given a name. The natural categories 
into which people slice up the world are products of the universal human percep-
tual and cognitive apparatus devised by evolution for dealing with the world. Ob-
jects are perceived in terms of attributes which in nature come in clusters. For ex-
ample, if an object is feathered, it is a good bet that it sings, flies, has a beak, and a 
particular shape. It is also a good bet that it doesn’t roar, bear live young, or have 
four legs. Attributes that go together, like feathered, singing, flying, beaked, and 
bird-shaped, define a natural category called “bird,” and the objects within a single 
category share attributes with each other (Clark and Clark 1978: 236). Other lan-
guage universals examined by Clark and Clark include such cognitive categories as 
number, negativity, cause and effect, and time. Thus most languages have ways of 
expressing singular and plural in nouns, and singular, as perceptively more salient, 
is always unmarked grammatically, whereas plural is always marked, as in cat, cats. 
Negatives are always marked with respect to positives, as positive statements are 
primary and more easily processed than negatives: it takes more specification to 
say what something is not than to say what something is. If a language has expres-
sions that differ in complexity for state, change of state, and cause of change of state, 
as in dead, die, and kill, then they are given increasingly complex expression. Fi-
nally, all languages have ways of distinguishing among the present, past, and fu-
ture, but the past is usually marked with respect to the present, and the future al-
ways is: for example, work, worked, will work (Clark and Clark 1978: 247–251).
All languages also appear to make reference to such spatial dimensions as 
height, width, distance, and thickness, because these are the dimensions that the 
human perceptual apparatus is tuned to pick out. One of the adaptively important 
dimensions is defined by the vertical pull of gravity, and there is also a natural 
plane of reference in the form of ground level. Verticality and horizontality are 
therefore two perceptual invariants, two co-ordinates organizing spatial relations, 
as reflected in such wide-spread verbal adjectives as high, low, tall, short; preposi-
tions like up, down, above, below; and verbs like rise, fall, raise, lower, lift, and drop. 
Human body too has a biologically defined and perceptually obvious plane of 
symmetry – the sagittal plane that splits the left and right sides of the body in half, 
which defines the dimension underlying left and right. The line running from head 
to toe in the sagittal plane defines another perceptually salient dimension, body 

 From Interaction to Symbol
verticality, and perpendicular to that plane is front and back. The linguistic terms 
used with these two dimensions have therefore natural, non-arbitrary origins. 
English, like many other languages, builds many of its relational terms for the up-
down, front-back, and left-right dimensions around appropriate body parts, such 
as head, front, face, back, top, foot, and side, as in ahead, in front, facing, at the 
back, on top, at the foot, and beside. These terms are also transferred to the vertical, 
front-back, and lateral dimensions of other objects that have a normal spatial ori-
entation: cars, trains, houses, mountains, trees and so on. When people stand, the 
space in front of them and above the ground is adaptively optimal for perception 
by eye, ear, and touch. Hence “upward” and “forward” should be “positive” direc-
tions, including the metaphorical uses such as high versus low opinion, or forward 
versus backward policies. The left and right sides of the body are symmetrical about 
the sagittal plane (unlike high versus low), but since most people are right-handed, 
right should be “positive,” as it indeed is in perhaps all languages. For example, 
dexterous comes from the Latin word for “right,” and sinister from the word for 
“left.” In English right, both as a noun and as an adjective, means “lawful,” “cor-
rect,” “proper,” “truthful” etc.
Linguistic social categories also have their roots in certain universal social and 
cultural conditions in which people live. All languages distinguish at least three 
characteristics in relatives: generation, blood relationship, and sex. In addition, all 
languages distinguish between blood relatives and spouse’s relatives, as the English 
mother versus mother-in-law. All languages treat relatives unequally: they favour 
ancestors over descendants, near relatives over far relatives, and blood relatives 
over spouse’s relatives. Another widespread though not universal bias in language 
is the one favouring male over female: in English, for example, the markedness of 
female is especially visible, as in actor-actress, major-majorette (Clark and Clark 
1978: 242, 251–254).
Iconic gestures
The universal presence of diverse types of iconic features in languages must there-
fore qualify the structuralist claim about the fundamental arbitrariness of the lin-
guistic sign. That is to say, arbitrariness and iconicity are not mutually exclusive 
but co-existing linguistic features that together reinforce the communicative and 
expressive power of language. The fact that arbitrariness dominates in human ver-
bal language does not automatically obliterate the presence and influence of evo-
lutionary older, emotive and iconic elements of speech. The iconic dimension is 
even more visible (literally) in sign languages – supposedly conventional, invented 
systems of gestural communication used as a substitute for “natural” speech. 

	
Chapter 9.  Linguistic iconicity and the limits of arbitrariness	 
Despite their conventionality, however, sign languages reveal a substantial (much 
higher in fact than in spoken languages) admixture of iconic features to comple-
ment the arbitrariness of the visual sign system.
Just as the arbitrary signs of speech build upon (without cancelling) the evolu-
tionary older emotive and iconic auditory features, so the artificial sign languages 
construct their own gestural arbitrary signs on the basis of the more archaic visual 
communication and body language, found in abundance in the animal kingdom. 
As I noted earlier, human visual communication works as part of the innate cogni-
tive modules subsumed under the social need, and it involves first of all facial ex-
pressions, manual gestures, and bodily postures. Manual gestures provide a more 
natural medium for intentional interactions among primates, and typically occur 
in the wild in contexts with a clear social component, such as play, aggression, ap-
peasement, eating, sex, and grooming (Corballis 2002: 167). In humans visual 
communication occupies as much as sixty-five percent of contiguous interper-
sonal relations, conveying primarily emotions (facial expressions) as well as refer-
ring to external objects and states, as in gestures, which tend to be iconic, provid-
ing by manual action an image of something a person is talking about, including 
gestural imitations of actions and behaviours, of movements, shapes, and spatial 
relations. Some movements of body parts (the head, eyes, brows, mouth, hands) 
commonly occur when people speak. Such movements are patterned in relation to 
speech and can contribute to the utterance in various ways: they can play a role in 
indicating to whom the utterance is addressed, they add to the emotional aspect of 
the utterance, they serve as markers of utterance structure, and they can mimic 
aspects of the content of the utterances (Kendon 1993: 43).
Many gestures also occur universally, regardless of cultural differences. These 
include the shoulder shrug with upturned palms and a raised brow as a sign of lack 
of knowledge or understanding; arms folded across the chest as a defensive ges-
ture; hand-to-mouth gesture when telling a lie or covering embarrassment; rub-
bing the hands together to indicate a positive expectation; and differing types of 
handshakes and kisses to indicate different attitudes towards the person being 
greeted (Mithen 2005: 89). In contiguous interactions humans are not much dif-
ferent in this respect from other primates, whose communication is likewise mul-
ti-modal, involving a synchronized use of vocalizations and gestures. For example, 
more than thirty different types of gestures were recorded among the gorillas, 
some of them tactile and iconic, as in touching the body of another gorilla and 
moving the hand in the direction in which it is to move: here the path of the ges-
ture imitates the desired path of the body movement (Mithen 2005: 118; Kendon 
1993: 51–53).
As Steven Mithen also points out, the gestural communication of early hu-
mans was greatly enhanced by the new degrees of motor control made possible by 

 From Interaction to Symbol
bipedalism, fully achieved by Homo ergaster (about two million years ago). The 
permanent upright body posture was probably an adaptation to reduce heat stress 
caused by increased exposure to the sun in the treeless, savannah-like landscapes 
of East Africa where our species evolved. The resulting independence of torso and 
arms from legs would have dramatically enhanced the potential for gesture and 
body language, as well as for the use of the freed hands in such activities as carry-
ing, throwing or making tools. This would have added to vocalization a powerful 
means of expressing and inducing emotions and manipulating behaviour. Mithen 
speculates that the proto-language of Homo ergaster probably consisted of holistic 
utterances, each with its own meaning but lacking any meaningful sub-units (no 
syntax), which were employed to manipulate other individuals through com-
mands, threats, greetings and requests in contiguous interactions. These holistic 
vocalizations would have been expressed in conjunction with hand and arm ges-
tures and perhaps body language as a whole. Gestures would be largely iconic, just 
as they are now in humans. They would be particularly important for conveying 
information about the speed and direction of movement, about the relative posi-
tion of people and objects, and about the relative size of people and objects. In 
addition, such musical features as particular levels of pitch, tempo, loudness, rep-
etition and rhythm would have been used to create particular emotional effects in 
the utterances. Given the complex social life of hominids, those who were most 
effective at gesture and body language would have been at a social and reproduc-
tive advantage (Mithen 2005: 144–157).
Today’s sign languages, both those spontaneously developed by deaf commu-
nities and those codified by convention, must therefore avail of the innate cogni-
tive and motor abilities for gestural iconic communication developed by humans 
during their evolution as primates. The visual character of sign languages also ex-
plains why they show a much greater tendency towards iconicity than does the 
auditory system of speech. As the linguists Klaudia Grote and Erika Linz point 
out, due to the predominance of visual over auditory perception in human interac-
tions with external objects, there are many more possibilities to depict visual sim-
ilarities than there are to produce acoustic ones in the process of sign-creation. 
That is to say, it is easier to create a visual correspondence between an external 
referent and the properties of visual-gestural signs than to create an acoustic cor-
respondence between a referent and vocal signs (Grote and Linz 2003: 23). The 
psychologist Michael C. Corballis puts it simply: “speech is more arbitrary than 
iconic; gestures are more iconic than arbitrary” (Corballis 2002: 161). As a result, 
all sign languages possess many more signs of highly imitative, iconic quality in 
comparison to the relatively smaller number of iconic features found in spoken 
languages. For instance, in the sign language of the Australian Warlpiri the sign for 
“crazy,” in which a flat hand is moved forward and back beside the ear, can be 

	
Chapter 9.  Linguistic iconicity and the limits of arbitrariness	 
understood a gestural imitation of a blocked ear. In aboriginal Australian culture 
the ear is the channel of understanding, and persons who behave stupidly or cra-
zily are said to have blocked ears (Kendon 1993: 55). The visual character of sign 
languages also means that where spoken languages order their elements sequen-
tially, in a linear fashion, sign languages use a multidimensional space to simulta-
neously articulate the different elements. The grammar of sign languages thus 
makes explicit use of space to provide structure for its elements. For example, 
grammatical tense is rendered spatially (and iconically) in terms of a time-line 
that locates the past behind the signer, the present close to the signer’s body, and 
the future in front (Hauser 1998: 239; Corballis 2002: 163). American Sign Lan-
guage consists of about twenty-five percent of signs that are either pantomimic 
(mimicking a complete action) or imitative (partially mimicking an action). Of 
the remaining seventy-five percent, two-thirds are derived from pantomimic or 
imitative gestures, and only one-third are completely arbitrary symbols (Anderson 
1998: 23). Indeed, for a long time it was widely believed that sign languages were a 
kind of pantomime, purely iconic, with no formal linguistic structure.
Like articulated speech, sign languages are fully autonomous languages, with 
all the properties common to all natural languages – they are rule-governed, gram-
matical symbol systems that change over time and that members of a sign lan-
guage community share. But sign languages are also distinct from spoken lan-
guages in both grammar and lexicon. The “phonological” units to construct signs 
involve manual parameters such as hand-shapes, hand-orientations, hand-move-
ments, and hand-locations, as well as non-manual signals such as facial expres-
sions (brow raises, eye blinks, mouth gesture and mouth picture), head nods, head 
tilts, shifts of the body and shoulders (Grote and Linz 2003: 37). All these param-
eters do not just represent their referents iconically, on a one-to-one basis, but 
have grammatical, combinatorial functions, just like phonemes, morphemes, and 
words in spoken languages. For instance, the signs for “tree” in American, Danish, 
and Chinese sign languages carry something of the shape of a tree (with some in-
ter-linguistic variations), but like the word for “tree” in spoken languages these 
signs can also be combined in utterances according to the syntactic, arbitrary rules 
peculiar to language (Corballis 2002: 163).
As is also the case with spoken languages, when sign languages evolve the di-
rection of change in particular signs and in their visual grammar is from iconic 
and representational to more arbitrary and constrained (Klima and Bellugi 
1979: 28). Studies of deaf children inventing their own home sign suggest that 
signs are initially coined for their resemblances to what they represent, but are 
later adapted to a more arbitrary form: iconic resemblance may be necessary to get 
signs up and running, but it loses its importance once signs are established 
(Corballis 2002:  163). As the linguist Adam Kendon explains, iconic gestures 

 From Interaction to Symbol
referring to objects and actions first undergo simplification into signs representing 
concepts, and then the formally reduced signs are retained only if they remain in 
contrast to features of other gestures within the sign system. During the formal 
reduction of the gesture an element from an elaborate pantomime gets selected for 
repeated use and comes to stand for the whole concept (in the name of economy), 
and then the element becomes simplified to such a degree that its iconic character 
is no longer apparent. In this way the sign turns into an arbitrary form, shaped 
only by the requirement to be distinct from other signs within the system. After 
losing its iconic character the sign becomes available for syntactic recombination 
with other signs to form compound signs or sentences (Kendon 1993: 58).
While at the iconic stage quantitative changes in the sign do not change its 
meaning but only add (or subtract) emphasis, at the arbitrary stage even slight 
variations (contrasts) in performance may produce completely different mean-
ings. For example, in Warlpiri sign language to bring a flat hand into contact with 
the centre of the upper chest is to sign “water,” but when the hand is moved later-
ally the meaning is “man.” Sign languages thus operate as combinations of a lim-
ited number of contrastive features. Just as in spoken languages, where words and 
morphemes are analysable as combinations of contrastive sounds (phonemes), so 
in sign languages signs contrast in terms of hand-shapes, location of performance 
in relation to the body, and patterns of movement. Codified gestures are, like 
words, capable of entering into combinations with one another, thus creating new 
codified gestures. For instance, in American Sign Language to sign “home” you 
move a “tapered” hand first to touch the mouth, then to touch the cheek. This is 
derived from a combination of two signs: the sign for “eat,” in which you touch the 
mouth with a “tapered” hand, and the sign for “sleep,” in which you place the palm 
of the hand against the side of the face (Kendon 1993: 51–53). Michael C. Corbal-
lis even suggests that linguistic grammar might have evolved from representation-
al and indicative gestures rather than from animal calls and early human vocal 
signals. Implicit in any simple gesture is the subject-verb-object relation that rep-
resents the structure of a basic sentence, as well as the structure of simple events in 
the real world. Indeed, the mimetic gestures and body language used by the apes 
such as chimpanzees, bonobo, and gorillas are much more complex than their 
emotive and mimetic vocalizations. The human syntactic language may thus have 
evolved, argues Corballis, primarily in the context of gesture, accompanied by a 
late-emerging vocal system. This means that language is not necessarily confined 
to the vocal auditory channel, but can function just as well in the visual-gestural 
modality (Corballis 2002: 164, 173; Ingold 1993: 37).
Both in visual sign languages and in auditory verbal languages arbitrariness 
thus typifies more advanced, post-iconic stages in the evolution of the communi-
cation system. Whatever the benefits of arbitrary systems of communication over 

	
Chapter 9.  Linguistic iconicity and the limits of arbitrariness	 
iconic ones, it seems clear in the light of the evidence adduced in this chapter that 
contemporary languages continue to possess kinesthetic, onomatopoeic, synaes-
thetic and other iconic attributes carried over from ancient times. Linguistic ico-
nicity appears to be a universal phenomenon whereby speakers perceive intuitive, 
“natural” connections between the form of the linguistic sign and its meaning. In 
the simplest definition verbal iconicity denotes a degree of natural correspondence 
between phonology and semantics, an inmost, intuitively felt, “natural” similarity 
association between sound and sense (Jespersen 1922:  396–411; Sapir 
1929: 225–227; Jakobson and Waugh 1987: 178). In this sense linguistic iconicity 
is a kind of “popular etymology” based on “expressive” or “impressive” phonetics 
and other features of language, instinctively recognized as valid by popular agree-
ment within a speech community, especially by its more language-sensitive mem-
bers such as children or poets. As is now recognized by many linguists, linguistic 
iconicity extends far beyond the small class of onomatopoeic words, and consti-
tutes a separate linguistic dimension, in many aspects alienated from convention-
ally structured speech, and including such phenomena as child language, interjec-
tions, language play and the like, characterized as expressive, affective, connotative 
– generally indexical and iconic (Hinton, Nichols and Ohala 1994: 1–12; Ander-
son 1998: 15–44; Fischer and Nänny 2001). This is obviously not to say that all ele-
ments of language carry naturally motivated signification, although a sizeable cat-
egory certainly does, even if particular elements are iconic only in some words or 
structures and not in others. Iconicity may be peripheral in more formal, discur-
sive, and especially written language, but it moves centre stage in informal speech, 
becoming a dominant dimension in the poetic use of language, where onomat-
opes, synaethesia, rhyme, assonance, alliteration and other iconic features all con-
tribute to the characteristically emotive, evocative, and suggestive quality of po-
etic language.
The universality of emotive and iconic sounds, now demonstrated in psy-
cholinguistic experiments, speaks in favour of an iconic Ursprache, a kind of ar-
chetypal phonology consisting of natural sound-object associations, deposited in 
the deep layers of phylogenetic memory as part of human evolutionary legacy 
(Priestly 1994: 237). Articulated speech as an advantageous tool in social commu-
nication must have arisen from intricate instrumental relations between early hu-
mans and the natural environment, where the sound shape of language initially 
reflected those complex relations in a natural and direct way, including the power 
of speech to imitate the multivalent sensory inputs. Iconicity as an analogy be-
tween the phonetic properties of speech sounds and the physical, including acous-
tic, properties of different objects and phenomena can be seen as a logical conse-
quence of evolution, in that quick identification of the relevant elements of the 
environment would have a clear adaptive advantage. The benefits of spontaneous 

 From Interaction to Symbol
sound-iconic communication have been demonstrated by experiments in which 
reaction-times of making correct judgments about the meanings of words were 
proven to be much shorter for iconic words than for purely arbitrary ones. In the 
human and non-human world alike, speed and accuracy of communication are 
usually to the benefit of both the speaker and the hearer, and are greatly enhanced 
if the form of vocalization is tied directly to meaning in a non-arbitrary way. In 
fact, as the linguist Leanne Hinton remarks, it is the evolutionary value of arbi-
trariness that requires an explanation (Hinton, Nichols and Ohala 1994: 11).

chapter 10
The origins of language and the 
advantages of arbitrariness
From the evolutionary point of view syntactic speech using arbitrary signs appears 
therefore to be built upon phylogenetically older perceptual and cognitive mecha-
nisms underlying indexical and iconic vocalizations, still found in today’s languag-
es on the level of sounds, words, and sentences. All systems of indirect communi-
cation, whether auditory or visual, rely on the associative distance between the 
perception of the sign and its cognitive interpretation, and in all non-arbitrary 
forms of communication that associative distance always retains some degree of 
identifiable connection between image and original: causal, or symptomatic in in-
dexes, and analogous in icons. But there evidently came a “moment” in the evolu-
tion of human communication, when the image-original, or sign-referent associa-
tion bypassed the perceptual automatisms governed by the archaic neural structures 
inherited by humans from the primates, to form a new type of association, gov-
erned by the evolutionary more recent cerebral cortex that allowed for a more 
flexible, volitional, and conventional connection between sign and its meaning, 
one neither motivated emotively nor based on physical resemblance or contiguity.
The appearance of arbitrary symbolic signs, most probably first in spoken lan-
guage rather than in visual communication, alongside the older emotive and icon-
ic vocal features, must have coincided with the arrival on the scene of the Homo 
sapiens around 170,000 years ago, with their diffusion from East Africa to the rest 
of the globe, and with the subsequent “explosive” genesis of visual culture between 
60,000 and 30,000 years ago (Aitchison 2000: 161; Watts 1999: 113). The emer-
gence of fully modern syntactic language was most probably correlated with the 
appearance of representational and decorative art, the introduction of burial ritu-
als and the accelerated diversification of technology at the Middle-Upper Palaeo-
lithic transition (Carruthers and Chamberlain 2000: 6). Once the early nomadic 
hunting-gathering communities began to separate and disperse geographically, 
their languages also differentiated, eventually giving rise to the present variety of 
ethnic languages and dialects of the world. The diversification of lexicons, gram-
mars, and phonological systems must have been aided by and in itself encouraged 
the gradual loss of linguistic iconicity in favour of arbitrariness, leading to the 

 From Interaction to Symbol
situation in which there may theoretically be as many different names for the same 
referent as there are languages.
As argued by Steven Pinker and Paul Bloom, the preference for arbitrariness 
turned out to be a more effective option from an evolutionary point of view, in that 
it resolved a difficulty of developing a huge innate code for numerous sound-
meaning iconic correspondences. Instead, it was neurophysiologically easier to 
evolve a mental device for learning arbitrary sound-meaning pairs peculiar to 
one’s speech community, a process that also enhanced group cohesion by increas-
ing cultural diversity along linguistic lines (Pinker and Bloom 1992:  465–470; 
Knight 1999: 243; Nettle 1999: 214, 219–224). The considerable liberation of lan-
guage from the constraints of emotive and iconic vocalizations not only triggered 
the multiplication and diversification of ethnic languages, but it also enabled each 
language to develop towards greater structural complexity of sophisticated dis-
crete, combinatorial systems, capable of practically unlimited creativity in reflect-
ing the ever-complicating socio-cultural realities. These remarkable transforma-
tions in human vocal communication would not be possible without the dominance 
of arbitrary linguistic signs, but it is unlikely that emotiveness and iconicity as the 
more archaic features of language have disappeared in the process or are ever like-
ly to disappear; they are too much a part of human neurophysiology. As long as 
emotions, instincts, intuitions, and thinking through analogies exist, language will 
retain its expressive and emotive function in child talk, poetry, drama, religious 
mantras, colloquial word-plays and verbal advertising.
Discrete syntax for the (partly) discrete world
The effectiveness of any communication system can be measured by the speed and 
variability of signal emission (in consequence by the amount of information that 
can be conveyed within a unit of time), as well as by the physical distance between 
sender and receiver in natural conditions. The tactile channel for example does not 
permit any physical distance between sender and receiver, and is typically limited 
to no more than two communicators at any given time (as in grooming or love-
making). The olfactory channel on the other hand can carry (albeit relatively slow-
ly) signals between several spatially separated communicators, but the emission of 
smells (especially natural odours) remains largely outside the sender’s control, and 
their number and variability are for physiological reasons also very limited. Sight 
is in many respects a powerful sense in humans, in that it can pick up signals in 
good visibility from kilometres away, although in inter-personal communication 
the distance is limited by how close the communicators have to remain to read 
each other’s body posture, gestures, and facial expressions. The rate of signal 

	
Chapter 10.  The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	 
change is also comparatively high in visual communication: up to about sixteen 
discrete signals per second (which is why to create an illusion of smooth move-
ment the movie camera has to record a succession of separate frames at least at 
that speed). In practice however, the speed of visual, gestural communication is 
limited more by the motor constraints of body language. Visual inter-personal 
communication also requires, by definition, sufficient visibility (in practice limited 
to daylight hours), eye contact, and freed hands. All practicalities of communica-
tion considered, the most efficient system of communication available to humans 
is based not on sight but on audition, and for very good reasons.
A rapid talker can convey as many as forty to forty-five phonemes per second, 
and even a more leisurely talker can reach between ten and twenty phonemes per 
second (a signal variation higher than that possible in visual communication). 
Twenty cycles per second is the lower limit of pitch perception in humans. Any-
thing more frequent than twenty beats per second is perceived as a low tone or a 
buzz (Lieberman 1977: 17). However, speech can pack as many as forty-five dis-
cernible phonemes in a second (acoustically not as discrete but as overlapping 
sounds), and the brain somehow manages to unpack these meaning-conveying 
sounds. At the morphemic level, the meaning of a spoken word is accessed by a 
listener’s brain in about a fifth of a second, before the speaker has finished pro-
nouncing it. People produce words almost as rapidly: it takes the brain about a 
quarter of a second to find a word to name an object, and about another quarter of 
a second to programme the mouth and tongue to pronounce it (Pinker 2001: 3). 
By comparison, sign languages are not as quick, in addition to being disadvan-
taged by the requirements of visibility and face-to-face orientation. Speech is thus 
by far the fastest way of exchanging information among humans, although it re-
quires a highly sophisticated vocal apparatus, one capable of producing rapid se-
quences of precisely modulated sounds and their quick recombination (Pinker 
1995: 168; 1997: 167; Hauser 1998: 244; Johansson 2006: 77). Other advantages of 
the auditory channel include its broadcast transmission and directional reception, 
which means that signals can be detected by any receiver within hearing range, 
largely independently from physical obstacles, and that the receiver can localize 
the signal (Hauser 1998: 48). In other words, in vocal communication information 
can be conveyed instantaneously from a single source to many receivers. Unlike 
visual communication speech also works independently from lighting conditions, 
so it can be used round the clock, not just during daylight hours. Neither does 
speech require face-to-face orientation or the use of the hands, which means that 
people can communicate effectively while engaged in other activities requiring 
visual attention, such as scanning the terrain, tracking animals, making tools, 
fighting and so on.

 From Interaction to Symbol
High frequency of signal variation is exactly what a combinatorial (digital) 
code requires, but before speech became combinatorial it started off (and in many 
respects still continues) as a holistic (analogue) code conveying symptomatic, 
emotive states (e.g. fear of danger, aggression, pleasure, mating disposition etc.) 
relating to current existential situations (Marler 1977: 54; Sinnema 1986). As I em-
phasized earlier, symbolic language did not obliterate but built on and incorpo-
rated the vocal calls controlled by phylogenetically more archaic neural structures 
in the brain (not the cerebral cortex) and limbic system, which also regulate such 
emotive and involuntary vocalizations in humans as sobbing, laughing, moaning, 
crying with fear or shouting in pain (Pinker 1995: 365; Allen and Saidel 1998: 185; 
Brown 1991: 131). Like the primate grunts, barks, screams, hoots and roars, hu-
man affective sounds vary in loudness, pitch, and frequency, the parameters that 
iconically reflect the intensity of the states that elicit them. The communicative 
function of these sounds, however, depends on their holistic character: affective 
vocalizations differ from one another as gestalts, and are not composed of recom-
binable components that are meaningless in themselves, like the phonemes mak-
ing up words (Dingwall 1979: 28; Bickerton 1990: 16). The English word pat, for 
example, consists of three phonemes, /p/, /æ/, and /t/, which can be recombined to 
form semantically different words tap and apt.
In human language syntax, that is, the process of stringing together independ-
ent linguistic subunits into a longer signal, thus appears already on the level of 
individual sounds. In this “phonological syntax” the units, like the letters in a writ-
ten word, have generally no independent meaning (except for the potential emo-
tive and iconic value of some phonemes in some contexts, as discussed in 
Chapter 9). According to the linguist James R. Hurford, many bird species can 
learn songs using something like phonological syntax. Our closest relatives, the 
apes, can also produce long calls composed of sub-units. For instance, the long 
calls of gibbons are used as markers of individual identity or in defence of terri-
tory. On the other hand the sub-unit notes, used in isolation, out of the context of 
long calls, are used in situations of territorial aggression (Hurford 2003: 43; Sav-
age-Rumbaugh at alli 1998). According to Marc D. Hauser there is also some evi-
dence that the capuchin monkey, the cotton-top tamarin, and the gibbon employ 
rudimentary phonological syntax, by being able to transpose or recombine differ-
ent sounds to code different messages (Hauser 1998: 12).
Although it is perhaps fair to call such abilities in apes pre-syntactic, they are 
still far removed from the human ability to organize sequences of words into com-
plex hierarchically structured sentences. By and large animal calls and signals can-
not be broken down into component parts, and separate sounds cannot be com-
bined as freely as the phonemes, morphemes, and words of human speech to 
provide additional or different information. Primate calls are still “complete 

	
Chapter 10.  The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	 
messages” rather than individual units of communication; they are holistic, with 
no internal structure, and they are expressive and manipulative rather than refer-
ential (Bickerton 1990: 16; 2003: 56). That is to say, they are used in the context of 
contiguous needs and emergences, rather than in relation to things or situations 
spatio-temporally displaced from the current communicative context. For in-
stance, the different alarm calls used by the vervet monkeys may “refer” to specific 
predators such as leopards, eagles, and snakes, but more likely they are simply in-
stinctive emotive reactions to contiguous dangers posed by these predators. 
Vervets do not use their calls to talk dispassionately about the past or the future, or 
to describe the world at large, but only to warn one another about specific current 
danger (Mithen 2005: 108). In the absence of consciousness, working memory, 
and syntactic language vervet monkeys also do not comment on or analyse the 
predator threat after the event, nor do they discuss possible improvements in the 
warning system and defence strategies for the future. Even trained apes can only 
communicate information that expresses their current wants or emotional states, 
but never anything distant in time or space. The “here-and-nowness” of animal 
calls thus differs qualitatively from the unlimited spatio-temporal reference found 
in human syntactic language (Bickerton 1996:  54; 2003:  87; Gibson 1993b: 6; 
Laszlo 1972a: 71; Hauser 1998: 39; Eccles 1989: 80).
The early stages in the history of language are also reflected in human ontog-
eny. Studies on human infants indicate that before they begin to communicate 
about objects and events in the external environment, infants convey information 
first of all about their affective state. At the stage of pre-symbolic intentional com-
munication (9 to 15 months) infants address messages to other communicators by 
sounds and meaningful gestures tied to specific current wants. Between 15 and 24 
months vocalizations become less tied to contexts but more to objects. A “naming 
explosion” takes place, during which relations between sounds and objects are 
established as the foundation of referential communication. The age of about two 
also marks the onset of grammar, as the child’s innate language faculty meshes 
with the parent language’s grammatical structures to generate inflectional mor-
phemes marking past tense, plural number, plus such syntactic operations as rela-
tivization, co-ordination, pronominalization, ellipsis, and recursion. From the age 
of about five onwards a post-syntactic development begins, when the child ac-
quires meta-linguistic skills of word playing, thus completing the ontogenetic de-
velopment of language from emotive and contiguous vocalizations to fully refer-
ential and symbolic syntactic speech (Lock 1993: 279–286).
Given the gradual, cumulative nature of the evolutionary process it seems un-
likely that the transition from holistic, analogue vocalizations to combinatorial, 
digital speech occurred overnight, by means of a single mutation that radically 
changed the nature of the human language from one generation to the next. Derek 

 From Interaction to Symbol
Bickerton argues in favour of a hypothetical intermediate “protolanguage,” for 
which he finds evidence in the utterances of small children (before two years of 
age), in ape language, and in early-stage pidgins. All these data show a total ab-
sence of complex sentences, a lack of correlation between function and word or-
der, frequent omission of sub-categorical constituents, and all-but-complete ab-
sence of grammatical items. Such proto-syntax typically consists of a simple 
action-subject or action-object combination in response to a contiguous situation: 
for instance, “me no sleep,” “me look,” “me speak” (Pidgin English); “read story,” 
“go open door,” “more juice,” “see daddy” (child language); “that eat,” “more pour,” 
“me good,” “hot potato” (trained apes) (Bickerton 1990: 128). It is probable that 
the Neanderthals, who co-existed with the Homo sapiens until the rapid extinction 
of the former some 30,000 years ago, also communicated using some rudimentary 
syntactic structures tied to contiguous situations (Donald 1991: 203–205).
What distinguishes language from protolanguage is syntax, which marked a 
change from a random stringing together of words into hierarchical tree struc-
tures. According to Bickerton, the linguistic history of the hominid line appears as 
a two-stage process: first there was lexicon without syntax, sound labels to sort raw 
experience, followed by the emergence of infinitely productive mechanisms to cre-
ate syntax as we know it. There are no antecedents of syntax in the language of 
ancestral species: combinatorial grammar could only have come into existence 
until there was a sizable vocabulary whose units could be organized into complex 
structures (Bickerton 1990: 91; 1996: 51; Hauser 1998: 40). In addition to content-
words (nouns, verbs, adjectives), the range of complex substructures brought into 
being by hierarchization and the computational procedures also produced abstract 
markers and non-referential grammatical items such as case-, person-, number-, 
tense-, mood-, and gender-endings, articles, conjunctions, prepositions, and ad-
verbs – morphemes and words wholly unknown in protolanguage but present in 
all known human languages. For Bickerton the appearance of protolanguage was 
unprecedented in the history of evolution – something that made possible what 
may have been the most far-reaching event since the beginning of life: the emer-
gence of human consciousness and symbolic culture. The “Great Leap Forward,” 
the relatively sudden explosion of human culture that took place some 40,000 
years ago is best explained, argues Bickerton, by the advent of fully syntactic lan-
guage at about the same time (Bickerton 1996: 57, 66; 2003: 91).
The main advantage of syntactic speech is its capacity to use the combinato-
rial grammar to rearrange the discrete linguistic elements in order to generate a 
vast number of statements on subjects extending beyond the necessarily limited 
contiguous situation. As also stressed by Steven Pinker, the cognitive and com-
municative benefits of a combinatorial language derive from the fact that the envi-
ronment which language helps to negotiate has itself partly combinatorial structure. 

	
Chapter 10.  The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	 
The world in which we live contains any of a number of actors (people and ani-
mals) engaged in any of a number of actions (walking, running, sleeping, eating, 
fighting, mating etc.), taking place in any number of locations and times. In such a 
world, the number of words that have to be learned by a syntactic communicator 
equals the sum of the number of actors, actions, places, times, and so on, whereas 
the number that would have to be learned by a non-syntactic communicator equals 
their product, a potentially unlearnable number. As a more efficient and more ac-
curate system of communication, syntactic speech is thus invaluable, argues Pink-
er, to an analytical mind in a combinatorial world (Pinker 1995: 365; 2003: 32; 
2007: 436; Dunbar 2003: 226; Lieberman 2006).
Noam Chomsky also talks about “discrete infinity” as the property by which 
language constructs from a few dozen separate elements an infinite variety of ex-
pressions of thought, imagination, and feeling. For Chomsky this property of lan-
guage appears to be “biologically isolated,” because it is unique among systems 
of animal communication (Chomsky 1957; 1972; 2000: 3). But as the psycholo-
gists Michael Studdert-Kennedy and Louise Goldstein point out, the combinato-
rial nature of the human language is not unique at all, but rather is an instance 
of a general principle common to all natural systems that, according to Wilhelm 
von Humboldt, who was the first to formulate the idea in 1836, “make infinite 
use of finite means” (Studdert-Kennedy and Goldstein 2003: 235). Discrete infin-
ity is based on what Studdert-Kennedy and Goldstein call “the particulate prin-
ciple,” which provides the only route to unbounded diversity of form and func-
tion through a combinatorial hierarchy in which discrete elements, drawn from 
a finite set, are repeatedly permuted and combined to yield larger units higher in 
the hierarchy and more diverse in structure and function than their constituents. 
The particulate units in physical chemistry include atoms, ions, and molecules; 
in biological inheritance – chemical radicals, genes and proteins; and in language 
– gestures, syllables, words, and phrases. In this way language, physics, and genet-
ics can be seen as converging in some respects on a common structural principle 
(Studdert-Kennedy and Goldstein 2003: 236).
Nor is syntactic, combinatorial language possible without the uniquely human 
extended working memory, involving the ability to hold in conscious attention 
both the events that are past and those still likely to happen. One of the reasons for 
the experimenters’ failure to teach syntactic language to the apes is precisely the 
absence of the concept of the passage of time in all but the human species (Plotkin 
1994: 200). At the same time it is probably futile to speculate which came first in 
human evolutionary history: grammatical language or extended working memory. 
Speech as a basically temporal medium no doubt contributed to the development 
of conscious memory, as successivity is the essential feature of auditory coding, in 
which data is presented in rapid serial order (Sebeok 1967: 367). As also argued by 

 From Interaction to Symbol
Gerald M. Edelman and Giulio Tononi, human higher-order consciousness is im-
possible without the cognitive ability to transcend the limitations of the here-and-
now and to embrace the extended perception of time, incorporating past, present, 
and future. These concepts emerged only when the new semantic capabilities af-
forded by syntactic language – to refer to displaced objects and events – appeared 
in the course of evolution. Syntactic speech must therefore have resulted from and 
in turn must have reinforced linguistic and conceptual memory, while higher-or-
der consciousness could foster the development of concepts of the past and future 
related to the self and to others. As this point, an individual could be freed, to 
some extent, from the bondage of the experienced present to embrace a whole new 
world of intentionality, categorization, and discrimination based on the concepts 
of time past and time future (Edelman and Tononi 2000: 195). The two cognitive 
faculties: the extended perception of time and syntactic language must therefore 
have developed gradually alongside one another related through positive feed-
back, with grammar acquiring more and more combinatorial features both to re-
flect and in turn to encourage the ever-expanding conscious perception of the 
causes and effects in the temporal, processual dimension of life.
Selective pressures on early language
The predominantly symbolic and arbitrary character of syntactic language has tra-
ditionally been cited as the prime argument in favour of the exclusively cultural 
and social, as opposed to the instinctive and natural, origin of this specifically hu-
man system of communication. However, just as “nothing in biology makes sense 
except in the light of evolution” according to the biologist Theodosius Dobzhansky, 
so nothing really makes sense in culture except when seen from the same evolu-
tionary perspective (Dobzhansky 1962: 215; Dawkins 2003: 68; Badcock 2000: 244). 
Far from being a cultural artefact that we learn the way we learn traffic rules or 
how to play the guitar, for Steven Pinker language is a distinct piece of the bio-
logical makeup of our brain that has arisen, like all other organs and cognitive 
faculties, through Darwinian natural selection. Language is a complex, specialized 
skill, which develops in the child spontaneously, without conscious effort or for-
mal instruction, is deployed without awareness of its underlying logic, and is qual-
itatively the same in every normal individual (Pinker and Bloom 1992: 452, 475, 
486; Pinker 1995: 4–6, 20). In the words of Noam Chomsky:
language learning is not really something that the child does: it is something that 
happens to the child placed in an appropriate environment, much as the child’s 

	
Chapter 10.  The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	 
body grows and matures in a predetermined way when provided with appropriate 
nutrition and environmental stimulation (Chomsky 1988: 62).
As is now widely recognized, the communicative advantages afforded our species 
by language call first of all for natural (or sexual) selection as the mechanism by 
which this cognitive device has come about. Like the eye, language has positive 
fitness implications in that it enables crucial information to be transmitted more 
efficiently between individuals than by non-linguistic means. All modern humans 
possess the same biologically given aptitude for language acquisition, which in our 
ancestral past proved adaptive to the hunting-gathering way of life (Workman and 
Reader 2004: 251; Hurford 1999: 177, 184; Clark and Clark 1978: 228).
In the absence of any permanent records of the sounds produced by the early 
humans, any attempt to place the origin of syntactic speech in some timeframe 
will always remain conjectural. The modern Homo sapiens (from about 170,000 
years ago) had skulls like modern humans, and must probably have had language. 
Steven Pinker argues that the language instinct was probably in place long before 
the spectacular cave art and other decorated artefacts of the Cro-Magnon humans 
in the Upper Palaeolithic (Pinker 1995: 388). Merlin Donald also speculates that 
the advantages that the linguistic skill must have produced were in response to the 
particular environmental stresses introduced by the last Ice Age (75,000–10,000 
BCE). Conditions of life in the Northern Hemisphere were extremely difficult at 
the time, which might have demanded a new adaptation. Survival in the cold cli-
mate, under the arduous conditions of a nomadic existence that was dependent on 
hunting for large game, required better social co-ordination and planning. Added 
to environmental pressures was competition with rival hominids, who were bat-
tling for roughly the same, huge ecological niche. In the event the syntactic Cro-
Magnon eliminated the proto-syntactic Neanderthals, who were stronger and 
more robust than modern humans, but probably lacked symbolic language. Both 
sub-species were able to adapt to the harsh glacial climate, but major evolutionary 
advances were probably driven by cognitive competition between the two human 
species, giving the linguistic Homo sapiens an ultimate upper hand over their pre-
linguistic rivals.
Like contemporary hunter-gatherers, their Upper Palaeolithic predecessors 
were accomplished tool makers and superb amateur biologists with detailed 
knowledge of the life cycles, ecology, and behaviour of plants and animals they 
depended on. Language would surely have been useful in such a lifestyle, by ena-
bling its users to communicate precise information about time, space, and objects 
in the natural environment, as well as about the intricate social relations, mutual 
commitments, obligations and alliances (Pinker 1995:  404). Organized group 
hunting in particular required co-ordinated social participation in the chase, 

 From Interaction to Symbol
effective social control of food sharing, and unambiguous knowledge about who 
does what, with whom, with what, where and when (Crook 1980: 130). Visual 
communication is of limited use during the group hunt, with the hands busy hold-
ing weapons and the eyes fixed on the tracks and the pursued game. During 
marching or running through dense overgrowth hunters often do not even see one 
another, calls of warning, simple vocal instructions and commands remaining the 
only viable way of effective and quick communication needed to co-ordinate the 
chase. Given the preference for meat in early Homo, Steven Mithen also suggests 
that increased consumption of meat obtained by group hunting or scavenging in-
volved food sharing, division of labour, and organization of movement around a 
home base. Combined with pair bonding and male investment in child rearing, 
these socio-economic conditions in turn led to prolonged infant dependency and 
childhood learning, facilitated by the communicative abilities of the verbal lan-
guage (Mithen 1999a: 100–103).
The ever-growing complexity of social life in the early hunting-gathering com-
munities also appears to have required syntactic speech as an effective method of 
interpersonal communication to facilitate social negotiations and to ensure stability 
of social life. Derek Bickerton argues that the main reason for the explosive growth 
of brain-size in humans (over threefold within the last three million years, creating 
the highest brain-body ratio of any species in earth) is the unprecedented mental 
capacity of language (Bickerton 1990: 44). Within the human brain, the prefrontal 
cortex is more than twice as large as what would be expected for a primate with a 
similarly sized brain. Although the prefrontal cortex is not considered a “language 
area” per se, it appears to play a critical role in language processing: it is the primary 
area for working memory, that is, for storing representations in the mind for im-
mediate use – a computation that is crucially involved in both producing sentences 
and comprehending their meaning (Hauser 1998: 113; Frankish 2000).
For Robin Dunbar too the dramatic increase in hominid brain size is directly 
related to group size and language as a means of integrating the group and diffus-
ing social tensions. According to Dunbar language evolved as a form of social 
grooming. Among the primates tactile grooming is usually a one-to-one activity, 
which creates social bond and cohesion, in addition to releasing chemicals known 
as opiates into the brain, which result in a feeling of contentment and pleasure in 
the individual being groomed (Dunbar 1996: 4). As Dunbar demonstrates, living 
within a larger group requires more brain-processing power to keep up with the 
ever-changing sets of social relationships. Among the primates the principal way 
to transfer information between individuals is by grooming each other’s bodies, 
because grooming is as much about sending social messages as about removing 
parasites. Dunbar argues that as the social group got larger, language evolved to 
provide a means for exchanging social information, initially as a supplement to 

	
Chapter 10.  The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	 
grooming, and then as a replacement for it. Language is a much more efficient way 
of transferring information, because grooming is a one-to-one activity, while one 
talker can be heard by many listeners (Dunbar 1996:  7–15; 2003:  220; 
2005: 112–114). Steven Mithen also suggests that vocal grooming in its earliest 
stages must have been closer to song than speech, which can explain the relaxing, 
emotional, and social nature of music. The early grooming speech was also prob-
ably dominated by soothing emotive vocalizations such as sighs, quiet grunts, 
purrs, hums and so on (Mithen 2005: 136).
Dunbar’s “social brain hypothesis” explains why the social domain features so 
prominently in our conversations even today. About two-thirds of our total con-
versation time is dedicated to social topics: what we like and dislike, what others 
are up to, how someone behaved, is it a good or a bad thing, who is in and who is 
out, who needs a favour and who is in a position to offer one, who is trustworthy 
and who is a liar, who is available and who is under the protection of a jealous 
spouse or family, how the children are coming along, how to deal with a difficult 
situation and so on. All the rest – politics, culture, science, philosophy, art, techni-
cal topics, music, sport – takes up a mere third of our conversation time. The same 
proportion is reflected in the subject-matter of the books and magazines published 
each year or of TV programmes: about two-third is fiction unfolding intimacies of 
the main characters, especially in romantic contexts. Equally popular are the re-
tellings of the life experiences of the rich and famous, with intimate details and 
gossip of their private lives (Dunbar 1996: 5, Barkow 1992). As Pinker also points 
out, gossip is a favourite pastime in all human societies, and the practical knowl-
edge it provides gives people obvious strategic advantages in the games of life. In 
the small bands in which our minds evolved, everyone knew everyone else, so all 
gossip was useful (Pinker 1998: 540).
Dunbar has also observed a striking difference in the interest in social affairs 
by the two sexes. While there are practically no differences between men and 
women today in the amount of time devoted to talking about social matters, there 
are significant inter-sexual differences in the choice of conversation topics de-
pending on the composition of the group. In unisex groups males and females 
spend just as much time discussing personal relationships and experiences, but in 
mixed sex groups talking about work, academic matters, religion, ethics and poli-
tics among males increases dramatically by up to twenty per cent. According to 
Dunbar, male conversations in mixed companies function as a kind of “vocal lek” 
(leks are animal display areas where males gather to advertise their qualities as 
potential mates to the females). When men talk about politics, hunting, warfare, 
sport, professional life, and other traditionally male activities, particularly when 
women are listening, they do so as a form of self-advertising and personal and/or 
sexual display (Dunbar 1996: 175; Barrow 1995: 81). Across cultures loquacious 

 From Interaction to Symbol
males are perceived as more interesting and appealing, even when they are not 
especially physically attractive (Woody Allen comes to mind). Anthropological 
studies indicate that tribal chiefs are often both gifted orators and highly polygy-
nous, suggesting that linguistic skills can make a Darwinian difference (Pinker 
and Bloom 1992: 483).
The psychologist Geoffrey F. Miller also argues that language was under the 
control of sexual selection rather than natural selection, and evolved as a means of 
showing off how good our genes are before prospective partners. Language, and by 
extension artistic creativity may thus have evolved as signals of genetic fitness to 
potential mates and competitors. Miller’s argument is that language may have orig-
inated as a means of enabling the process of competing for a mate, and only later 
was used for all its other purposes. Miller points to the phenomenon of verbal 
courtship, or the “gift of the gab,” as an example of the importance of language in 
the dating game. In the context of sexual selection men are verbal peacocks, using 
language to impress women during courtship. For their part, women use language 
less as a tool during mate selection (they rely on their looks instead) but rather as 
a method for holding an already existing relationship (Miller 2000b: 5–13). This is 
why when men talk about social life they tend to talk about their own experience 
and activities, while women tend to talk about other people’s lives. Men also tend to 
have larger vocabularies than women, but women score, on average, more highly 
on tests of verbal fluency than men (Cartwright 2000: 155; Workman and Reader 
2004: 276). While men use their knowledge and social prestige before women to 
win their favours, women “modestly” and quietly gather useful information about 
other people for the purpose of networking, bonding, and smooth daily running of 
social life. A typical male discourse conducted within exclusive male groups, tradi-
tionally mostly in the context of hunting and warfare, would also be expected to be 
dominated by curt, laconic, unemotional and impersonal instructions, commands 
and prohibitions. On the other hand, one would expect a typical female discourse 
within unisex groups to be dominated by “quiet,” affirmative, descriptive, personal, 
occasionally emotionally agitated but otherwise tension-free, characteristic of situ-
ations of safety, relaxation, and non-emergency (Sadowski 2001c: 87).
Language and the problem of reference
Syntactic, combinatorial language is probably the most effective form of commu-
nication so far invented, one especially suited to the increasingly complicated so-
cial life of our ancestral environment. Early on humans fell into a lifestyle in which 
the survival of groups and individuals depended on extended co-operation and 
efficient communication in matters relating to food, nurturance, safety, and 

	
Chapter 10.  The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	 
reproductive opportunities. This lifestyle presented extraordinary opportunities 
for evolutionary gains and losses, benefiting long-term co-operation and also de-
tecting cheaters. As Steven Pinker and Paul Bloom emphasize, interacting with 
other individuals of comparable mental abilities whose motives are at times out-
right malevolent makes formidable demands on cognition. For this reason in all 
cultures social interactions are mediated by attempts at persuasion and argument. 
Equally universal are attempts at sussing other people out using second-order in-
tentionality (guessing what others may think), as well as learning of other people’s 
desires and obligations through gossip. Early humans lived in a world not unlike 
ours in this respect, in which language was involved in the intrigues of politics, 
economic exchanges, familial and sexual relations, and friendship. Within a group 
of interdependent, co-operating individuals, the mental states and intentions of 
other individuals are among the most important things worth knowing and talk-
ing about (Pinker and Bloom 1992: 483).
Equally important is the way language was able to facilitate the accumulation 
and quick diffusion across the group of the knowledge about the environment, as 
well as its non-genetic transmission from generation to generation. Cognitively 
advanced Homo sapiens acquire a great deal of information during their lifetimes, 
at a rate far exceeding the slow accumulation of genetic knowledge through natural 
selection. A species such as ours, equipped with a communication system able to 
spread quickly useful knowledge about the constantly shifting contingencies of the 
environment, can gain a decisive advantage in competition with other species, such 
as the Neanderthals, that can only defend themselves against new threats in evolu-
tionary time, through natural selection (Pinker and Bloom 1992: 460). The possi-
bility of development, adaptation, and avoidance of competition by non-genetic 
means has been one of the most important pay-offs from the evolution of human 
brain complexity. By passing on ideas through social interaction by means of lan-
guage, gestures, visual images and symbols, human cultural development has pro-
ceeded far more rapidly than by coding particular types of information in genes. 
Moreover, the information that can be passed on by behavioural and cultural means 
is of the type that cannot be transferred by genetic inheritance. Indeed, the phe-
nomenon of culture refers precisely to the specifically human practice of commu-
nicating social knowledge by means of extra-biological inheritance. This usually 
occurs via language as the quickest and most effective way of exchanging ideas. By 
comparison, non-verbal, visual communication is more limited and slower, as in 
individuals watching one another to imitate motor skills. Syntactic speech remains 
therefore the most effective means of transmitting cultural knowledge, as evidenced 
by gossip, religion, or science (Plotkin 1994: 213, 224; Barrow 1995: 82).
Language obviously requires the necessary, genetically pre-programmed brain 
circuitry and appropriately developed vocal anatomy, but once acquired the novel 

 From Interaction to Symbol
form of information transmission became partly decoupled from genetic inherit-
ance, sending our hominid ancestors down a novel evolutionary path. The unique 
ability of language to code quickly new knowledge and quickly to diffuse it within 
the group has to do both with displaced referentiality and with language’s syntac-
tic, combinatorial, arbitrary quality – features that set language apart from any 
other system of animal and human communication.
Referentiality, that is, the ability of a signal or sign to denote something other 
than itself by having parainformation attached to it in the sender’s and the receiv-
er’s minds, is found in most types of communication. It is present even in instanc-
es of emotive contiguous-indexical communication, when an involuntary physio-
logical reaction, such as the bristling of the hair or perspiring, refers in a 
rudimentary way to an unseen inner state that elicited the external emotive symp-
tom. At the other end of referential communication is human language, whose 
arbitrary symbols supported by combinatorial grammar can refer to a practically 
unlimited number of entities, both existent and made-up, across the broad spatio-
temporal spectrum and all imaginable locations. In the animal kingdom referen-
tial signals are favoured in social species where individuals occasionally leave the 
core of their group and consequently have the opportunity to encounter objects or 
events that are relevant to other group members: food, predators, mating opportu-
nities, dangerous neighbours and so on. Compared with the scale of human refer-
ential communication, however, animal signals have their referential capacity usu-
ally limited to a single context. For example, the dance of the honeybee is clearly 
referential and even exhibits the property of displacement – the ablility to refer to 
an object that is spatio-temporally removed from the sender. But even when they 
are functionally referential, animal signals are restricted to one or a small number 
of contexts. Nevertheless, referential communication is one that was enhanced 
over evolutionary time because of its adaptive usefulness.
In human language too the words’ ability to refer to actions or objects that are 
external to the speaker is the basis on which all the more sophisticated functions 
of language are dependent. That is to say, whatever the subsequent influence of 
language on thought and internal representation of the world, its communicative 
capacity to refer to external objects or events must be considered primary, as evi-
denced by all animal communication systems (Allen and Saidel 1998: 188–190). 
Referentiality is also the main criterion in Saussure’s classic definition of the lin-
guistic sign, which accordingly “exists only through the associating of the signifier 
[the form of the sign] with the signified [the concept the sign refers to].” Saussure 
compares the two-sided linguistic unit to a chemical compound like water, a com-
bination of hydrogen and oxygen neither of which, taken separately, contains any 
of the properties of water (Saussure 1974: 102).

	
Chapter 10.  The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	 
Thus understood communicative nature of language should remain obvious 
enough, if not for the attempts by postmodern theorists to “transmogrify” (as 
Raymond Tallis puts it) Saussure’s ideas, by claiming that referential discourse is 
impossible both because extra-linguistic reality lies beyond the reach of language, 
and because the apparent extra-linguistic realities are in fact the product of lan-
guage, that is to say, they are intra-linguistic. In what Tallis calls an “anti-Saussure-
an use of Saussure’s concepts” by theorists such as Barthes, Lacan, and Derrida, 
Saussure’s inseparable connection between signifier and signified has been sev-
ered. In consequence, dispensing with the signified, that is, with referential mean-
ing, has reduced language in some academic quarters to the futile “free play of the 
signifier,” as evidenced by the incomprehensible mumbo-jumbo of postmodern 
discourse (Tallis 1995a: 49, 54, 84–86, 88). Saussure’s own warning about separat-
ing the signifier from the signified was the following: “whenever only one element 
is retained, the entity [of the linguistic sign] vanishes; instead of a concrete object 
we are faced with a mere abstraction” (Saussure 1974: 103).
The origins of arbitrariness
The effectiveness of a referential system of communication can be measured by the 
amount of information transmitted in the unit of time with the least ambiguity 
and the greatest intelligibility. In this respect iconic systems, for all their advan-
tages discussed in Chapters 7 and 9, are comparatively inefficient by being slow 
and ambiguous. Except in limited contexts of pictorial instruction or facial recog-
nition, an image can suggest rather than precisely indicate, and its holistic nature 
prevents quick succession of signals to speed up the transmission of detailed infor-
mation. By contrast, more complex communication systems involving arbitrary 
signalling units allow for concatenation and hierarchical structure, which greatly 
increase both the speed of transmission and the meaning generating capacity 
(Dingwall 1979: 21).
Indeed, arbitrariness of linguistic units and combinatorial grammar are close-
ly intertwined: once a sign has lost its iconic, inherent semantic quality, its sole 
communicative function was to serve as an abstract, contrasting unit in a system 
where meaning is conveyed through recombination of signs with no meaning of 
their own. Thus in the word cat neither the overall sign (spoken or written) nor its 
constituent phonemes (or letters) in any way resemble either the whole cat or any 
of its anatomical or behavioural features. Except for cases discussed in Chapter 9, 
words are linked to meaning not through physical resemblance but as a result of 
rote learning during language acquisition. Arbitrary signs are just mnemonic tags, 
and any sign could do just as well. In this way, to communicate some abstract idea 

 From Interaction to Symbol
all a user of an arbitrary system such as language needs to do is to retrieve from 
memory the word that matches the corresponding concept. If instead the sender 
was to shape a visual sign to convey the same idea using some recognizable con-
nection between its form and its content, every word would require either a pre-
pared picture as an illustration of the concept, or an amusing but inefficient pan-
tomime, as in the game of charades (Pinker 1995:  80, 156; 1997:  163). Iconic 
features of language such as onomatopoeia or synaesthesia certainly exist to add 
intuitive colouring to the meaning, but they are footnotes to the far more impor-
tant principle of the arbitrariness of the sign – or else we would understand the 
words in every foreign language instinctively (Pinker 2001: 2). In arbitrary lan-
guage sound or image is (generally) free from perceptive associations with its 
original, be it an object, emotion or attitude, and it can therefore be freely manipu-
lated and recombined. For this reason arbitrary signs are most useful in coding 
highly abstract and precise ideas, especially the non-emotive, non-perceptual, and 
often counterintuitive concepts of science, as in physics and mathematics. In this 
way arbitrary symbols enable humans to transcend the perceptual and cognitive 
limitations of phylogenetically more archaic emotive and iconic forms of commu-
nication (Wierciński 1983: 43).
At the same time, as Terrence Deacon observes, symbolic communication 
does not grow logically and automatically from non-arbitrary (emotive and icon-
ic) communication. The cognitive “jump” from analogue to digital communica-
tion is hard to explain, as even a small, inefficient, and inflexible symbolic system 
is very difficult to acquire (vide experiments with teaching human language to 
chimpanzees) (Deacon 1997: 379). Even for humans learning a new symbolic sys-
tem can be difficult. For instance, the system of raised dots for the use of the blind, 
known as Braille, is based on an arbitrary code, developed along logical rather 
than psychological lines, and is very difficult to master (Geldard 1977: 215). Not-
withstanding the working of the innate language faculty to get the process of lan-
guage acquisition started, a symbolic system depends on substantial external so-
cial support in order to be learned, and forces one to employ counterintuitive 
learning strategies that may interfere with non-symbolic social communication 
such as emotive vocalizations, facial expressions, and gestural displays. Indeed, the 
counterintuitive nature of symbolic communication, in particular the arbitrary 
connection between sound and meaning in words, has challenged thinkers since 
before recorded history, and it continues to plague every field where explanations 
of thought processes are attempted. Deacon admits that thousands of years and 
thousands of texts later we still do not fully understand the cognitive basis of sym-
bolic reference – the relationship that invests words with their meanings. From the 
evolutionary point of view linguistic reference is anomalous: symbolic communi-
cation does not logically derive from iconic or indexical communication, and 

	
Chapter 10.  The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	 
words and sentences have no counterparts in the rest of the biological world. This 
means that we do not really understand one of our most commonplace and spe-
cies-defining experiences (Deacon 1997: 51).
Equally mysterious is the transition from holistic protolanguage to fully syn-
tactic speech. As suggested by Studdert-Kennedy and Goldstein, the initial ena-
bling condition was probably the fact that semantically holistic utterances physi-
cally consisted of discrete phonetic symbols, randomly concatenated into strings 
of “phonetic gestures.” In this way compositionality could emerge because holistic 
utterances readily fractionate along the fault lines of their discrete components, 
eventually leading to segmentation into what we now call words (Studdert-
Kennedy and Goldstein 2003: 238). The linguist Alison Wray also hypothesizes 
how the syntactic, analytic system could arise during the protolanguage period, 
supplementing and enhancing the capacity of the holistic message inventory (vo-
cal manipulative expressions of greeting, warning, commanding, threatening, re-
questing, appeasing and so on). The analytic protolanguage could have evolved 
first by isolating single referential words for objects, persons, and actions (that is, 
nouns and verbs) from holistic utterances, particularly those entailing displaced 
originals. This in turn made possible the independent expression of new, informa-
tive statements by juxtaposing these lexical items, even though the inherent ambi-
guity, deriving from the absence of grammar, constrained the power of this new 
means of expression. Accordingly, the first step towards combinatorial grammar 
would have been segmentation, the dividing up, probably along phonetic lines, of 
the whole utterance into meaningful subunits. If in two or more semantically re-
lated utterances there were chance matches between phonetic segments and as-
pects of meaning, then it would seem as if there was a constituent with that mean-
ing. In a hypothetical example, if a holistic phrase tebima, meaning give that to her, 
co-existed with kumapi, meaning share this with her, then it might be concluded 
that ma had the meaning female person + beneficiary (Wray 2000: 296). Arbitrary 
sequences of sounds could thus become associated with particular referents: per-
sons, animals, objects, actions and so on through repeated use. In the early stages 
the simple analytic system was still insufficient for the subtle social interactions 
required for individual and group survival, which means that it had to co-exist 
with the protolinguistic holistic expressions (Wray 2002: 118, 133). With time, the 
isolated lexical items, especially those referring to absent objects and persons, 
could be manipulated mentally more freely, precisely because of their detachment 
from immediate, contiguous reference. This is how, according to Wray, linguistic 
compositionality could have emerged, the feature that eventually made language 
so much more powerful than holistic, situation-bound communication systems.

 From Interaction to Symbol
How language produces meaning
From a systems point of view language, like all organized systems, consists of in-
terrelated elements. On the syntactic level the constituent elements of language are 
its lexical items, or words, while the relations between the words are defined by 
rules of grammar. For Steven Pinker similarly the ingredients of language are 
words and rules: words in the sense of memorized links between sound and mean-
ing; rules in the sense of operations that assemble the words into combinations 
whose meaning can be computed both from the meanings of individual words and 
from the way they are arranged in an utterance (Pinker 2001: 300). Both the words 
and the rules of grammar were invented because they served clear pragmatic and 
referential functions: the words provided lexical and conceptual equivalents to ob-
jects, actions, and states, while the grammatical categories such as the subjunctive, 
the conditional, the idea of plurals and tenses, of conjugations and declensions, of 
active and passive voice and so on, helped to clarify the relations between the 
words/concepts in intelligible utterances. The origin of words and rules was thus 
closely related to their anticipated and perceived usefulness to the growing human 
cognitive and communicative agenda.
The word as the smallest semantic unit that can be moved around in an utter-
ance is based on a memorized arbitrary pairing between sound and meaning. 
During language acquisition people tacitly agree to use a particular sound to con-
vey a particular idea. For example, a combination of phonemes forming the Eng-
lish word rose brings to the minds of English speakers an idea of a sweet smelling 
flower with thorns, not because of any possible indexical or iconic link between 
the word and the flower called rose, but because users of English have all learned 
the same link between a combination of sounds making up the word rose and the 
concept of a rose. (Shakespeare’s Juliet famously and aptly observes: “What’s in a 
name? That which we call a rose by any other word would smell as sweet” 
[Shakespeare 1994: 129]). Today’s adult speakers of English dispose of a produc-
tion vocabulary of 20,000 to 50,000 words, and comprehension vocabulary is con-
siderably larger. An average child from the age of two onwards acquires around ten 
new words a day to arrive at a vocabulary of about 14,000 words by the age of six. 
Growth in vocabulary from then on to about age seventeen averages at least three 
thousand new words a year. By that age young language learners are exposed to 
some 85,000 distinct word-roots and at least 100,000 distinct word-meanings in 
their school textbooks alone (Clark 1993: 13).
The word, and collectively the lexicon, is the primary symbolic device in the 
referential system that links phonetic utterances with the world. However, the 
phonological and the syntactic systems alone cannot generate meaningful sen-
tences, if by “meaningfulness” we understand internal representations (concepts) 

	
Chapter 10.  The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	 
relating to outside entities such as people, objects, events, the categories they be-
long to, their distribution in space and time, and their causal relations to one an-
other. Pinker and Bloom list the following kinds of contents, or types of meaning, 
worthy of communication among humans: to be able to refer to individuals and 
classes; to distinguish among basic ontological categories (things, events, places, 
times, manners etc.); to distinguish the participants in the event or state according 
to role; to identify the intentional states of ourselves and others; to express distinc-
tions of truth value and modality (necessity, possibility, probability, factuality); to 
comment on the time of an event or state; to encode an unlimited number of 
predicates, arguments, and propositions; to use the same propositional content 
within different speech acts such as questions, statements, or commands (Pinker 
and Bloom 1992: 460; Crook 1980: 134; Clark 1993: 44–47). In other words, lan-
guage has “meaning” if it mentally connects its structures with persons, objects, 
events, actions, and states existing in the outside world.
This means that the meaning of a word in the brain cannot be a definition 
entirely in terms of other words or symbolic devices, because reference ensures 
that language is an open, not a closed system. Each lexical entry, or word, is the 
centre of a complex network that contains four classes of information: 1/ meaning, 
or reference; 2/ syntactic properties, including the category of the entry (for exam-
ple, verb); 3/ morphological details, such as affixes for plurals, cases, or tenses; and 
4/ phonological information, including syllabic structure and accents (Donald 
1991: 251; Pinker 2001: 24). Which is not to say that language is unimaginable 
without referential meaning, relying only on syntactic, morphological, and pho-
nological rules but not on semantic ones. Word-play or metaphysical speculation, 
for instance, seem to thrive on grammatical rules alone, by producing statements 
with no discernible connection with the world outside the employed discourse. 
The occasional separation of semantics from other linguistic structures is possible 
due to so-called “double articulation,” or “duality of patterning,” which divides 
language into two distinct levels of organization: phonology and morpho-syntax. 
For James R. Hurford the two levels of language organization are semi-autono-
mous, and only the morpho-syntactic level is linked to the logical forms of seman-
tics and the possibility of referential meaning. This effectively means that language 
has two quite distinct sets of rules for “putting things together:” phonological rules 
which put individual consonants and vowels together to make syllables and basic 
grammatical units called morphemes, and syntactic rules which take these ele-
ments and put them together to make (possibly) meaningful utterances (Hurford 
2002: 319). This also means that it is possible to generate linguistic utterances us-
ing only the rules from the morpho-syntactic level but without engaging the logi-
cal forms that link syntax with semantics. This explains why it is so easy to produce 
grammatically correct but meaningless (that is, non-referential) sentences. 

 From Interaction to Symbol
However, if symbolic language has arisen historically as a system of communica-
tion, its referential and representational function must be considered primary, as 
language’s evolutionary raison d’être, with its non-referential uses as possibly ac-
cidental although culturally consequential by-products.
On the morpho-syntactic level language users do not just string together iso-
lated words; they combine them into phrases and sentences, in which the meaning 
of the combination can be inferred both from the individual meanings of the words 
involved and from the rules combining the words. Which is another way of saying 
that the meaning of a phrase or utterance is more than the sum of meanings of the 
constituent words. Nor can we derive the meaning of a word from the phonetic ele-
ments that compose it. By a similar token, in a physical domain we cannot derive 
the fire-extinguishing properties of water from the combination of hydrogen (which 
burns) and oxygen (which sustains burning), nor the properties of proteins from 
the genes that control their formation (Studdert-Kennedy and Goldstein 2003: 237). 
Thus the word dog on its own refers to any domesticated canine mammal, whereas 
the combined phrase mad dog forms a new semantic entity, in which the meaning 
of one word is modified by the other grammatically related word. Here the word 
mad does not just refer to any person or animal being insane, but specifically to a 
dog, while dog as a generic member of the canine family is narrowed down in the 
phrase to a dog that happens to be mad. On top of that the entire phrase mad dog 
can assume a metaphoric, connotative meaning when used to describe an uncon-
trollably violent person for example. In all other “dog”-related phrases, such as cats 
and dogs, dogs of war, a dog’s life and so on, the specific meanings, both denotative 
and connotative, are created by the meanings of the individual words involved, 
modified by the rules binding the words together in the phrase.
Not any combination of words is allowed, but only those controlled by the 
rules peculiar to language: we say cats and dogs, but not dogs and cats (grammati-
cal but stylistically incorrect), or and casts dogs (ungrammatical). After Noam 
Chomsky it is widely accepted that in the mind of every language user there is an 
innate Universal Grammar as the generator of rules specific to a particular lan-
guage, which determine how words may be arranged into grammatically correct 
combinations. The set of these rules is referred as generative grammar: it assembles 
words into phrases according to the words’ functions, or part-of-speech catego-
ries, such as noun and verb. The rules of generative grammar are also productive 
(hence the adjective “generative”): by specifying kinds of words (a noun, a verb, a 
determiner etc.) rather than actual words, the rules allow the speaker to assemble 
new sentences without having to regurgitate preassembled clichés, thus permitting 
an unprecedented number of combinations of sentences and associated ideas. For 
instance, we can say mad dog, but also doggy dog or stuffed dog, just by substituting 
adjectival phrases. The combinatorial nature of grammatical rules allows every 

	
Chapter 10.  The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	 
position in a sentence to be filled with a choice of words from a lengthy lexical list 
(Saussure 1974: 124–126; Pinker 2001: 4–8). In this way, by substituting every po-
sition in the sentence with new words from the list of nouns, verbs, adjectives, 
prepositions and so on, one can generate a practically infinite number of gram-
matical (if not always meaningful) sentences.
One of the most important features of language as a communication system 
able to refer to things displaced in time is recursion, a grammatical rule whereby 
the verb phrase, or sentence, can contain another verb phrase or sentence (Pinker 
2001: 9–11; Johansson 2006: 7; Bloom 1998: 211). The recursive power of syntax 
allows us to describe objects and events to a potentially infinite degree of embed-
ding, as in he thinks that she knows that he persuaded etc. In the sentence I told him 
he could watch that film later on DVD, the sentence he could watch that film later 
on DVD is embedded in the sentence I told him. The recursive rule can repeat itself 
practically ad infinitum, creating a string of embedded sentences, like a Russian 
doll. A human being possessing a recursive grammar can express or understand 
an infinite number of distinctive thoughts, referring to events distributed across 
the entire time scale, as befits a species with an extended working memory (Bran-
don and Hornstein 1986: 185). For instance, in the sentence quoted above we are 
in fact dealing with three separate moments in time: the present time in which the 
sentence is spoken, the past to which the sentence refers (I told him), and an un-
specified future any time after the moment denoted by I told him (which could be 
between the past event and the present, or even beyond the present, if he from the 
sentence has not yet seen the film in question). Recursion is a powerful communi-
cation device for exchanging precise information about time, space, objects, and 
about who did what to whom and when. Without recursion it would not be pos-
sible to exchange propositions about the specifically human higher-order inten-
tionality, or gossip, as in the sentence He knows that she thinks that he is having an 
affair with Ann. Without recursive grammar language would not be such a power-
ful tool of persuasion, argument, hypothetical speculation and social negotiation. 
If reference, another important feature of language, has its antecedents in animal 
communication, even in creatures as small and otherwise cognitively primitive as 
the honey-bees, recursion appears to be the only attribute of the human language 
that lacks any parallel within animal communication systems.
Other possible sources of language: sexual selection and gestures
It seems clear, especially with the benefit of hindsight, that a system of communi-
cation based on symbolic reference across the entire time spectrum must have 
given its users an adaptive edge by conferring some reproductive advantage over 

 From Interaction to Symbol
ecological competitors such as the non-symbolic and contiguity-bound Neander-
thals. Increased survival due to success in hunting in the harsh conditions of the 
last Ice Age must have been among the chief benefits of efficient social communi-
cation based on syntactic language. At the same time Terrence Deacon argues that 
the transition from mimetic to symbolic culture was also due to sexual (as well as 
natural) selection. His line of reasoning is the following: in hunting-gathering 
communities the only way that males, while away on hunting, could be ensured of 
the fidelity of their females was the social institution of marriage. In order to pre-
vent, or at least to reduce, mistrust and jealousy, couples made public and binding 
promises of sexual fidelity to each other. Because the promise referred to future 
and possible events, it could only be expressed through symbolic signs: social cer-
emony, gestures, objects (such as today’s wedding ring), and communication sys-
tems using displaced referents, such as language. Non-human primates are under 
no pressure to speak or to use visual symbols, because they communicate only 
about the currently experienced world, and anything important in it can always be 
pointed out, literally, by manual gesture or emotive vocal signalling. On the other 
hand humans, with their extended perception of time, make social contracts by 
agreeing to share and enforce an abstract idea referring to some future eventuality. 
Since physical referents denoted by contracts do not (yet) exist, Deacon argues 
that the only way to convey information about a contract would have been to es-
tablish a suitable symbol. This symbol would be likely to derive from some ritual 
action involved in cementing the contract (as a wedding ring might come to sym-
bolize marriage). With recurrent use, such ritual symbols became reduced to 
shorthand, and were eventually given verbal, also symbolic equivalents (Deacon 
1997: 402, 406).
Another recurrent social situation which may have given rise to, or at least may 
have greatly encouraged symbolic thinking is the “sham menstruation” phenome-
non, which the anthropologists Chris Knight and Camilla Power argue was prac-
tised by the Palaeolithic women (probably as far back as 100,000 years). As I al-
ready mentioned in Chapter 4 in connection with bodily adornments and the 
beginnings of referential communication, sham menstruation was a fiction-gener-
ating strategy in which newly fertile females were bonded in coalitionary alliance 
with their pregnant and nursing mothers, sisters, and other kin. Women appar-
ently developed this strategy to avoid being made pregnant and then abandoned by 
their mates. Sham menstruation was designed to conceal the precise period of ovu-
lation, extending the female’s receptivity beyond the fertile period, thus keeping the 
male sexually interested over an increasingly extended period. As in the case of the 
marriage contract emphasized by Deacon, sham menstruation presupposed ex-
tended working memory as a psychological prerequisite for a symbolic solution to 
an adaptively important problem – the long-term male commitment to his sexual 

	
Chapter 10.  The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	 
partner and her offspring. According to Knight and Power, symbolic culture could 
thus emerge to offset the danger of menstruating (that is, fertile) women being se-
duced by philandering males. To hide the signs of imminent fertility in a menstru-
ating female, other women painted their bodies red, thus publicly advertising their 
own potential fertility to attract male attention to their group in general, at the 
same time hiding the individual, truly menstruating women from the attention of 
philanderers. By bonding together closely, the young woman’s female kin would 
temporarily bar male sexual access to her and would scramble her signal, packag-
ing the released information in a form that philanderers could not use. The persist-
ence of such “blood” coalitions led eventually to the conventionalization of signals 
into symbolic signs and the stabilization of “blood”-symbolized kin-coalitions 
(Knight 1991; 2002: 151; Power 1999; Watts 1999: 137; Davidson 2003: 154).
On the other hand, Merlin Donald speculates that the most likely initial source 
of arbitrary symbols at the time when iconic communication still predominated 
were not vocal communication or conventionalized bodily displays, but the stand-
ardization of mimetic visual performance – that is, gesture. Gesture is still closely 
tied to speech in modern humans, and some of the gestural expressions are what 
Donald calls “emblematic” – stereotypical signs carrying part-iconic part-symbol-
ic specific meanings: for example, thumbs up for “OK,” or index finger circling the 
temple for “psychologically peculiar.” All cultures have some system of expression 
involving facial and postural attitudes to express approval and disapproval, anger 
and sadness, puzzlement, derision and so on. Gestures may have started out as 
variants of emotional expressions, with time to become the most rudimentary 
symbols, that is, symbols still close to a mimetic level of representation, such as 
shrugging the shoulders, pursing the lips, shaking the head to indicate puzzlement, 
waving and smiling to greet someone, shaking hands and so on. Putting the fingers 
to the lips and producing a “shh” sound indicates silence both in modern Western 
culture and among the Kalahari Bushmen. Donald argues that gesture and speech 
both have mimetic origin and share a computational stage, indicating that they 
may have developed together up to a point (Donald 1991: 220, 224). In the event 
speech overtook gestures in combinatorial development to form the main sym-
bolic system among humans, largely due to the aforementioned physical advan-
tages of the auditory medium, including the comparatively high speed of signal 
emission, and the freeing of the hands and eyes from communicative function.
The co-evolution of vocal language and gestural communication is also en-
dorsed by the psychologist Michael C. Corballis, who argues that gestures are neu-
rophysiologically synchronized with speech, and that the two channels of com-
munication form a single, integrated system. When people are prevented from 
speaking and asked to communicate with gestures, their gestures spontaneously 
take on syntactic elements. Infants exposed to a sign language learn it as naturally 

 From Interaction to Symbol
as those who learn to speak, and perhaps even more quickly. The main argument 
in favour of evolutionary pressure on gestural communication is the bipedalism of 
early hominids, attested already for Australopithecus anamensis (some 4,2 million 
years ago), which freed the arms and hands from primary involvement in locomo-
tion, and opened up the frontal stance. Corballis suggests that these development 
led the hominids to discover natural (that is, iconic) relationships between their 
own gestures and events in the physical world. Mimed communication could thus 
have been a precursor to language, which accordingly progressed from mimed 
sequences to a more abstract and conventionalized system, much as do present-
day sign languages. After the emergence of the genus Homo about 2,5 million years 
ago, gesture may have begun to acquire syntactic structure, while the vocal ele-
ments were gradually introduced, eventually to dominate over gestural communi-
cation, as the hands became more involved with other activities, such as carrying 
and manufacturing (Corballis 2002: 161, 170, 175; 2003: 214, 216).
With evolutionary hindsight, symbolic communication appears “overdeter-
mined,” as Terrence Deacon puts it. Almost everything points to it: it bestows clear 
advantage in organizing hunts, sharing food, exchanging views about social reali-
ties, planning warfare and defence, passing on tool-making skills, sharing impor-
tant past experiences, establishing social bonds between individuals, manipulat-
ing potential sexual competitors or mates, caring for and training the young and 
so on (Deacon 1997: 377). The ecological success of symbol-using humans com-
pared with non-symbolic primate species or the Neanderthal humans indicates 
that there must be a significant reproductive advantage conferred by language.
Ethnically differentiated languages must also have played a significant role in 
maintaining group cohesion and communal identity in opposition to the outsiders 
(Knight 1999: 243). Iconic signs alone, due to their reliance on universal, species-
specific perceptual automatisms and cognitive processes, tend to display consider-
able inter-cultural intelligibility, and their role in demarcating group boundaries is 
therefore limited. The arbitrary signs of speech on the other hand rely on group-
specific learning practices, resulting in the emergence of sharp inter-group bound-
aries, separate communal identities and cultural developments, including the Tow-
er of Babel of thousands of mutually unintelligible ethnic languages of the world.
From an evolutionary point of view the diversification of languages is in itself 
a puzzling phenomenon. Given the fact that language evolved to allow informa-
tion to be exchanged, why do languages diversify so rapidly that they very quickly 
become mutually unintelligible? There are now some 6,000 living languages in the 
world, plus an untold number that have already become extinct. Languages also 
spawn dialects with unseemly speed, and dialects in turn eventually give rise to 
new languages. Robin Dunbar suggests that since it is probably not beyond the wit 
of evolution to have produced language structures that are resistant to corruption, 

	
Chapter 10.  The origins of language and the advantages of arbitrariness	 
so if languages diversify so easily it is probably because they have been deliber-
ately selected to do so. One answer is simply drift: the gradual accumulation of 
accidental mutations (mispronunciations etc.) over long periods of time. Another 
reason, a selective one favoured by Dunbar, is the need to differentiate communi-
ties, mainly to eliminate free riders – individuals who take the benefits of co-oper-
ation but do not pay the costs. Dialects were thus probably designed to act as 
badges of group membership that allow everyone to identify members of their 
exchange group simply by the way they speak (Dunbar 2003: 229–231).
Neither the diversification of ethnic languages nor the combinatorial nature of 
language in general would be possible without the arbitrary nature of the linguistic 
sign, which liberated the form of the sign from the constraints of the emotive and 
iconic motivation, and consequently enabled the free manipulation of the sign 
through combinations and permutations to code meanings referring to things dis-
placed in time and place. The switch towards arbitrariness thus moved human 
language onto a level of efficiency, flexibility, and precision unattainable by the 
more archaic, primate systems of communication. At the same time the recombi-
nation of phonemes and words to form grammatical sentences is only possible to 
a combinatorial mind, capable of producing discrete propositions about the exist-
ing and hypothetical situations, which means that syntactic language is as much 
about communicating complex information about the natural and social environ-
ments as about a new, specifically human way of thinking. As I noted earlier, lan-
guage evolved through natural selection primarily for the function of communica-
tion, but its combinatorial structure also affected the thought processes (Pinker 
1997: 169; Bloom 1998: 208). Without language, much of our conceptual thinking 
as expressed in religion, philosophy, science, law and politics would not exist. In 
the course of human cognitive evolution language and other modules of the mind 
entered into a competitive feedback loop, and as our ancestors’ abilities to com-
municate increased, so did their social and conceptual capacities, which in turn 
created more pressure for greater communicative abilities, and so on (Bloom 
1998: 204). This also means that while linguistic communication as an adaptation 
presupposes referential meaning, increased cognitive abilities facilitated by com-
binatorial language also make it possible to generate propositions with no equiva-
lents in the empirical world – a curious, fascinating, uniquely human phenomenon 
of non-referential meaning, probably produced as a by-product of language con-
ceived primarily as a system of referential communication.


chapter 11
Language and the symbolic compulsion
The combinatorial nature of syntactic language thus accounts for language’s two-
fold function: that of communication and cognition. As well as being a way of 
exchanging ideas about important facts of life, language is also an outward expres-
sion of an unusual mode of thought – symbolic representation. Symbolic thinking 
enables humans to live, uniquely among the animals, not only in the world of 
physical things, but also in a shared world of virtual, immaterial reality. People are 
not only alerted to the natural and social environments affecting them directly, but 
they also inhabit an invisible world of mental abstractions, impossibilities, and 
paradoxes, they brood over what could have happened but didn’t, over what is 
likely to happen, and what it will be like not to exist. The generative nature of lan-
guage, its ability to produce a potentially infinite number of sentences, gives rise to 
a corresponding number of possible concepts and propositions, some factual and 
some fictional. Within language’s communicative function people tell stories about 
their own and other people’s experiences, that is, about what really happened. On 
the other hand within language’s cognitive function people also invent stories 
about imagined or impossible events, and they even make use of these stories to 
organize their lives, as evidenced by the social influences of religions and political 
ideologies. Like other animals, we think and exchange knowledge about percepti-
ble material objects and important existential situations, but as humans we are not 
limited to the visible reality – we can also think about abstract and metaphysical 
entities, we tell jokes, narrate ghost stories, compose poems and music, invent 
myths of the origin of the world, write novels, or use mathematics to speculate 
about the physical nature of the universe. It is this ability of language and of the 
combinatorial mind to produce a new, virtual dimension of reality, a meta-version 
of the physically existing world that has created a huge cognitive gap between hu-
mans and all other species (Bloom 1998: 212). 
As I argued in Chapter 2, communication in its simplest form requires an im-
age, or perception of an objects or situation, and parainformation, that is, a mental 
association attached to that perception. Derek Bickerton describes the same proc-
ess in terms of a primary system of representation, or what he calls “on-line think-
ing,” in which sense perceptions of the world are mapped onto conceptual repre-
sentations, as when an actual egg is reflected in the concept of an egg-shaped 
object in the mind of a bird, enabling the bird to recognize a real egg in its vicinity 

 From Interaction to Symbol
and to react appropriately (protectively) towards it. In fact, everything that we or 
other creatures perceive is a representation, not naked reality itself. No creature 
receives from its senses more than a selection from the range of information that 
is potentially available. What is presented to any species, not excluding our own, 
by its senses is thus not “reality” but a species-specific view of reality – not what is 
“out there,” but what it is useful for the species to know about what is there. Neces-
sarily partial and biased as the primary representation of reality is for animals, at 
the same time that view cannot stray too far from the surface of things-as-they-
are. If it did, animals would be presented with counterfactual evidence, and would 
quickly starve or be killed and eaten (Bickerton 1990: 13, 82, 209).
All animals relate to the outside world through the primary system of repre-
sentation (parainformation), but only humans can avail of metainformation, that 
is, of associations about associations, or what Bickerton refers to as a secondary 
system of representation, or “off-line thinking,” when conceptual representations 
are mapped onto another system of mental representation such as language (Bick-
erton 1996: 40, 103–105). Other meta-cognitive phenomena such as inner dia-
logue, fantasizing, or philosophizing are all secondary systems of representation in 
the above sense. The cognitive scientist Dan Sperber similarly argues that during 
the course of evolution the human mind has evolved a biologically unique, spe-
cies-specific module of “meta-representation.” Whereas the other cognitive mod-
ules contain concepts and (primary) representations of things, Sperber suggests 
that this new module integrates the other modules to form “concepts of concepts,” 
or “representations of representations” (Sperber 1994: 42–46). It is clear that just 
as primary systems of representation offer a necessarily fragmentary, species-spe-
cific picture of what the world is really like, secondary systems of representation 
distance the observer from the external world even more, often to the point of 
distorting it completely, as in fantasies, delusions, dreams, or hallucinations. Even 
science – offering a most reliable description to date of what the empirical world is 
probably like – is basically a metainformational, cognitively secondary phenome-
non, as is consciousness, that uniquely human sense of knowing that one knows. 
Paradoxically therefore, progressive distancing from the external world caused by 
these meta-cognitive devices is the price humans pay for consciously knowing 
anything about the world at all. 
It’s not all in language
Syntactic language and other meta-cognitive faculties appear to be closely interre-
lated in the mind, but not in the sense that we “think” in a particular language: 
English, Chinese, or Polish. The “language” of thought, or what Steven Pinker calls 

	
Chapter 11.  Language and the symbolic compulsion	 
“mentalese,” shares with verbal languages a basically combinatorial and proposi-
tional structure, and our thoughts can of course be translated into verbal equiva-
lents. At the same time the fact that there can be two thoughts, or concepts, corre-
sponding to one word (e.g. “stool”), means that thoughts and words are not one 
and the same thing (Pinker 1995: 75, 77; 2007: 55–58). Mental life goes on largely 
independently of particular language, as otherwise personalities, cultures, value 
systems, and lifestyles would all be direct functions of a particular, unique ethnic 
language. Both individual personalities and ethnic cultures do differ of course, but 
not as widely as the phonological, lexical, and grammatical systems of unrelated 
languages, and not as a result of the language individual people and communities 
happen to be using. There can be wide differences between the personalities and 
lifestyles of people sharing the same ethnic language, just as people speaking differ-
ent languages can be similar in all other psychological and cultural respects. Trans-
lating books from one language to another makes sense precisely because people 
from different linguistic communities can have common, mutually intelligible 
mentalities and outlooks, to say nothing of human nature as the generator of the 
universally understood basic templates of human experience and social relations.
Important as language is for human communication and cognition, its impact 
on our thinking must not therefore be overstated. Many experiments have probed 
the minds of creatures without language, such as infants and nonhuman primates, 
and have discovered the fundamental categories of thought fully in operation: ob-
jects, space, cause and effect, number, probability, agency (the initiation of behav-
iour by a person or animal), and the functions of tools (Pinker 2002: 210; Hurford 
2002: 312). Deaf children (never exposed to spoken language) using hand signs 
pass through exactly the same developmental stages as speaking children, and the 
language that emerges from their gestural signs has the same characteristics of 
grammatical structuring as the verbal language (Plotkin 1994: 201, 205). As indi-
vidual introspection also demonstrates, there is a general poverty of language 
when it comes to dealing with most visual and auditory stimuli that constantly 
attack our senses, with our emotional states, or when describing facial expressions 
or facial identity (Magee 1998: 95). Experiences such as pain and love, sensual 
pleasure of sex and food, contemplation of music and so on are notoriously diffi-
cult to communicate through language, and probably impossible to describe fully. 
Most sensations and emotions can only be shared experientially, but not commu-
nicated verbally. What it effectively means is that the language faculty co-exists 
with but does not determine or dominate other cognitive modules – it is primarily 
a biological adaptation to communicate information, and not an insidious shaper 
of thought and feeling (Pinker 1995: 6; Carruthers and Boucher 1998). 
The opposite view, one proposing that language strongly influences the way 
people perceive the world and think about it, has been known as linguistic 

 From Interaction to Symbol
determinism, and has been one of the most influential schools of thought in twen-
tieth-century linguistics, psychology, philosophy, and anthropology. The linguistic 
determinism hypothesis concentrates on the differences in both vocabulary and 
grammar between different languages and suggests that speakers of a particular 
language are led to think, perceive and remember the world in a way peculiar to 
that language. Consequently, users of different languages will tend to view the 
world differently. In anthropology the hypothesis of linguistic determinism is also 
known as cultural relativism, the latter associated with the anthropologist Franz 
Boas (1858–1942), who inspired his student, the linguist Edward Sapir, into a be-
lief that languages carve up the world into categories according to which people 
perceive and understand the world (Sapir 1985: 69). Sapir’s own student Benjamin 
Whorf stretched this observation into the famous linguistic determinism hypoth-
esis, whereby nature is cut up and organized into concepts codified in the patterns 
of language, which determine the way the users of the language perceive reality 
(Whorf 1940: 229–231; 1956; Lund 2003: 10; Pinker 2002: 207; 2007: 124–136).
Like all one-sided, deterministic positions, the linguistic determinism/cultural 
relativity hypothesis offers only a partial and therefore distorted view, here of the 
relations between the mind, language, and the world. The hypothesis effectively 
implies that the fundamental categories of reality are not “in” reality itself but are 
imposed wholly by one’s culture, in practice by language. But as I said earlier, the 
fact that translations from one language to another are possible appears to indicate 
that thought and culture are not functions of a particular ethnic language. Also, 
people do not absorb and use their native languages passively, but allow the linguis-
tic structures to interact with their minds, feelings, and individual experience to 
shape their language creatively by coining new words and expressions. Languages 
evolve and change, and not only due to their own inherent, independent dynamics 
but also thanks to the largely non-linguistic socio-psychological processes. 
The linguistic determinism hypothesis also begs a fundamental question as to 
where the categories of a particular ethnic language come from in the first place. A 
sensible answer would probably have to consider sustained historical interactions 
between the linguistic community and the social and natural environments, the 
latter existing largely independently from the language the community happens to 
be using. According to the linguist Michael Lee, it is the structure of our everyday 
experience that is reflected in the structure of the language, rather than the other 
way round. As a system of communication language works within the confines of 
the real world, and is constrained both by the limitations of our neural hardware 
and by the particulars of observable reality. For example, we all feel the effects of 
gravity and enjoy the benefits of stereoscopic vision, and these shared experiences 
exert a force on the languages of all cultures, giving rise to some linguistic univer-
sals (Lee 1988: 211; Clark and Clark 1978: 227–230). As Steven Pinker also points 

	
Chapter 11.  Language and the symbolic compulsion	 
out, there is no scientific evidence that languages dramatically shape their speak-
ers’ ways of thinking; to the contrary, observations of deaf children and of people 
with linguistic impairments demonstrate development of alternative syntactic and 
symbolic forms of communication, such as sign languages or Braille (viz. the fa-
mous case of Helen Keller [1880–1968], a deaf-blind author, activist and lecturer, 
who achieved her academic accomplishments using the sense of touch alone). De-
spite their isolation from the verbal world, languageless adults display many ab-
stract forms of thinking, such as rebuilding broken locks, handling money, playing 
card games, and entertaining each other with long pantomimed narratives (Pinker 
1995: 49–51, 61).
A classic case in point in the debate about language and thought is colour 
perception and its relation to linguistic labels for colours. From a physical point of 
view the spectrum of light is continuous, not divided into discrete colours of the 
rainbow. The electromagnetic wavelength is a continuous dimension, and there is 
nothing to separate red, yellow, green, blue and so on into separate perceptual 
categories. But although there are no colour boundaries from a physical view-
point, from a physiological point of view they do exist. Colour vision depends on 
the degree of stimulation of three kinds of cones, each with a different pigment, 
and the cones are wired to neurons in a way that makes the neurons respond best 
to red patches against a green background or vice versa, blue against yellow, black 
against white (Sherwood 1997: 178–180). The physiological basis of colour per-
ception is thus independent of any language, which means that words for different 
colours are constrained by perception, not the other way round.
Wherever languages differ in their colour words, they differ in a predictable 
way, as the classic research by Brent Berlin and Paul Kay has persuasively demon-
strated. Originally, investigations into the lexical domain of colour arose as an at-
tempt to prove the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, namely that languages vary without 
restraint, and since physically the colour spectrum is continuous, its division into 
discrete lexical items should be completely arbitrary. But Berlin and Kay have 
shown that this is not the case, because the focal points of colour terms (terms and 
colour that most speakers of a language agree on) are in fact determined by the 
neural anatomy of our colour vision. First of all, Berlin and Kay discovered that 
although different languages encode in their vocabularies different numbers of 
basic colour categories, a total universal inventory of exactly eleven basic colour 
categories exists (black, white, red, yellow, green, blue, brown, purple, pink, orange, 
and grey), from which any given language draws its basic colour terms. Some lan-
guages, like English, use all eleven, while others use as few as two. But when a 
language has only two, it does not pick just any two at random, but black and white 
(as “dark” and “light”).

 From Interaction to Symbol
The following strict limitations on the numbers and types of colour categories 
are also coded by any given language: when a language has three colours, it always 
picks black, white, and red; if a language contains four terms, then it contains a 
term for either green or yellow (but not for both); if a language contains five terms, 
then it contains terms for both green and yellow; if a language contains six terms, 
then it contains a term for blue; if a language has seven terms, then it contains a 
term for brown; and if a language contains eight or more terms, then it contains a 
term for purple, pink, orange, grey, or some combination of these. 
These limitations also reflect the sequence of evolutionary stages through 
which a language must pass as its basic colour vocabulary increases. There also 
appears to be a positive correlation between general cultural complexity (includ-
ing the level of technological development) and complexity of colour vocabulary. 
For instance, all the languages of highly industrialized European and Asian peo-
ples have eight or more colour terms in their vocabularies, while all representa-
tives of early stages (between two and four colour terms in their lexicons) are spo-
ken by peoples with small populations and limited technology, located in isolated 
areas. The choice of basic colour terms in different languages is therefore far from 
random, because the very physiology of the human visual system makes some 
colours more salient than others. For example, children find black, white, and red 
eye-catching and easy to remember. Colour terminology is therefore universal be-
cause the physiology of the human vision has universal properties (Berlin and Kay 
1999: 1–3, 10, 14, 16; Clark and Clark 1978: 232–234; Lee 1988: 216, 218).
The exclusive preoccupation with language and the related view that language 
is a paradigm for all other forms of communication have also led to distorted and 
confusing concepts and theories of culture. Contemporary communication stud-
ies, semiotics, literary and media studies derive their methodologies and critical 
vocabulary mainly from structuralist linguistics, quite irrespective of whether the 
object of investigation is linguistic communication or not. While the concept of 
the arbitrariness of the sign and the combinatorial nature of the code certainly ap-
ply to syntactic language, they do not necessarily reflect the character of the visual 
media such as painting, photography, drama or film. Syntactic language is indeed 
based largely on a digital code, but life-simulating visual media, like life itself, are 
mainly analogue, communicating their messages through holistic, unrecombina-
ble gestalts. A classic case in point is the perception of the human face, in life as 
well as on a painted or photographic portrait, or in a cinematic close-up (Smith 
and Scott 1997). The face consists of certain typical elements such as the oval over-
all shape, the eyes, the nose, the lips, the ears, the cheeks, the forehead, the neck, 
facial and scalp hair and so on. Within limited quantitative variations all these ele-
ments can assume only one, familiar type of spatial arrangement to be perceived 
as a face. Rearranging these elements freely will not produce a new meaningful 

	
Chapter 11.  Language and the symbolic compulsion	 
image but a chaotic, Picassoesque picture of randomly scattered bits and pieces: 
here an eye, there an ear and so on. On the other hand in digital language a simple 
recombination of constituent elements such as phonemes in a word can turn one 
meaningful message into another meaningful message, as in turning the word dog 
into a semantically unrelated word god simply by reversing the order of the pho-
nemes/letters. We cannot perform a similar trick with analogue and holistic visual 
messages: a painted dog will not turn into an image of “god” if we paint the dog 
facing the other way. This means that applying linguistic categories to analyses of 
paintings, photographs or of sequential narratives such as novels, plays or films is 
simply mistaken. One must therefore treat with a pinch of salt the frequently used 
by misleading critical vocabulary which talks about the “language” or “grammar” 
of film, or which uses the concept of “text” both in relation to alphabetic writing 
and to the narrative structure of a novel, to the visual spectacle of drama and film, 
or even to the history of the world (Merquior 1986: 248).
The excesses of language combinatorial machine 
While on-line, adaptive thinking and denotative linguistic representation are con-
strained both by the physiology of sensory perception and by the physical proper-
ties of the environment, off-line meta-thinking and the connotative use of language 
are practically open-ended in the meanings they can generate. Human on-line 
thinking is a direct descendant of animal cognition, with its alertness to the ever-
changing contingencies of life and to adaptively important situations such as food 
gathering, prey locating, intruder repelling and so on, which limit the number of 
problems that animals can communicate about. By contrast, in humans the capac-
ity to think about one’s responses to life, coupled with the combinatorial nature of 
language as a medium with which to communicate one’s thoughts, produce a po-
tentially unlimited number of possible topics of communication. While all other 
creatures can communicate only about things that have direct evolutionary sig-
nificance to them, human beings can communicate about literally anything.
The unlimited semantic potential of human symbolic communication results 
both from the extended working memory, which enables us to hold in conscious 
attention events and possibilities far exceeding the limitations of the current mo-
ment, and from the combinatorial nature of language, which can transcend our 
perception of the here-and-now by generating propositions also about events that 
never happened and are never likely to happen. Each of us has a vocabulary of 
around 30,000 to 40,000 words, yet we are able to generate some 1030 (i.e. one with 
thirty zeroes behind it) different grammatical sentences of about twenty words in 
length. Even a comparatively small inventory of lexical elements can be assembled 

 From Interaction to Symbol
by rules of grammar into an immense set of distinct utterances, whose number 
grows exponentially (geometrically) with the size of the combination. This means 
that if we never drew breath but just talked all our lives, we would utter but a tiny 
fraction of all the sentences we are capable of producing (Pinker 2001: 8; Plotkin 
1994: 199). 
The creative capacity of a combinatorial system applies also to another unique-
ly human form of expression: music, in that both language and music are capable of 
generating an unlimited number of novel sequences from a small number of basic 
ingredients. Just as speakers can produce sentences they have never heard before, so 
composers can write melodies which nobody has ever produced before (Sloboda 
1985: 17; Bertalanffy 1981: 50). As the governess Maria, played by Julie Andrews, 
explains to the von Trapp children in the classic film The Sound of Music (1965): 
When you read you begin with ABS, when you sing you begin with DO, RE, ME.... 
DO, RE, ME, FA, SO, LA, TE are only the tools we use to build a song. Once you 
have these notes in your heads, you can sing a million different tunes by mixing 
them up. Like this: SO, DO, LA, FA, ME, DO, RE, SO, DO, LA, TE, DO, RE, DO. 
Now put it all together... 
and there follows one of Rodgers and Hammerstein’s unforgettable melodies. This 
extraordinary creativity of the human mind is qualitatively different from any-
thing that any other species can produce in their pre-syntactic, holistic forms of 
communication. However, impressive as human linguistic creativity is, it is impor-
tant to bear in mind that statistically speaking most sentences generated through 
a combinatorial grammar are nonsensical or false, in the sense of lacking any ref-
erential support in the extra-linguistic, outside world. The question is: what pos-
sible benefits can there be in exchanging ideas about non-existent objects, crea-
tures, and events? Does not the resulting cognitive distance from and distortion of 
empirical reality undermine language’s primary communicative function?
As I discussed in the previous chapter, language produces sentences through 
the operation of a number of interrelated cognitive modules, including a store-
house of memorized words (lexicon); a set of rules that combine words and parts 
of words into bigger words (morphology); a set of rules that combine words into 
phrases and sentences (syntax); a set of rules converting words, phrases, and sen-
tences into sound patterns that speakers can pronounce or extract from the stream 
of noise when listening (phonology); and connections between the structure of 
language and the mind, defining what the speaker wants to say (semantics) (Pinker 
2001: 24; Hurford 2002: 319). The sub-system of language that crucially defines its 
communicative function is the semantic module, which connects the combinato-
rial sub-systems of syntax, morphology, and phonology with the similarly combi-
natorial mind, creating the generative language machine mentioned above, capable 

	
Chapter 11.  Language and the symbolic compulsion	 
of producing an astronomical number of novel grammatical sentences. The mind 
contains, among many other things, the concepts of objects found in the empirical 
world, which can be converted into lexical equivalents used by the language ma-
chine to produce meaningful sentences, that is, sentences that refer to independ-
ently existing external objects and events.
But the vast combinatorial powers of language and mind go far beyond these 
referential propositions, which is why an overwhelming majority of what we are 
potentially capable of saying is meaningless: grammatical but non-referen-
tial. Chomsky’s often quoted “colourless green ideas sleep furiously” is just one of 
an unlimited number of such nonsensical albeit grammatically correct sentences 
(Johansson 2006: 9). In fact, Chomsky’s sentence is not only empirically untrue 
but also logically false: if something is green then it cannot be colourless; ideas 
cannot be green because they are invisible, immaterial entities; only living organ-
isms can sleep, but not ideas; and when an organisms sleeps it cannot do so furi-
ously, but only quietly. While for Chomsky the defining feature of language is in-
deed combinatorial syntax, his example also illustrates the danger of separating 
syntax from semantics. The above nonsensical sentence shows how mentally easy 
it is to separate the combinatorial language machine from meaning, not just from 
referential meaning but even from simple logic that can determine which theo-
retical propositions are true and which are not. In other words, it is clearly possible 
to allow the phonological, morphological, and the syntactic modules to operate 
without the related but apparently not indispensable semantic module that gener-
ates referential or plausible meanings. With the semantic module engaged lan-
guage performs its primary communicative function by producing meaningful 
propositions referring to the relevant, actual or possible objects and situations in 
the outside world. On the other hand when the semantic module is disconnected, 
so to speak, from syntax language performs a non-communicative, solely cogni-
tive function by generating meaningless, fictional propositions of disputable rele-
vance to the outside world. That is to say, there is no empirical equivalent of the 
hypothetical situation described in Chomsky’s sentence about colourless green 
ideas that sleep furiously.
It is this capacity for unbridled linguistic productivity and equally unrestrained 
combinatorial thinking that makes possible such cognitive phenomena as myth, 
poetry, fantasy, and delusion. The one great advantage of combinatorial language 
is that it can produce messages, both factual and fictitious, much more quickly and 
easily than, by comparison, holistic acoustic and visual messages produced by the 
primates, and obviously more quickly and easily than the phenotypic communica-
tive displays produced by the slow evolutionary process. At the same time, as the 
linguist Andrew Carstairs-McCarthy observes, the very ease, speed, and versatility 
of language make it cheap to use for spreading deceptive information, mainly to 

 From Interaction to Symbol
gain advantage over one’s fellows. By contrast, signals which are expensive to pro-
duce, like elaborate plumage as part of a mating display in birds, are hard to fake 
and therefore reliable (Carstairs-McCarthy 2000: 261). Even deceptive animal sig-
nals such as mimicry take evolutionary time to produce, and once produced they 
remain fixed, inflexible, and limited in scope. On the other hand, the messages of 
human combinatorial speech can be produced and changed quickly and with neg-
ligible physiological cost which, combined with human capacity for meta-think-
ing, creates extraordinary and unprecedented opportunities for deception, includ-
ing self-deception, as well as apparently profitless and impractical fantasizing 
(Clark 1998). 
Human language appears therefore to be a mixed blessing. On the one hand it 
has proven to be the most efficient way ever invented by evolution of exchanging 
adaptively important and necessarily truthful and accurate information about the 
environment. On the other hand the combinatorial nature of language has pro-
duced an easy, quick, and physiologically cheap way of generating and disseminat-
ing information that is blatantly untruthful and inaccurate in the empirical sense. 
One can only surmise that if language has arisen through natural selection, then 
probably on balance the benefits of language’s communicative function have out-
weighed its potentially counter-adaptive capacity to produce fictitious and possi-
bly harmful descriptions of the world. That is to say, the truthful propositions of 
language, congruous with empirical reality, have proven advantageous enough to 
offset the possible disadvantages of untruthful models of the world that have ac-
companied humanity since time immemorial: especially the linguistically formu-
lated religious models, with their self-deceptive, factually wrong accounts of the 
origin, structure, evolution, and ultimate goal of the universe and of human life in 
it. It is one of the great miracles of the human condition that the same system of 
communication that gave our species an unprecedented evolutionary benefit – the 
capacity to represent the world quickly, cheaply, and accurately – has also given us 
the power to represent practically anything, whether true or false, whether adap-
tively significant or not. Still, the communicative benefits of language are evident-
ly so enormous that members of our species can produce and believe in a great 
deal of empirically untrue propositions, often leading to dysfunctional behaviour, 
and still survive (Bickerton 1990: 20).
Such mixed blessings are not unknown in evolution. In addition to adapta-
tions, that is, anatomical and behavioural features that enhance survival, the evo-
lutionary process often produces other outcomes visible in the designs of organ-
isms, including random effects as well as by-products of adaptations (so-called 
“spandrels,” after a comparison with the triangular spaces formed as incidental 
architectural by-products by the intersection of arches supporting the dome of the 
cathedral of San Marco in Venice) (Gould and Lewontin 1979: 581–590). For the 

	
Chapter 11.  Language and the symbolic compulsion	 
biologists Stephen Jay Gould and R. C. Lewontin these concomitants of adapta-
tions, or exaptations, are those properties of the phenotype that do not contribute 
to the organism’s functional design, but happen to be coupled to properties that 
are, and so were dragged along into the organism’s design because of selection on 
the design features to which they were linked (Gould 1991: 43–54; Buss et alli 
1998: 534–538; Tooby and Cosmides 1992a: 62; Fernald 1992: 392–395). For ex-
ample, bones are adaptations, but the fact that they are white is an incidental by-
product (bones were selected to include calcium because it conferred hardness 
and rigidity to the structure), and it simply happened that the insoluble calcium 
salts that are a constituent of a bone are white in colour. Similarly with the red 
colour of blood: blood cells, or erythrocytes, are essentially plasma membrane-
enclosed bags of haemoglobin that transports oxygen to tissues. It just happens 
that because of its iron content haemoglobin appears reddish when combined with 
oxygen (and bluish when deoxygenated).
By the same token it is possible to view some aspects of human cognition, es-
pecially certain manifestations of meta-thinking such as art, religion, and philoso-
phy – the so-called “spiritual culture” – as an evolutionary incidental by-product 
of the linguistic and related mental modules, primarily selected for by the demands 
of efficient communication in the tough conditions of life in the Pleistocene peri-
od. Symbolic and combinatorial language as a secondary system of representation, 
coupled with the capacity for meta-thinking afforded by consciousness, plus the 
theory of mind, extended working memory and the resulting teleological need, 
have all detached human cognition from the primary, or parainformational, sys-
tem of representation inherited from our animal ancestors, and have given us the 
mental wherewithal to produce such uniquely human artefacts as fictional litera-
ture, poetry, mythology, religion, mysticism, magic, artistic visions, philosophic 
speculation, and scientific theory. As a result we not only live in the physical world 
of things registered through our primary systems of representation, but we also 
inhabit a virtual world of symbolic stand-ins for things invented by secondary 
systems of representation. With the exception of science, all symbolic domains are 
essentially non-referential in character, in the sense that they do not denote things 
that exist anyhow – the repertoire of “things” referred to by most of symbolic cul-
ture simply has no existence outside a symbolic context (Dunbar 1995: 132).
The belief in the existence of otherwise non-existent symbolic entities, how-
ever, can serve important social and cognitive needs: it can cement the group and 
provide answers, factually wrong but psychologically useful, to the uniquely hu-
man metaphysical and teleological questions regarding the possible purpose and 
meaning of life. Symbolic entities universally include supernatural beings (deities, 
ghosts, demons, hobgoblins, monsters etc.); elements of mythical cosmology (par-
adise, hell etc.); social roles and institutions (emperors, priests, presidents, etc.); 

 From Interaction to Symbol
objects endowed with symbolic meaning (totems, sceptres, national emblems etc.); 
abstract moral concepts (sin, evil, redemption etc.); ritual acts (baptism, signing an 
agreement, taking an oath etc.); or values (religious faith, patriotism, virtue, being 
cool, chic and so on) (Chase 1991: 34–36; Blackmore 1999: 188). All cultures, re-
gardless of the level of their technological and social development, have used sym-
bolic language and the combinatorial mind to generate elaborate virtual realities 
described by religions, ethnic mythologies, and popular culture. Even the most 
isolated modern human groups live mentally within such virtual, symbolic reali-
ties. For example, the Tasaday of the Philippines, the pygmies of the African rain 
forest, and the Bushmen of Southern Africa when first contacted by Europeans 
still had the same type of tool culture associated with the very earliest modern hu-
man remains discovered by archaeology. But they all possessed elaborate spoken 
languages with complex grammars and highly developed tribal structures, rituals, 
mythical cosmologies, and religions with their supernatural beings (Donald 
1991: 206, 210–212; 2001: 168–199). 
Some of the symbolic domains found in human cultures past and present are 
adaptive and utilitarian (e.g. law, science); some, such as art, folklore, and mythical 
cosmologies, are probably indifferent to survival; and some may be deleterious, as 
when a person’s or a group’s religious beliefs are challenged by unorthodoxy from 
within, or threatened by an incompatible symbolic universe of another group, lead-
ing in individual cases to serious existential crises and even to suicide, or giving rise 
to bitter violent conflicts between groups for no other reason than because both 
sides strongly believe in different symbolic, supernatural entities that have no ob-
jective validity anyway. All cultures possess their own versions of symbolic domains 
invented for the purpose of consolidating relations between members of the group, 
of justifying political structures and the prevailing ideologies, of asserting group 
identity, and of allaying individual metaphysical anxieties, but it is also clear that 
the symbolic entities performing these important social functions have no inde-
pendent, empirical existence outside the meta-cognitive sphere of collective belief. 
The conceptual indulgence of philosophic discourse
The unquestioning faith that usually accompanies claims about the world made 
within different symbolic domains is not limited to religion and its supernatural 
premises, but can be found as a cognitive disposition underlying equally uncritical 
beliefs in any symbolic system, be it secular political ideology, philosophy, or aca-
demic theory. Science too is ultimately a product of abstract thought rooted in the 
combinatorial, symbolic mind, but unlike all the other symbolic systems science 
makes a point of limiting its claims about the world to those that can actually be 

	
Chapter 11.  Language and the symbolic compulsion	 
empirically proven through observation and experiment. In scientific thinking 
there is a constant two-way flow of information between the sensory, primary rep-
resentations and the linguistic, secondary representations, whereby a new obser-
vation can inductively inspire a new scientific concept, just as an a priori deductive 
concept can be immediately checked against observational evidence. Out of an 
infinitely large number of propositions that can be potentially produced by lan-
guage, science accepts only those that are verifiable and therefore relevant to the 
world in which we live. On the other hand no verification is as a rule required in 
support of philosophic propositions, whose validity is usually founded on the per-
sonal authority of their propounders, on current intellectual fashion, and on group 
solidarity among intellectuals rather than on objective evidence.
Non-referential or self-referential symbolic systems such as philosophy are 
driven on the one hand by human psychological compulsion to search for the 
meaning of life, and on the other hand by the compulsion of the combinatorial 
language machine that generates both meaningful and meaningless sentences with 
equal ease. (In fact, meaningless sentences are even easier to produce than mean-
ingful ones, because they do not require an additional reality check.) Unlike reli-
gion philosophy is usually also a product of highly literate cultures, where models 
of the world are created by manipulating the visual elements of an exteriorized and 
more or less fixed written text, rather than by using volatile and emotive spoken 
language. Because of its permanent character, writing is even more removed from 
external, physical reality than speech: it is a representation of a linguistic represen-
tation of a conceptual representation of the experienced world (Harris 1986: 27; 
Ong 2004: 40, 81; Frankish 1998). It is therefore easier to treat words on a page as 
entities in themselves rather than as signs referring to external entities such as 
concepts as the words’ mental equivalents, and by extension to referents outside 
language. Because of language’s compulsion to “idle,” as it were, the philosophic 
discourse thus produced is often of doubtful relevance to the realities of life. As the 
contemporary philosopher Bernard Williams observes sceptically: “at all times, 
and in all eras, and whoever’s doing it, at least ninety per cent of philosophy, on a 
generous estimate, is not much good, and is never going to be of any interest much 
to anybody later on except historians” (Magee 1978: 121). 
The separation of lexicon and syntax from semantics, which lies at the basis of 
much of philosophic discourse, is also facilitated by the arbitrary nature of the 
linguistic sign. Arbitrary symbols signify, but they do not model or reflect mean-
ing, as iconic signs do. Spoken or written words are not models of anything but 
only the objective carriers of information, arbitrary access devices for addressing 
certain memories. Arbitrary symbols exist therefore on another level of represen-
tation than iconic signs, and are more detached from their referents than iconic 
signs are from theirs. This is why with language, especially with writing, it is so 

 From Interaction to Symbol
easy to ignore the problem of reference, and to produce discourse that refers to 
nothing but itself (as in Derrida’s dictum that “there is nothing outside the text”). 
This is also why in lexicography the “meaning” of a word is not defined by its ex-
ternal reference, but by means of other words. As Merlin Donald puts it: 
Within the self-contained world of language, to find the meaning of a word in the 
mind one merely looks up its definition, or searches through a mental filing sys-
tem; or reduces it to a set of elementary symbols or semantic markers. In all three 
cases, there is no need to leave (that is, refer outside of) the symbolic system 
(Donald 1991: 227; 2001).
The cognitive distance between arbitrary written signs and the empirical world 
facilitates therefore the free manipulation of the former, as arbitrary symbols can 
be easily detached from their particular referents (provided they have any at all in 
the first place). At this abstract level of literacy, as Ellen Dissanayake notes, onto-
logical, ethical, and political statements in a text can be analyzed not in terms of 
their extra-textual meaning but of their linguistic function, a tendency pushed ad 
absurdum by some contemporary intellectuals, who seem to have replaced the tra-
ditional philosophic quest for the meaning of life with the quasi-linguistic quest 
for the meaning of words.
In Dissanayake’s words, “the immemorial discourse on the universe is trans-
figured by and into the concern for the adequate universe of discourse” (Dissanayake 
1991: 178). In his turn Bertrand Russell had this to say about the danger of the 
philosophers’ obsession with language: 
Philosophers and bookish people generally tend to live a life dominated by words, 
and even to forget that it is the essential function of words to have a connection of 
one sort or another with facts, which are in general non-linguistic. Some modern 
philosophers have gone so far as to say that words should never be confronted 
with facts but should live in a pure, autonomous world where they are compared 
only with other words. When you say, “the cat is a carnivorous animal,” you do not 
mean that actual cats eat actual meat, but only that in zoology books the cat is 
classified among carnivora. These authors tell us that the attempt to confront lan-
guage with fact is “metaphysics” and is on this ground to be condemned. This is 
one of those views which are so absurd that only very learned men could possibly 
adopt them (Russell 1975: 110). 
As Bryan Magee also observes, postmodern theorists in particular have credited 
language with an absurdly disproportionate importance in human life and experi-
ence, treating it as the main object of interest, an end in itself, a self-referential 
subject matter of its own messages. Magee compares these thinkers to “a man who 
sits all the time polishing his glasses, but never puts them on his nose and looks 
through them at the world” (Magee 1978: 121; 1998: 111).

	
Chapter 11.  Language and the symbolic compulsion	 
There is a pertinent story about the linguist Edward Sapir, who had been work-
ing with an informant on an American Indian language with a grammar that he 
was having trouble sorting out. Finally, Sapir felt he had caught on to the principles 
involved, and to test his hypothesis he began making up sentences in the language 
himself. “Can you say this?” he would ask his informant, and would then produce 
his utterance in the informant’s language. Sapir repeated this several times, each 
time composing a different expression. Each time his informant nodded his head 
and said “Yes, you can say that.” This apparently was confirmation that he was on 
the right track. Then an awful suspicion crossed Sapir’s mind. Once more he asked 
“Can you say this?” and once more received the answer “Yes.” Then he asked, “But 
what does it mean?” “Not a darn thing!” came the reply (Weinberg 1975: 56). In 
other words, having grasped the grammatical rules of the language Sapir set the 
combinatorial syntactic machine in motion, generating more and more novel sen-
tences, but because they were produced outside the communicative context of real 
experience, they were grammatical but meaningless, syntactic but non-semantic. 
One is reminded of a scene from Woody Allen’s film Love and Death (1975), set in 
early nineteenth-century Russia, in which a jealous husband slaps his wife’s lover 
on the face with a question “Shall we say, pistols at dawn?,” to which the challenged 
lover, played by Allen, responds in Groucho Marx style: “We can say it. I don’t 
know what it means, but we can say it.”
In a similar way much of the discourse produced within philosophy appears to 
result from the working of the combinatorial mind and equally combinatorial lan-
guage, but not necessarily from reflection on actual experience or from observa-
tion of the world. Once referential semantics is taken out of the equation, linguis-
tic self-indulgence can generate any number of grammatical propositions that are 
elegant and even thought provoking, but largely irrelevant to the world in which 
we live because simply untrue. Propositions thus produced can be found in nu-
merous contemporary scholarly publications, especially in postmodern theory. 
For example, one often reads that people are sometimes aggressive because their 
culture socializes them to be violent; that men are jealous of their sexual partners 
because they are conditioned to be so by the patriarchal culture in which they 
grow up; that men subconsciously desire to kill their fathers and copulate with 
their mothers; that women envy men their penises; that gender is a social con-
struct and can be freely chosen; that rape is about power and not about sex; that 
from a woman’s point of view all sexual intercourse is rape and marriage is a form 
of slavery; that people’s minds are blank slates at birth; that women like looking 
attractive because they have been sexually objectified by the “masculine gaze”; that 
people cannot understand anything apart from the linguistic constructs imposed 
on them by society; that human identity is unstable and infinitely malleable; that 
human nature does not exist; that cultural universals do not exist; that language 

 From Interaction to Symbol
does not connect with anything beyond itself, and that linguistic meaning is inde-
terminate; that a discrete and independent human mind is a myth; that in litera-
ture there is no such thing as authorial intention, and that all creation is in fact 
borrowing and re-creation; that the unconscious is structured like language; that 
all scholarly research is political; that being determines consciousness, and so on 
and so forth. As in the earlier-quoted anecdote about Edward Sapir, one can ask if 
it is possible to say all of these things. Yes, it is not only possible but also very easy 
to think, say, and write such propositions, because their production does not re-
quire any proof except personal belief, ideological commitment, and wishful 
thinking. But what do thus formulated propositions mean? Not a darn thing. The 
above claims are either empirically totally untrue, or at best in need of substantial 
revision and correction. They are modern intellectual myths, many of them rooted 
in the Leftist political radicalism of the 1960s, invented by academics for the pur-
pose of beguiling their colleagues and impressionable undergraduates, but they 
are not valid propositions designed to test the empirical parameters of the socio-
cultural realities as they actually exist.
The surrender of many academics to the symbolic compulsion of language, 
and the resulting view that empirical reality is not so much reflected as miracu-
lously called into being by the sheer power of words, have led to the now common 
but perversely misleading habit of “writing” various things, as opposed to “writing 
about things,” as normally used to be the case. Thus among the titles of books, ar-
ticles, university courses and conferences one frequently finds expressions such as 
“writing the nation,” “writing identity,” “writing the body,” “writing sexuality,” 
“writing the city” and so on. In the past the use of the preposition about or on after 
“writing” correctly indicated that the thing in question existed prior to being de-
scribed and interpreted in writing by someone. Now the omission of the preposi-
tion implies against all evidence and common sense that the act of writing creates 
things ab nihilo, as in magic where verbal charms and incantations are believed to 
produce tangible results in the physical world. We are told, for example, that the 
female body is “written,” “invented,” and “culturally constructed,” as if the exist-
ence of biology and anatomy depended on whether we talk about them or not. 
There seems to be no doubt that social discourse affects the way we understand 
and interpret certain facts, but it does not affect the very existence of those facts 
(Bolin 1996: 36).
The fact that the combinatorial machine of syntactic language can be activated 
so easily, and that the virtual symbolic reality thus generated is so psychologically 
compelling should not absolve intellectuals from exercising mental discipline to 
sift meaningful claims from meaningless ones, mainly by applying rules of logic 
and by respecting evidence; in other words, by reconnecting syntax with seman-
tics. Chomsky’s grammatically correct but semantically nonsensical furious sleep 

	
Chapter 11.  Language and the symbolic compulsion	 
of colourless green ideas illustrates the danger of ignoring both logic and extra-
linguistic reference, as spectacularly evidenced by postmodern criticism, whose 
authors seem to have abandoned all intellectual responsibility of explaining the 
cultural realities, and have taken to playing pointless word games and writing 
mumbo-jumbo instead. This deploring intellectual fashion has been deservedly 
ridiculed in the Bad Writing Contest run from 1995 to 1998 by Denis Dutton from 
the journal Philosophy and Literature, which celebrated the most stylistically lam-
entable passages found in scholarly books and articles (Dutton 1998: 1; Myers 
2005: 354). In 1998 for example the first prize went to Judith Butler, a Guggenheim 
Fellowship-winning professor of rhetoric and comparative literature at the Uni-
versity of California at Berkeley. Butler’s prize-winning sentence appears in her 
“Further Reflections on the Conversations of Our Time,” an article published in 
the scholarly journal Diacritics (1997): 
The move from a structuralist account in which capital is understood to structure 
social relations in relatively homologous ways to a view of hegemony in which 
power relations are subject to repetition, convergence, and rearticulation brought 
the question of temporality into the thinking of structure, and marked a shift from 
a form of Althusserian theory that takes structural totalities as theoretical objects 
to one in which the insights into the contingent possibility of structure inaugurate 
a renewed conception of hegemony as bound up with the contingent sites and 
strategies of the rearticulation of power (Dutton 1998: 2). 
Perfectly grammatical if perhaps too long and convoluted, Butler’s sentence con-
tains words of such a degree of semantic abstraction and vagueness that they can 
mean almost anything. Other recipients of the first prizes in the Bad Writing Con-
test included such luminaries of postmodern theory as Homi K. Bhabha, a profes-
sor of English at the University of Chicago, and the cultural critic Fredric Jameson.
Ironically and depressingly, some of the worst academic writers are highly-
paid English professors working at prestigious universities, who have evidently 
abandoned the old-fashioned useful task of expounding the complexities of the 
literary canon to less prepared readers, and have embraced instead the pretentious 
and obscure psychoanalytic, Marxist, feminist, and deconstructive gobbledygook 
to talk about popular culture in general. If theology is a good example of a disci-
pline with a method (deduction) but without a subject, postmodern theory is a 
classic example of a discipline with a subject (society, culture, language and so on) 
but without a method. Once the central premise of theology – the existence of the 
eternal, omniscient and omnipotent god – is accepted, all the subsequent argu-
ments follow with unassailable logical consistency. On the other hand, if there is 
such a thing as the central premise of postmodern theory, it is (probably) that 
everything is relative and unstable – but what follows is a conceptual chaos in 

 From Interaction to Symbol
which everything can mean anything, and in which nothing is discovered but eve-
rything is invented. 
The humanities’ physics envy
Why should many academic humanists resort to such woeful and unnecessary 
linguistic habits? Raymond Tallis interprets the popularity of the originally Fran-
cophone postmodern theory in the Anglophone universities in terms of the terror 
of insularity on the part of British intellectuals, who have uncritically embraced 
Parisian ideas to be thought of as more cosmopolitan and less chauvinistic (Tallis 
1995a: xiv-xvi). The biologist Peter Medawar in turn suggests that postmodernism 
and humanities in general appear to suffer what he calls “physics envy.” Arts schol-
ars want to be thought profound, but their subject is actually easy compared with 
sciences, so they have to language it up to redress the balance (Dawkins 2003: 8). 
The biologist Paul R. Gross and the mathematician Norman Levitt also talk about 
the contradictory attitudes of postmodern thinkers towards Western science, who 
on the one hand blame it for the atrocities committed in the twentieth century, 
while at the same time they cannot help silently admiring science for its achieve-
ments and the practical benefits it brings. For instance, postmodern critics seem 
untroubled by the fact that their denunciations of Western scientific epistemology 
are composed on word processors, whose very existence derives from a subtle 
understanding of the universe encoded in quantum mechanics, and that their of-
ten indispensable spectacles depend upon the light – via the science of optics – of 
the rationalism and empiricism of the Enlightenment and the Scientific Revolu-
tion (Gross and Levitt 1998: 220). The ambivalent attitude of postmodernism to-
wards science was brilliantly exposed by the now famous hoax, perpetrated in 
1996 by the physicist Alan Sokal on the editors of the prestigious American jour-
nal Social Text. Sokal submitted to the journal’s editors a parody paper called 
“Transgressing the Boundaries: Towards a Transformative Hermeneutics of Quan-
tum Gravity,” which was crammed with nonsensical, but unfortunately authentic, 
quotations about physics and mathematics by prominent French and American 
intellectuals (Sokal Hoax 2000: 11–47). The paper was accepted by the editors 
probably because it came from a physicist and because it said all the politically 
correct things that the editors of Social Text evidently wanted to hear: the attack on 
“post-Enlightenment hegemony” and on such unfashionable notions as the exist-
ence of the real world. From a scientific point of view, however, Sokal’s paper was 
brimming with absurdities and blatant non sequiturs, proclaiming categorically 
for example that physical reality, no less than social reality, is at bottom a social 
and linguistic construct. By a series of stunning leaps of logic, the paper arrives at 

	
Chapter 11.  Language and the symbolic compulsion	 
the conclusion that “the π of Euclid and the G of Newton, formerly thought to be 
constant and universal, are now perceived in their ineluctable historicity,” and that 
quantum gravity has profound political implications. The rest of the article is in 
the same cultural relativist and social constructivist vein (Sokal Hoax 2000: 16).
In a detailed disclaimer to his hoax, submitted to Social Text but not surpris-
ingly rejected and published elsewhere, Sokal explains that in addition to a mé-
lange of half truths, obvious falsehoods and non sequiturs, his original article con-
tained “syntactically correct sentences that have no meaning whatsoever.” He 
regrets not having been able to include more of the latter: “I tried hard to produce 
them, but I found that, save for rare bursts of inspiration, I just didn’t have the 
knack” (Sokal and Bricmont 1998: 248). Postmodern theorists, with their evident 
knack for meaningless and pretentious gibberish, can find additional help in a 
computer programme designed in 1996 by an Australian academic Andrew Bul-
hak called Postmodernism Generator, available on the Internet, which produces 
random, meaningless and yet quite realistic pseudo-academic texts. The pro-
gramme is based on Bulhak’s technical paper called “On the Simulation of Post-
modernism and Mental Debility Using Recursive Transition Networks.” Every hit 
on the website will be rewarded with an apparently serious academic paper, writ-
ten in grammatically faultless but nonsensical sentences, complete with numbered 
footnotes (http://www.elsewhere.org/pomo). In its first two years online, the Post-
modernism Generator delivered more than half a million essays – each wholly 
original and all utterly meaningless (Wheen 2004: 86; Dawkins 2003: 62). My own 
few hits produced within seconds fully annotated essays with the following prom-
ising titles: “Capitalist Subconceptual Theory and Postsemiotic Nationalism,” 
“Pretextual Feminism and Postdialectic Modernist Theory,” “Dialectic Appropria-
tions: the Cultural Paradigm of Narrative and Sontagist Camp,” “The Context of 
Defining Characteristic: Dialectic Posttextual Theory and Nationalism.” It really is 
good fun (up to a point), unlike reading Derrida or Lacan for example. This is 
because reading parody or fiction is entertaining, whereas reading fiction mas-
querading as fact is simply irritating, as any attempt to fool one usually is.
The Sokal hoax may have been “a sham that shook the academy,” but the de-
bate it engendered among philosophers, scientists, sociologists and literary schol-
ars has had, sadly, little or no effect on postmodern theory and practice. More than 
a decade after the event, postmodernism’s influence on university curricula, on 
publishing and personnel policies in academia remains powerful. An honest de-
bate between humanists and scientists, one that would encourage a much needed 
radical re-evaluation of the theoretical foundations of humanistic inquiry, and a 
possible rapprochement between the two cultures, still remains a vain hope. A 
virtual lack of response by postmodern critics to the substantiated charges of ob-
scurantism and of deliberate obfuscation of science, levelled both by scientists and 

 From Interaction to Symbol
by dissenting humanists, seems to indicate that the intellectuals whose main self-
imposed task is to “critique” culture and society are impaired in their own critical 
judgment, by refusing to take on board any criticism of their own critical methods 
(Sokal and Bricmont 1998; Patai and Corral 2005). Resistance to criticism usually 
bespeaks a symbolic compulsion, abundantly illustrated by the history of religious 
and political dogmatisms, with their dichotomous, exclusive, intolerant logic of 
“us” versus “them,” in which “them” includes everyone outside one’s own commu-
nity united around the same self-deceptive symbolic system. The refusal to accept 
empirical evidence or logical arguments as criteria with which to validate general 
propositions about the world thus places postmodern theory on a par with reli-
gious cults and political parties, with their similar group solidarity and unques-
tioning faith in inspired leaders and their “scripture.” As in cults and political 
movements in the world of postmodern theory there are also egos and careers at 
stake: one somehow does not expect senior academics who have built their schol-
arly reputations by writing politically correct nonsense suddenly to make a U-turn 
and publicly confess that they have been wrong all their professional lives (al-
though public admission of mistakes is routine in science, which is why science 
can make real progress [Dawkins 2006c: 31]). But if the two cultures are ever to 
merge to form a unified vision of the world, their coming-together would also 
have to include accepting by the humanities a degree of methodological rigour, 
intellectual honesty, and healthy self-criticism that typically characterizes scien-
tific inquiry.
What will hopefully emerge as a result of the possible rapprochement between 
the arts and the sciences should be a conceptual and methodological unity, in 
which the humanities, traditionally inspired mainly by philosophic speculation, 
will draw closer to the more up-to-date vision of the world produced by sciences, 
to partly fuse with them (Tallis 1995b; Wilson 1998: 9; Pinker 1999: 21). This 
would have to happen if the arts disciplines are to stop being trapped in their own, 
self-generated virtual reality largely divorces from the world as we know it. In the 
process the humanities should re-establish their relevance to the socio-cultural 
realities that it is their historic mission to interpret and explain in a reliable and 
adequate way. This would probably require abandoning philosophy-inspired, self-
indulgent intellectual habits of allowing language’s combinatorial machine to idle 
without any checks on the veracity of thus generated propositions, followed by an 
adoption of science-based respect for logic and evidence. In the study of the prod-
ucts of the human mind such as art and literature, the new, science-inspired hu-
manities would have to accept that we will not understand human intelligence, 
social communication, and culture until we understand how these seemingly un-
natural attributes are deeply rooted in human biology, and consequently in human 
evolution (Plotkin 1994: xiv; Barrow 1995: 4, 246). When the biological determi-

	
Chapter 11.  Language and the symbolic compulsion	 
nants of behaviour are ignored or dismissed, the debate about human mind and 
culture becomes, in the words of one of Oscar Wilde’s characters, “a metaphysical 
speculation, and like most metaphysical speculations [it] has very little reference 
at all to the actual facts of life, as we know them” (Wilde 1994: 366). 
Thus in the place of the fashionable notions of cultural relativism and social 
constructionism, the new humanities would have to appreciate that by virtue of 
being members of one biological species all humans have the same, fairly stable 
adaptive mechanisms in the form of universally developing cognitive specializa-
tions. In consequence, certain fundamental ways of thinking will be the same eve-
rywhere, without needing to be socially transmitted. Due to the innate adaptive 
mechanisms one should not expect cultural differences to vary continuously along 
all imaginable dimensions, but one might expect a limited number of recurring 
patterns, both within and across cultures (Tooby and Cosmides 1992b: 211, 215).
The methodological fusion between the arts and the sciences has for decades 
now been advanced by scientists, many of whom were quoted in the present book, 
but the urgent need to draw the two cultures together has also been advocated by 
individual humanistic scholars, especially by those inspired by evolutionary theo-
ry. For example, the new discipline of bio-epistemology, promoted by the literary 
scholar Nancy Easterlin, aims at nothing less than restoring literary (and cultural) 
studies, including communication studies, to a central position in culture and 
education, in the form of what Easterlin calls “a revised and informed humanism.” 
Rather than seeing human beings as evolution’s greatest achievement and the cen-
tre of the universe, a new humanism would be guided consciously – and with 
some humility – by the awareness that our knowledge is not absolute because it is 
inevitably human, constrained by the limitations of our cognitive apparatus. In 
contrast to traditional liberal humanism, the new humanism, based on the bio-
epistemological perspective, will reconnect humanistic disciplines with life 
through scientific insight, thus leading not to the spiritualization of things human 
but to a bio-cultural perspective that allows us to speculate on the function and 
meaning of human culture within the context of the social and natural environ-
ments that have produced the human species (Easterlin 2005: 633).
Drawing on recent research in psychology and linguistics, Easterlin addresses 
the central problem of literature – the emergence of narrative – by stressing its 
indispensable role in human mental and social life. What all narrative forms across 
cultures and epochs have in common is that they all give meaning to social and 
individual events and mental states, and their production and dissemination de-
pend on the retention of action and thought in memory – that uniquely human 
cognitive attribute. Narrativity – defined as the ability to organize actor, action, 
goal, scene, and instrument into a sequential story – is thus a primary form of 
cognition in social interaction, quite independently of language acquisition. From 

 From Interaction to Symbol
a psychological point of view the basis of narrativity are not linguistic structures 
but memory founded on the predisposition to discover causal order and meaning 
in nature. Narrativity is therefore an adaptive tactic, because the intelligibility of 
events resulting from narrative constructs is correlated with a feeling of control 
and mastery over lived experience (Easterlin 2005: 628; Turner 1996: 25). 
For Joseph Carroll too the verbal narrative is the main aesthetic construct that 
best fulfils the teleological function. The narrative is universally based on the same 
form, involving individual human characters in a social context, engaged in goal-
oriented action, conflict and resolution. Producing and consuming narratives are 
a universal human disposition, which in itself is indirect testimony to the adaptive 
character of the arts, which supply a psychologically indispensable link between 
conceptual models of experience and the biologically constrained and emotion-
ally mediated dispositions that we call human nature. The purpose of the narra-
tive, as in religious myth, folk tale, philosophic discourse and work of literature, is 
to represent human experience, and just as the fundamental elements of biological 
existence are living organisms, populations, environments, and behaviour gov-
erned by genetic predispositions, so the traditional categories of the narrative – 
character, setting, plot – correlate with these biological elements and provide cog-
nitive order, transcendental meaning, moral guidance, and a partial sense, 
however illusory, of control over one’s destiny (Carroll 1995; 2004: xxii, 19, Sad-
owski 1999b).
Despite the fictitious nature of the narrative, characters in narratives usually 
do what people normally do in the real world, which from an evolutionary point 
of view means pursuing goals that ultimately serve two things: to survive and to 
reproduce. Most of the plots in literature across the world are defined by love and 
sex, or by a threat to the safety of the protagonist or his kin, with the universal 
themes of romance and heroic adventure emerging as respective outcomes of these 
two evolutionary goals. By the same token the two main narrative modes, comedy 
and tragedy, appear to reflect respectively two general types of situation crucial to 
human survival and propagation: situations characterized by successful adapta-
tion, marked by survival in dangers, overcoming of obstacles, finding a mate, and 
happily reproducing ever after (comedy); and situations characterized by an irre-
solvable conflict, by failure to adapt, usually marked by a protagonist’s loss of life 
and consequently of an opportunity to reproduce (tragedy). The two narrative 
modes also reflect two main types of situations involved in the relations between 
autonomous systems and the environment: situations marked by the satisfaction 
of needs and the attainment of homeostatic equilibrium, corresponding with com-
edy; and situations marked by an irreversible disturbance of the system’s func-
tional equilibrium, corresponding with tragedy. In between these two existential 
extremes are recurrent types of situations for possible narrative scenarios, as mo-

	
Chapter 11.  Language and the symbolic compulsion	 
tivated by the various needs, which all derive from the evolutionary history of our 
species (Sadowski 1992, 1999a; 2000a). Life-simulating constructs such as verbal 
narrative, visual arts, drama and film thus ultimately serve an adaptive purpose, 
the circumstance that can firmly place the critical discussion of these constructs 
within the bio-epistemological paradigm postulated by the new humanities.


References
Abrams, M.H. 1977. The deconstructive angel. Critical Inquiry 3: 425–38.
Ackoff, Russell L. & Emery, F.E. 1972. On Purposeful Systems. London: Tavistock Publications.
Aitchison, Jean 2000. The Seeds of Speech: Language Origin and Evolution. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press (1996).
Alberti, Leon Battista 1972. On Painting and on Sculpture. The Latin Texts of De Pictura and De 
Statua. Translated by Cecil Grayson. London: Phaidon Press Limited.
Allen, Colin & Saidel, Eric 1998. The evolution of reference. In The Evolution of Mind, D.D. 
Cummins & C. Allen (eds), 183–203. New York-Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Altmann, Stuart A. 1967. The structure of primate social communication. In Social Communica-
tion among Primates, Stuart A. Altmann (ed), 325–369. Chicago-London: The University of 
Chicago Press.
Anderson, Earl R. 1998. A Grammar of Iconism. Madison: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press/
London: Associated University Presses.
Angyal, A. 1981. A logic of systems. In Systems Thinking: Selected Readings, F.E. Emery (ed), 
27–40. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books Ltd (1969).
Arnheim, Rudolf 1974. Art and Visual Perception: A Psychology of the Creative Eye. The New 
Version. Berkeley-Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Badcock, Christopher 2000. Evolutionary Psychology: A Critical Introduction. Cambridge: Polity 
Press.
Baddeley, Alan 1993. Working memory and conscious awareness. In Theories of Memory, A.F. 
Collins, S.E. Gathercole, M.A. Conway & P.E. Morris (eds), 11–28. Hove (UK): Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Barash, David P. 2006. What the whale wondered: Evolution, existentialism, and the search for 
“meaning.” In Richard Dawkins: How a Scientist Changed the Way We Think. Reflections by 
Scientists, Writers, and Philosophers, A. Grafen & M. Ridley (eds), 255–262. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Barker, Philip 2000. Human communication processes. In Iconic Communication, Masoud 
Yazdani & Philip Barker (eds), 1–16. Bristol: Intellect.
Barkow, Jerome H. 1992. Beneath new culture is old psychology: Gossip and social stratification. 
In The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, J.H. Barkow, 
L. Cosmides & J. Tooby (eds), 622–637. New York: Oxford University Press.
Barkow, J.H., L. Cosmides & J. Tooby (eds.). 1992. The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology 
and the Generation of Culture. New York: Oxford University Press.
Barr, Charles 2000. “They think it’s all over”: The dramatic legacy of live television. In Big Pic-
ture, Small Screen: The Relations between Film and Television, J. Hill & M. McLoone (eds), 
47–75. Luton: University of Luton Press, Acamedia Research Monograph 16.
Barrow, John D. 1995. The Artful Universe. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barthes, Roland 1967. Elements of Semiology. Translated by A. Lavers & C. Smith. London: 
Jonathan Cape Ltd (1964).

 From Interaction to Symbol
Bartrum, Giulia 2002. Albrecht Dürer and his Legacy: The Graphic Work of a Renaissance Artist. 
London: The British Museum Press.
Bateson, Gregory 1979. Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity (Advances in System Theory, Com-
plexity, and the Human Sciences). London: Fontana.
Bazin, André 1980. The ontology of the photographic image. In Classic Essays on Photography, 
A. Trachtenberg (ed), 237–244. New Haven, Conn.: Leete’s Island Books.
Beck, James H. 1999. Italian Renaissance Painting. Köln: Könemann.
Beckett, Samuel 1990. The Complete Dramatic Works. London-Boston: Faber & Faber (1986).
Benjamin, Walter 1980. A short history of photography. In Classic Essays on Photography, A. 
Trachtenberg (ed), 199–216. New Haven, Conn.: Leete’s Island Books.
Berlin, Brent & Kay, Paul 1999. Basic Color Terms: Their Universality and Evolution. CSLI Publi-
cations (1969).
Bertalanffy, Ludwig von 1973. General System Theory: Foundations, Development, Applications. 
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books (1968).
	
1981. A Systems View of Man. Boulder, Col.: Westview Press.
Beyer, Andreas 2003. Portraits: A History. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Bible: Authorized King James Version. 1997. Oxford-New York: Oxford University Press.
Bickerton, Derek 1990. Language and Species. Chicago-London: The University of Chicago 
Press.
	
1996. Language and Human Behaviour. London: The University College London Press.
	
2003. Symbol and structure: A comprehensive framework for language evolution. In Language 
Evolution, M.H. Christiansen & S. Kirby (eds), 77–93. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Birstein, Vadim J. 2001. The Perversion of Knowledge: The True Story of Soviet Science. Cam-
bridge, MA: Westview Press.
Blackmore, Susan 1999. The Meme Machine. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Blonsky, Marshall (ed.). 1985. On Signs. Baltimore, Maryland: The Johns Hopkins University 
Press.
Bloom, Paul 1998. Some issues in the evolution of language and thought. In The Evolution of Mind, 
D.D. Cummins & C. Allen (eds), 204–223. New York-Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Boccaccio, Giovanni 1984. Decameron. Translated by J. Payne. Berkeley, Calif.-London: Univer-
sity of California.
Bolin, Anne 1996. Traversing gender. In Gender Reversals and Gender Cultures: Anthropological 
and Historical Perspectives, S.P. Ramet (ed.), 22–51. London-New York: Routledge.
Bourdon, Jérôme 2004. Live television is still alive: On television as an unfulfilled promise. In 
The Television Studies Reader, R.C. Allen & A. Hill (eds), 182–195. London-New York: 
Routledge.
Boyer, Pascal 1994. The Naturalness of Religious Ideas: A Cognitive Theory of Religion. Berkeley-
Los Angeles-London: University of California Press.
	
2000. Evolution of the modern mind and the origins of culture: religious concepts as a 
limiting-case. In Evolution and the Human Mind: Modularity, Language and Meta-cognition, 
P. Carruthers & A. Chamberlain (eds), 93–112. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brandon, Robert N. & Hornstein, Norbert 1986. From icons to symbols: some speculations on 
the origins of language. Biology and Philosophy 1: 169–189.
Briggs, Asa & Burke, Peter 2005. A Social History of the Media: From Gutenberg to the Internet 
(2nd edn). Cambridge: Polity Press.
Brown, Donald E. 1991. Human Universals. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.

	
References	 
Brown, Gordon D. A. & Chater, Nick 2001. The chronological organization of memory: common 
psychological foundations for remembering and timing. In Time and Memory: Issues in Phi-
losophy and Psychology, C. Hoerl & T. McCormack (eds), 77–110. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Busnel, René-Guy 1977. Acoustic communication. In How Animals Communicate, T.A. Sebeok 
(ed.), 233–251. Bloomington-London: Indiana University Press.
Buss, David M. 2004. Evolutionary Psychology: The New Science of the Mind. Boston, Mass.-
London: Allyn and Bacon (1999).
Buss, David M. et alli. 1998. Adaptations, exaptations, and spandrels. American Psychologist 
53(5): 533–548.
Bühler, Karl 1978. Sprachtheorie: Die Darstellungsfunktion der Sprache. Frankfurt-Berlin-Vien-
na: Ullstein (1934).
Campbell, Neil A. 1996. Biology. Menlo Park, Calif.: The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Com-
pany, Inc.
Capra, Fritjof 1983. The Turning Point: Science, Society and the Rising Culture. London: Flamingo.
	
1996. The Web of Life: A New Synthesis of Mind and Matter. London: Flamingo.
Carroll, Joseph. 1995. Evolution and Literary Theory. Columbia-London: University of Missouri 
Press.
	
2004. Literary Darwinism: Evolution, Human Nature, and Literature. New York-London: 
Routledge.
Carroll, Noël 1995. Towards an ontology of the moving image. In Philosophy and Film, C.A. 
Freeland & T.E. Wartenberg (eds), 68–88. New York-London: Routledge.
Carruthers, Peter & Boucher, Jill (eds.). 1998. Language and Thought: Interdisciplinary Themes. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carruthers, Peter & Chamberlain, Andrew 2000. Introduction. In Evolution and the Human 
Mind: Modularity, Language and Meta-cognition, P. Carruthers & A. Chamberlain (eds), 
1–12. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carstairs-McCarthy, Andrew 2000. The distinction between sentences and noun phrases: An 
impediment to language evolution? In The Evolutionary Emergence of Language: Social 
Function and the Origins of Linguistic Form, C. Knight, M. Studdert-Kennedy & J.R. Hur-
ford (eds), 248–263. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cartwright, John 2000. Evolution and Human Behaviour: Darwinian Perspectives on Human 
Nature. Basingstoke-London: Macmillan.
Chandler, Daniel 2002. Semiotics: The Basics. London: Routledge.
Chase, Philip G. 1991. Symbols and Palaeolithic artefacts: Style, standardization and the imposi-
tion of arbitrary form. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 10: 193–214.
Chauvet, J-M. & Deschamps, E.B. 1996. Chauvet Cave: The Discovery of the World’s Oldest Paint-
ings. London: Thames and Hudson/New York: Abrams.
Cheney, D.L. & Seyfarth, R. M. 1990. How Monkeys See the World: Inside the Mind of Another 
Species. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chomsky, Noam 1957. Syntactic Structure. The Hague: Mouton.
	
1972. Language and Mind. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich (1968).
	
1988. Language and Problems of Knowledge. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
	
1992. Rationality/science. Z Papers 1(4): 52–57.
	
2000. New Horizons in the Study of Language and Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.

 From Interaction to Symbol
Clark, Andy 1998. Magic words: How language augments human computation. In Language and 
Thought: Interdisciplinary Themes, P. Carruthers & J. Boucher (eds), 162–183. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, Eve V. 1993. The Lexicon in Acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, Eve V. & Herbert H. Clark 1978. Universals, relativity, and language processing. In Uni-
versals of Human Language, J.H. Greenberg (ed.), 225–277. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Uni-
versity Press.
Corballis, Michael C. 2002. Did language evolve from manual gestures? In The Transition to 
Language, A. Wray (ed.), 161–179. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
	
2003. From hand to mouth: The gestural origins of language. In Language Evolution, M.H. 
Christiansen & S. Kirby (eds), 201–218. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Coren, S., Ward, L.M. & Enns, J.T. 2004. Sensation and Perception. Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc.
Cosmides, Leda & Tooby, John 1994. Origins of domain specificity: The evolution of functional 
organization. In Mapping the Mind: Domain Specificity in Cognition and Culture, L.A. Hir-
schfeld & S.A. Gelman (eds), 85–116. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crook, John Hurrell 1980. The Evolution of Human Consciousness. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Crystal, David 1995. The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Cummins, Denise Dellarosa 1998. Social norms and other minds: The evolutionary roots of 
higher cognition. In The Evolution of Mind, D.D. Cummins & C. Allen (eds), 30–50. New 
York-Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cunningham, Valentine 2005. Theory, what theory? In Theory’s Empire: An Anthology of Dissent, 
D. Patai & W.H. Corral (eds), 24–40. New York: Columbia University Press.
Davidson, Iain 2003. The archaeological evidence of language origins: States of art. In Language 
Evolution, M.H. Christiansen & S. Kirby (eds), 140–157. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davidson, Iain & Noble, William 1993. Tools and language in human evolution. In Tools, Lan-
guage and Cognition in Human Evolution, K.R. Gibson & T. Ingold (eds), 363–388. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davies, Norman 1997. Europe: A History. London: Pimlico.
	
2003. Rising ’44: The Battle for Warsaw. London: Macmillan.
	
2007. Europe East and West. London: Pimlico.
Dawkins, Richard 2003. A Devil’s Chaplain: Selected Essays by Richard Dawkins. Latha Menon 
(ed.). London: Phoenix.
2006a. The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press (1976).
	
2006b. The Blind Watchmaker. London: Penguin Books (1986).
	
2006c. Unweaving the Rainbow: Science, Delusion and the Appetite for Wonder. London: 
Penguin Books (1998).
Deacon, Terrence 1997. The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of Language and the Human 
Brain. London: Allen Lane, The Penguin Press.
Denton, Derek 2005. The Primordial Emotions: The Dawning of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Dickstein, Morris 1992. Double Agent: The Critic and Society. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dingwall, William Orr 1979. The evolution of human communication. Studies in Neurolinguis-
tics 4: 1–95.
Dissanayake, Ellen 1991. What is Art for? Seattle-London: University of Washington Press.

	
References	 
Dobzhansky, Theodosius 1962. Mankind Evolving: the Evolution of the Human Species. New 
Haven-London: Yale University Press.
Donald, Merlin 1991. Origins of the Modern Mind: Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture and 
Cognition. Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press.
	
2001. A Mind so Rare: the Evolution of Human Consciousness. New York-London: W.W. 
Norton & Company.
Dunbar, Robin 1995. The Trouble with Science. London: Faber and Faber.
1996. Gossip, Grooming and the Evolution of Language. London: Faber and Faber.
	
2003. The origin and subsequent evolution of language. In Language Evolution, M.H. Chris-
tiansen & S. Kirby (eds), 219–234. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
	
2005. The Human Story: A New History of Mankind’s Evolution. London: Faber and Faber.
Dunbar, R., Knight, C. & Power, C. (eds). 1999. The Evolution of Culture: An Interdisciplinary 
View. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Dutton, Denis 1998. The Bad Writing Contest: Press Releases, 1996–1998. http://denisdutton.
com/bad_writing.htm
Easterlin, Nancy 2005. Making knowledge: bioepistemology and the foundations of literary 
theory. In Theory’s Empire: An Anthology of Dissent, D. Patai & W.H. Corral (eds), 621–635. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Ebin, Victoria 1979. The Body Decorated. London: Thames and Hudson Ltd.
Eccles, John C. 1989. Evolution of the Brain: Creation of the Self. London-New York: Routledge.
Eco, Umberto 1976. A Theory of Semiotics. Bloomington-London: Indiana University Press.
Edelman, Gerald Maurice 1992. Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the Mind. London: 
Allen Lane, The Penguin Press.
Edelman, G.M. & Tononi, Giulio 2000. Consciousness: How Matter Became Imagination. Lon-
don: Allen Lane, The Penguin Press.
Eichenbaum, Howard & Cohen, Neal J. 2001. From Conditioning to Conscious Recollection: 
Memory Systems of the Brain. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ekman, Paul 2003. Emotions Revealed: Understanding Faces and Feeling. London: Weidenfeld & 
Nicolson.
Ekman, Paul & Friesen, Wallace V. 1975. Unmasking the Face. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-
Hall.
Ellis, John M. 1997. Literature Lost: Social Agendas and the Corruption of the Humanities. New 
Haven-London: Yale University Press.
	
2005. Is theory to blame? In Theory’s Empire: An Anthology of Dissent, D. Patai & W.H. Cor-
ral (eds), 92–109. New York: Columbia University Press.
Emerson, Ralph Waldo 1994. Nature. In The Heath Anthology of American Literature, P. Lauter 
(ed.), vol. 1, 1502–1528. Lexington, Mass.: D. C. Heath and Company.
Etcoff, Nancy 1999. Survival of the Prettiest: The Science of Beauty. London: Abacus.
Fernald, Anne 1992. Human maternal vocalizations to infants as biologically relevant signals: 
An evolutionary perspective. In The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Gen-
eration of Culture, J.H. Barkow, L. Cosmides & J. Tooby (eds), 391–428. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Fischer, Olga & Nänny, Max (2001). Introduction: veni, vidi, vici. In The Motivated Sign: Iconic-
ity in Language and Literature 2, O. Fischer & M. Nänny (eds), 1–14. Amsterdam-Philadel-
phia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Fiske, John 1987. Television Culture. London-New York: Routledge.
2001. Introduction to Communication Studies. London: Routledge (1982).

 From Interaction to Symbol
Flew, Terry 2002. New Media: An Introduction. Oxford-New York: Oxford University Press.
Fodor, Jerry A. 1983. The Modularity of Mind: An Essay on Faculty Psychology. Cambridge, 
Mass.: The MIT Press.
Frankish, Keith 1998. Natural language and virtual belief. In Language and Thought: Interdisci-
plinary Themes, P. Carruthers & J. Boucher (eds), 248–269. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
	
2000. Evolving the linguistic mind. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Evolution of Lan-
guage Conference, J-L. Dessalles & L. Ghadakpour (eds), 104–108. Paris: Ecole Nationale 
Supérieure des Télécommunications.
Frazer, James 2002. The Golden Bough: A Study in Religion and Magic. Mineola-New York: Do-
ver Publications, Inc (1922).
Freedberg, David 1989. The Power of Images: Studies in the History and Theory of Response. 
Chicago-London: The University of Chicago Press.
Freund, Gisèle 1980. Photography and Society. London: The Gordon Fraser Gallery Ltd.
Friday, Jonathan 2002. Aesthetics and Photography. Hants, England: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Geldard, Frank A. 1977. Tactile communication. In How Animals Communicate, T.A. Sebeok 
(ed.), 211–232. Bloomington-London: Indiana University Press.
Gernsheim, Helmut & Gernsheim, Alison 1969. The History of Photography from the Camera 
Obscura to the Beginning of the Modern Era. London: Thames and Hudson (1955).
Giancoli, Douglas C. 1995. Physics: Principles with Applications. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Pren-
tice-Hall International, Inc (1980).
Gibson, Kathleen R. 1993a. Animal minds, human minds. In Tools, Language and Cognition in 
Human Evolution, K.R. Gibson & T. Ingold (eds), 3–19. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
	
1993b. Overlapping neural control of language, gesture and tool-use. In Tools, Language 
and Cognition in Human Evolution, K.R. Gibson & T. Ingold (eds), 187–192. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Gombrich, Ernst H. 1982. The Image and the Eye: Further Studies in the Psychology of Pictorial 
Representation. Oxford: Phaidon Press Limited.
	
1995. Shadows: The Depiction of Cast Shadows in Western Art. London: National Gallery 
Publications.
	
1999. The Uses of Images: Studies in the Social Function of Art and Visual Communication. 
London: Phaidon Press Limited.
2003. Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of Pictorial Representation. London: Phaidon 
Press Limited (1960).
Gombrich, Ernst H. & Hochberg, J. 1972. Art, Perception, and Reality. Baltimore-London: The 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Gould, Stephen Jay 1991. Exaptation: A crucial tool for evolutionary psychology. Journal of So-
cial Issues 47: 43–65.
Gould, Stephen Jay & Lewontin, R.C. 1979. The spandrels of San Marco and the panglossian 
paradigm: A critique of the adaptionist programme. Proceedings of the Royal Society of Lon-
don B 205: 581–598.
Greenfield, S. 2001. The Private Life of the Brain. Harmondsworth: Panguin Books.
Greenlee, Douglas 1973. Peirce’s Concept of Sign. The Hague: Mouton.
Gregory, Richard L. 1981. Mind in Science: A History of Explanations in Psychology and Physics. 
London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

	
References	 
Gregory, R.L. & Gombrich, E.H. 1973. Illusion in Nature and Art. London: Gerald Duckworth & 
Company Ltd.
Gribbin, John 2003. Science: A History 1543–2001. London: Penguin Books.
Gross, Paul R. & Levitt, Norman 1998. Higher Superstition: The Academic Left and its Quarrels 
with Science. Baltimore-London: The Johns Hopkins University Press (1994).
Grote, Klaudia & Linz, Erika 2003. The influence of sign language iconicity on semantic concep-
tualization. In From Sign to Signing: Iconicity in Language and Literature 3, W.G. Müller & 
O. Fischer (eds), 23–40. Amsterdam-Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Guthrie, R. D. 1970. Evolution of human threat display organs. Evolutionary Biology 4: 257–302.
Guyton, Arthur C. & Hall, John E. 1996. Textbook of Medical Physiology. Philadelphia-London: 
W. B. Saunders Company.
Haber, Ralph Norman & Hershenson, Maurice 1980. The Psychology of Visual Perception. New 
York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Hall, Edward T. 1966. The Hidden Dimension: Man’s Use of Space in Public and Private. London-
Sydney-Toronto: The Bodley Head.
Halverson, John 1987. Art for art’s sake in the Palaeolithic. Current Anthropology 28(1): 63–89.
Harris, Roy 1986. The Origin of Writing. London: Duckworth.
Hauser, Marc D. 1998. The Evolution of Communication. Cambridge, Mass.-London: The MIT 
Press.
	
2000. The sound and the fury: primate vocalizations as reflections of emotion and thought. 
In The Origins of Music, N.L. Wallin, B. Merker & S. Brown (eds), 77–102. Cambridge, 
Mass.-London: The MIT Press.
Hawking, Stephen 1996. A Brief History of Time. London: Bantam Books (1988).
Herlofsky, William J. 2001. Good probes: Icons, anaphors, and the evolution of language. In The 
Motivated Sign: Iconicity in Language and Literature 2, O. Fischer & M. Nänny (eds), 55–66. 
Amsterdam-Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Hinton, H.E. 1973. Natural deception. In Illusion in Nature and Art, R.L. Gregory & E.H. Gom-
brich (eds), 97–160. London: Gerald Duckworth & Company Ltd.
Hinton, L., Nichols, Johanna & Ohala, J.J. (eds.). 1994. Sound Symbolism. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Hirsch, E.D. Jr 1967. Validity in Interpretation. New Haven-London: Yale University Press.
	
1976. The Aims of Interpretation. Chicago-London: The University of Chicago Press.
Hirsch, Julia 1981. Family Photographs: Content, Meaning, and Effect. New York-Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Hochberg, Julian 1972. The representation of things and people. In Art, Perception, and Reality, 
E.H. Gombrich, J. Hochberg & M. Black (eds), 47–94. Baltimore-London: The Johns Hop-
kins University Press.
Hoerl, Christoph & McCormack, Teresa 2001. Perspectives on time and memory: An introduc-
tion. In Time and Memory: Issues in Philosophy and Psychology, C. Hoerl & T. McCormack 
(eds), 1–36. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Holyoak, Keith J. & Thagart, Paul 1995. Mental Leaps: Analogy in Creative Thought. Cambridge, 
MA.: The MIT Press.
Holmes, George 1996. Renaissance. London: Phoenix Illustrated, Orion Publishing Group.
Homer 1980. The Odyssey. Translated by W. Shewring. Oxford-New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Honderich, Ted (ed.). 1995. The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford-New York: Oxford 
University Press.

 From Interaction to Symbol
Hudson, John 1992. The History of Chemistry. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Humphrey, Nicholas 2002. The Mind Made Flesh: Essays from the Frontiers of Psychology and 
Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hurford, James R. 1999. The evolution of language and languages. In The Evolution of Culture: 
An Interdisciplinary View, R. Dunbar, C. Knight & C. Power (eds), 173–193. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press.
	
2002. The roles of expression and representation in language evolution. In The Transition to 
Language, A. Wray (ed), 311–334. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
	
2003. The language mosaic and its evolution. In Language Evolution, M.H. Christiansen & 
S. Kirby (eds), 38–57. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ingold, Tim 1993. Relations between visual-gestural and vocal-auditory modalities of commu-
nication. In Tools, Language and Cognition in Human Evolution, K.R. Gibson & T. Ingold 
(eds), 35–42. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jakobson, Roman & Halle, Morris 1971. Fundamentals of Language. The Hague-Paris: Mouton 
(1956).
Jakobson, Roman & Waugh, Linda R. 1987. The Sound Shape of Language. Berlin-New York-
Amsterdam: Mouton de Gruyter (1979).
James, Henry 1945. The Short Stories of Henry James. New York: Random House.
Jespersen, Otto 1922. Language: Its Nature, Development and Origin. London: Allen & Unwin.
Johansson, Sverker 2006. Origins of Language: Constraints on Hypotheses. Amsterdam-Philadel-
phia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Johnson-Laird, Philip Nicholas & Byrne, Ruth M.J. 1991. Deduction. Hove-London: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates Ltd. Publishers.
Kaplan, Stephen 1992. Environmental preference in a knowledge-seeking, knowledge-using or-
ganism. In The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, J.H. 
Barkow, L. Cosmides & J. Tooby (eds), 581–598. New York: Oxford University Press.
Keats, John 1992. The Poems. London: Everyman’s Library.
Kemp, Martin 1990. The Science of Art: Optical Themes in Western Art from Brunelleschi to 
Seurat. New Haven-London: Yale University Press.
Kendon, Adam 1993. Human gesture. In Tools, Language and Cognition in Human Evolution, 
K.R. Gibson & T. Ingold (eds), 43–62. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
King, Andrew J. 2000. On the possibility and impossibility of a universal iconic communication 
system. In Iconic Communication, M. Yazdani & P. Barker (eds), 17–41. Bristol: Intellect.
Klein, S., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J. & Chance, S. 2002. Decisions and the evolutions of memory: 
Multiple systems, multiple functions. Psychological Review 109: 306–329.
Klima, Edward S., Bellugi, Ursula et alli 1979. The Signs of Language. Cambridge, Mass.-London: 
Harvard University Press.
Knapp, John & Womack, Kenneth (eds.). 2003. Reading the Family Dance: Family Systems Ther-
apy and Literary Study. Newark: University of Delaware Press.
Knight, Chris 1991. Blood Relations: Menstruation and the Origins of Culture. New Haven-Lon-
don: Yale University Press.
	
1999. Sex and language as pretend-play. In The Evolution of Culture: An Interdisciplinary 
View, R. Dunbar, C. Knight & C. Power (eds), 228–247. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press.
	
2002. Language and revolutionary consciousness. In The Transition to Language, A. Wray 
(ed), 138–160. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

	
References	 
Knight, C., Dunbar, R. & Power, C. 1999. An evolutionary approach to human culture. In The 
Evolution of Culture: An Interdisciplinary View, R. Dunbar, C. Knight & C. Power (eds), 
1–14. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Koehler, W. 1981. Closed and open systems. In Systems Thinking: Selected Readings, F.E. Emery 
(ed), 71–82. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books Ltd (1969).
Kramer, Peter 2000. The lure of the big picture: Film, television and Hollywood. In Big Picture, 
Small Screen: The Relations between Film and Television, J. Hill & M. McLoone (eds), 9–46. 
Luton: University of Luton Press, Acamedia Research Monograph 16.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1970. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: The University of Chi-
cago Press.
La Barre, Weston 1972. Hallucinogens and shamanic origins and religion. In Flesh of the Gods: The 
Ritual Use of Hallucinogens, P.T. Furst (ed), 261–278. London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd.
Lambert, David 2004. Body Language. Glasgow: HarperCollins Publishers (1996).
Lange, Marc (ed.). 2007. Philosophy of Science: An Anthology. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Laszlo, Ervin 1969. System, Structure, and Experience: Toward a Scientific Theory of Mind. New 
York-London-Paris: Gordon and Breach, Science Publishers, Inc.
	
1972a. The Systems View of the World: The Natural Philosophy of the New Developments in 
the Sciences. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
	
1972b. Introduction to Systems Philosophy: Toward a New Paradigm of Contemporary 
Thought. New York: Harper & Row.
	
1983. Systems Science and World Order: Selected Studies. Oxford-New York-Toronto: Perga-
mon Press.
	
1993. The Creative Cosmos: A Unified Science of Matter, Life and Mind. Edinburgh: Floris 
Books.
Lee, Michael 1988. Language, perception and the world. In Explaining Language universals, J.A. 
Hawkins (ed), 211–246. Oxford-New York: Basil Blackwell, Ltd.
Leroi-Gourhan, André 1968. The Art of Prehistoric Man in Western Europe. London: Thames 
and Hudson.
Lewis-Williams, David 2004. The Mind in the Cave: Consciousness and the Origins of Art. Lon-
don: Thames and Hudson Ltd.
Lieberman, Philip 1977. The phylogeny of language. In How Animals Communicate, T.A. Sebeok 
(ed), 3–25. Bloomington-London: Indiana University Press.
	
1984. The Biology and Evolution of Language. Cambridge, Mass.-London: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
	
2006. Toward an Evolutionary Biology of Language. Cambridge, Mass.-London: Harvard 
University Press.
Links, J.G. 2005. Canaletto. London: Phaidon Press Limited (1982).
Lock, Andrew 1993. Human language development and object manipulation: Their relation in 
ontogeny and its possible relevance for phylogenetic questions. In Tools, Language and Cog-
nition in Human Evolution, K.R. Gibson & T. Ingold (eds), 279–296. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Locke, John 1978. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Sussex: The Harvest Press Limited.
Lopreato, Joseph 1984. Human Nature and Biocultural Evolution. Boston-London: Allen & Unwin.
Lorris, Guillaume de & Jean de Meun 1994. Romance of the Rose. Oxford-New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Lund, Nick 2003. Language and Thought. London-New York: Routledge.

 From Interaction to Symbol
Magee, Bryan 1978. Talking Philosophy: Dialogues with Fifteen Leading Philosophers. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
	
1998. Confessions of a Philosopher: A Journey Through Western Philosophy. London: Phoenix.
Mango, Cyril (ed.). 1972. The Art of the Byzantine Empire, 312–1453: Sources and Documents. 
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Mann, Vivian B. (ed.). 2000. Jewish Texts on the Visual Arts. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Marien, Mary Warner 2006. Photography: A Cultural History. London: Laurence King Publish-
ing Ltd.
Marler, Peter 1977. The evolution of communication. In How Animals Communicate, T.A. Se-
beok (ed), 45–70. Bloomington-London: Indiana University Press.
Martin, Bronwen & Ringham, Felizitas 2000. Dictionary of Semiotics. London-New York: Cassell.
Martindale, C. 1981. Cognition and Consciousness. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey Press.
Mauss, Marcel 1972. A General Theory of Magic. London-Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul 
(1950).
Mazur, Marian 1966. Cybernetyczna teoria układów samodzielnych (A Cybernetic Theory of Au-
tonomous Systems). Warsaw: Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe.
	
1970. Jakościowa teoria informacji (A Qualitative Theory of Information). Warsaw: 
Wydawnictwa Naukowo-Techniczne.
	
1976. Cybernetyka i charakter (Cybernetics and Character). Warsaw: Państwowy Instytut 
Wydawniczy.
Medawar, Peter B. & Medawar, Jean S. 1977. The Life Science: Current Ideas of Biology. London: 
Wildwood House.
Melchior-Bonnet, Sabine 2002. The Mirror: A History. New York-London: Routledge (1994).
Merquior, José Guilherme 1986. From Prague to Paris: A Critique of Structuralist and Post-Struc-
turalist Thought. London: Verso.
Merrell, Floyd 1998. Sensing Semiosis: Toward the Possibility of Complementary Cultural “Logics.” 
Houndmills-London: Macmillan Press Ltd.
Miller, Geoffrey F. 2000a. Evolution of human music through sexual selection. In The Origin of 
Music, N.L. Wallin, B. Merker & S. Brown (eds), 329–360. Cambridge, Mass.-London: The 
MIT Press.
	
2000b. The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution of Human Nature. Lon-
don: Heinemann/Doubleday.
Mithen, Steven 1999a. The Prehistory of the Mind: The Cognitive Origins of Art, Religion and Sci-
ence. London: Thames and Hudson Ltd (1996).
	
1999b. Symbolism and the supernatural. In The Evolution of Culture: An Interdisciplinary View, 
R. Dunbar, C. Knight & C. Power (eds), 147–171. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
	
2000. Mind, brain and material culture: An archeological perspective. In Evolution and the 
Human Mind: Modularity, Language and Meta-Cognition, P. Carruthers & A. Chamberlain 
(eds), 207–217. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
	
2005. The Singing Neanderthals: The Origins of Music, Language, Mind and Body. London: 
Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Moholy-Nagy, László 1969. Painting, Photography, Film. London: Lund Humphries (1925).
Morris, Desmond 1962. The Biology of Art: A Study of the Picture-Making Behaviour of the Great 
Apes and its Relationship to Human Art. London: Methuen & Co Ltd.

	
References	 
Morton, Eugene S. 1994. Sound symbolism and its role in non-human vertebrate communica-
tion. In Sound symbolism, L. Hinton, J. Nichols & J.J. Ohala (eds), 348–365. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Myers, D.G. 2005. Bad writing. In Theory’s Empire: An Anthology of Dissent, D. Patai & W.H. 
Corral (eds), 354–359. New York: Columbia University Press.
Nagel, Thomas 1998. The sleep of reason. The New Republic 12 Oct.: 32–38.
Nelson, Charles A. & de Haan, Michelle 1997. A neurobehavioral approach to the recognition of 
facial expressions in infancy. In The Psychology of Facial Expression, J.A. Russell & J.M. 
Fernández-Dols (eds), 176–204. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nesse, Randolph M. & Lloyd, Alan T. 1992. The evolution of psychodynamic mechanisms. In 
The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, J.H. Barkow, L. 
Cosmides & J. Tooby (eds), 601–624. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nettle, Daniel 1999. Language variation and the evolution of societies. In The Evolution of Cul-
ture: An Interdisciplinary View, R. Dunbar, C. Knight & C. Power (eds), 214–227. Edin-
burgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Nöth, Winfried 1995. Handbook of Semiotics. Bloomington-Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
2001. Semiotic foundations of iconicity in language and literature. In The Motivated Sign: Iconic-
ity in Language and Literature 2, O. Fischer & M. Nänny (eds), 17–28. Amsterdam-Phila-
delphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Ohala, John J. 1994. The frequency code underlies the sound symbolic use of voice pitch. In 
Sound Symbolism, L. Hinton, J. Nichols & J.J. Ohala (eds), 325–347. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Ong, Walter J. 2004. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. London-New York: 
Routledge (1982).
Ovid 2002. Ovid’s Metamorphoses. London: Penguin Books Ltd.
Oyama, Susan 2000. Evolution’s Eye: A Systems View of the Biology-Culture Divide. Durham-
London: Duke University Press.
Panofsky, Erwin 1991. Perspective as a Symbolic Form. New York: Zone Books (1927).
Pascal, Blaise 1985. Pensées. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books Ltd.
Patai, Daphne, Will H. Corral (eds.). 2005. Theory’s Empire: an Anthology of Dissent. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Peirce, Charles Sanders 1998. Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. C. Hartshorne & P. 
Weiss (eds). Bristol: Thoemmes Press (1931–58).
Pendergrast, Mark 2003. Mirror Mirror: A History of the Human Love Affair with Reflection. New 
York: Basic Books.
Penrose, Roland 1973. In praise of illusion. In Illusion in Nature and Art, R.L. Gregory & E.H. 
Gombrich (eds), 245–284. London: Gerald Duckworth & Company Ltd.
Pinker, Steven 1995. The Language Instinct: The New Science of Language and Mind. London: 
Penguin Books Ltd.
	
1997. Language as a psychological adaptation. In Characterizing Human Psychological Ad-
aptations, G.R. Bock & G. Cardew (eds), 162–180. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
	
1998. How the Mind Works. London: Allen Lane, The Penguin Books.
	
1999. Uniting the branches of knowledge. The Times Literary Supplement 1,405: 21.
	
2001. Words and Rules: The Ingredients of Language. London: Phoenix.
	
2002. The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature. New York-London: Penguin 
Books.

 From Interaction to Symbol
	
2003. Language as an adaptation to the cognitive niche. In Language Evolution, M.H. Chris-
tiansen & S. Kirby (eds), 16–37. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
	
2007. The Stuff of Thought: Language as a Window into Human Nature. London: Allen Lane, 
The Penguin Books Ltd.
Pinker, Steven & Bloom, Paul 1992. Natural language and natural selection. In The Adapted 
Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, J.H. Barkow, L. Cosmides & 
J. Tooby (eds), 451–494. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pirenne, Maurice Henri 1970. Optics, Painting and Photography. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Plato 2003. The Republic. London: Penguin Books.
Pliny the Elder 1991. Natural History. London: Penguin Books.
Plotkin, Henry 1994. The Nature of Knowledge: Concerning Adaptations, Instinct and the Evolu-
tion of Intelligence. London: Penguin Books.
	
1997. Evolution in Mind: An Introduction to Evolutionary Psychology. London: Allen Press.
Popper, Karl 1979. Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach. Oxford: At the Clarendon 
Press (1972).
2002. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. London-New York: Routledge Classics (1935).
Power, Camilla 1999. “Beauty magic”: The origins of art. In The Evolution of Culture: An Inter-
disciplinary View, R. Dunbar, C. Knight & C. Power (eds), 92–112. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press.
Priestly, T.M.S. 1994. On levels of analysis of sound symbolism in poetry, with an application to 
Russian poetry. In Sound Symbolism, L. Hinton, J. Nichols & J.J. Ohala (eds), 237–255. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Provine, Robert R. 1997. Yawns, laughs, smiles, tickles, and talking: Naturalistic and laboratory 
studies of facial action and social communication. In The Psychology of Facial Expression, 
J.A. Russell & J.M. Fernández-Dols (eds), 158–175. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Rapaport, Anatol 1986. General System Theory: Essential Concepts and Application. Tunbridge 
Wells, Kent-Cambridge, Mass.: Abacus Press.
Reid, David 1967. Sound Symbolism. Edinburgh: T. & A. Constable.
Reinfandt, Christoph 2001. How German is it? The place of systems-theoretical approaches in 
literary studies. European Journal of English Studies 5(3): 275–288.
Ridley, Matt 1994. The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature. London: Penguin 
Books.
	
2003. Nature via Nurture: Genes, Experience and What Makes us Human. London: Fourth 
Estate.
Rogers, Franklin R. & Rogers, Mary Ann 1986. Painting and Poetry: Form, Metaphor, and the 
Language of Literature. Lewisburg, Pa.: Bucknell University Press.
Rosenbleuth, Arturo 1970. Mind and Brain: A Philosopy (sic) of Science. Cambridge, Mass.-Lon-
don: The MIT Press.
Russell, Bertrand 1975. My Philosophical Development. London: Unwin Books (1959).
Russell, James A. & Fernández-Dols, José Miguel 1997. What does a facial expression mean? In 
The Psychology of Facial Expression, J.A. Russell & J.M. Fernández-Dols (eds), 3–30. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sadowski, Piotr 1992. Interpretation of literary process: A systemic approach. Studia Anglica 
Posnaniensia 24: 131–139.

	
References	 
	
1999a. Systems Theory as an Approach to the Study of Literature: Origins and Functions of 
Literature. Lewiston-Queenston-Lampeter: The Edwin Mellen Press.
	
1999b. What is literature?—A systems definition. Semiotica 123(1/2): 43–58.
	
2000a. Psychological configurations and literary characters: A systems view. Journal of Lit-
erary Semantics 29: 105–122.
	
2000b. Literature as interaction: A systems model of literary composition and reception. 
The Ukrainian Society for the Study of English 1: 80–86.
	
2001a. Control, information, and literary meaning: A systems model of literature as com-
munication. European Journal of English Studies 5(3): 289–301.
	
2001b. The sound as an echo to the sense: the iconicity of English gl- words. In The Moti-
vated Sign: Iconicity in Language and Literature 2, O. Fischer & M. Nänny (eds), 69–88. 
Amsterdam-Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
	
2001c. Gender and Literature: A Systems Study. Lanham-New York-Oxford: University 
Press of America.
	
2002. Sound-symbolic vocabulary of light in Pearl. In Middle English: From Tongue to Text, 
P.J. Lucas & A.M. Lucas (eds), 35–42. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
	
2003. From signal to symbol: Towards a systems typology of linguistic signs. In From Sign 
to Signing: Iconicity in Language and Literature 3, W.G. Müller & O. Fischer (eds), 411–424. 
Amsterdam-Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Samuels, Richard 2000. Massively modular minds: Evolutionary psychology and cognitive ar-
chitecture. In Evolution and the Human Mind: Modularity, Language and Meta-Cognition, 
P. Carruthers & A. Chamberlain (eds), 13–46. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sapir, Edward 1929. A study in phonetic symbolism. Journal of Experimental Psychology 12: 
225–239.
	
1985. Selected Writings of Edward Sapir in Language, Culture, and Personality. London-
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Sassoon, Rosemary & Gaur, Albertine 1997. Signs, Symbols and Icons: Prehistory to the Compu-
ter Age. Exeter: Intellect Books.
Saussure, Ferdinand 1974. Course in General Linguistics. C. Bally, A. Sechelraye & A. Reidlinger 
(eds). Glasgow: Fontana/Collins.
Savage-Rumbaugh, S., Shanker, Stuart G. & Taylor, Talbot J. 1998. Apes, Language, and the Hu-
man Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schacter, Daniel 2001. The Seven Sins of Memory: How the Mind Forgets and Remembers. New 
York: Houghton Mifflin.
Schiffman, Harvey Richard 1996. Sensation and Perception: An Integrated Approach. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Schmidt, Siegfried 1982. Foundation for the Empirical Study of Literature: The Components of a 
Basic Theory. Translated by R. de Beangrande. Hamburg: Helmut Buske Verlag.
Sebeok, Thomas A. 1967. Discussion of communication process. In Social Communication 
among Primates, S.A. Altmann (ed), 363–369. Chicago-London: The University of Chicago 
Press.
	
1976. Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs. Bloomington: Indiana University/Lisse, the 
Netherlands: The Peter De Ridder Press.
	
1994. An Introduction to Semiotics. London: Pinter Publishers/Toronto: University of To-
ronto Press.
Shakespeare, William 1994. Romeo and Juliet. B. Gibbons (ed). London-New York: Routledge.
	
1997. King Lear. R.A. Foakes (ed). Walton-on-Thames: Thomas Nelson and Sons Ltd.

 From Interaction to Symbol
Shepard, Roger N. 1997. The genetic basis of human scientific knowledge. In Characterizing Hu-
man Psychological Adaptations, G.R. Bock & G. Cardew (eds), 23–38. Chichester: John Wi-
ley & Sons, Inc.
Sherwood, Lauralee 1997. Human Physiology: From Cells to Systems. London-New York-Toron-
to: Wadsworth Publishing Company.
Silverman, Kaja 1983. The Subject of Semiotics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sinnema, William 1986. Digital, Analog, and Data Communication. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: 
Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Slater, Peter J.B. 2000. Birdsong repertoires: Their origins and use. In The Origins of Music, N.L. 
Wallin, B. Merker & S. Brown (eds), 49–63. Cambridge, Mass.-London: The MIT Press.
Sless, David 1986. In search of Semiotics. London: Sydney: Croom Helm.
Sloboda, John A. 1985. The Musical Mind: The Cognitive Psychology of Music. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
Smith, Craig A. & Scott, Heather S. 1997. A componential approach to the meaning of facial 
expressions. In The Psychology of Facial Expression, J.A. Russell & J.M. Fernández-Dols 
(eds), 229–254. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sokal, Alan & Bricmont, Jean 1998. Intellectual Impostures: Postmodern Philosophers’ Abuse of 
Science. London: Profile Books.
Sokal Hoax: The Sham that Shook the Academy 2000. Edited by the editors of Lingua Franca. 
Lincoln-London: University of Nebraska Press.
Solso, Robert L. 2003. The Psychology of Art and the Evolution of the Conscious Brain. Cam-
bridge, Mass.-London: The MIT Press.
Sontag, Susan 1978. On Photography. London: Allen Lane (1973).
Sperber, Dan 1994. The modularity of thought and the epidemiology of representation. In Map-
ping the Mind: Domain Specificity in Cognition and Culture, L.A. Hirschfeld & S.A. Gelman 
(eds), 39–67. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stankiewicz, Edward 1972. Problems of emotive language. In Approaches to Semiotics: Cultural 
Anthropology, Education, Linguistics, Psychiatry, Psychology, T.A. Sebeok, A.S. Hayes & 
M.C. Bateson (eds), 239–264. The Hague-Paris: Mouton & Co.
Sterelny, Kim 2006. The perverse primate. In Richard Dawkins: How a Scientist Changed the Way 
We Think. Reflections by Scientists, Writers, and Philosophers, A. Grafen & M. Ridley (eds), 
213–223. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Studdert-Kennedy, Michael & Goldstein, Louis 2003. Launching language: The gestural origin 
of discrete infinity. In Language Evolution, M.H. Christiansen & S. Kirby (eds), 235–254. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Symons, Donald 1979. The Evolution of Human Sexuality. New York-Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
	
1992. On the use and misuse of Darwinism in the study of human behavior. In J. H. Barkow, 
L. Cosmides & J. Tooby (eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the genera-
tion of culture. New York: Oxford University Press.
Tallis, Raymond 1995a. Not Saussure: A Critique of Post-Saussurean Literary Theory. Hound-
mills, Basingstoke-London: Macmillan Press Ltd (1988).
	
1995b. Newton’s Sleep: The Two Cultures and the Two Kingdoms. London: Macmillan Press 
Ltd.
	
1999a. Enemies of Hope: A Critique of Contemporary Pessimism: Irrationalism, Anti-Hu-
manism and Counter-Enlightenment. London: Macmillan Press Ltd.
	
1999b. Theorrhoea and After. London: Macmillan Press Ltd.

	
References	 
Thomson, Kristin & Bordwell, David 2003. Film History: An Introduction. Boston: McGraw-Hill 
Companies, Inc.
Thomson, Richard F. & Madigen, Stephen A. 2005. Memory: The Key to Consciousness. Washing-
ton, D.C.: Joseph Henry Press.
Tomlin, R.S. 1986. Basic Word Order: Functional Principles. London: Croom Helm.
Tooby, John & Cosmides, Leda (1992a). The psychological foundations of culture. In The Adapt-
ed Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, J.H. Barkow, L. Cosmides 
& J. Tooby (eds), 19–136. New York: Oxford University Press.
	
1992b. Cognitive adaptations for social exchange. In The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psy-
chology and the Generation of Culture, J.H. Barkow, L. Cosmides & J. Tooby (eds), 163–228. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Trachtenberg, Alan (ed.). 1980. Classic Essays on Photography. New Haven, Conn.: Leete’s Island 
Books.
Trivers, Robert L. 1990. Deceit and self-deception: The relationship between communication 
and consciousness. In Man and Beast Revisited, M. Robinson & L. Tiger (eds), 175–191. 
Washington, D.C.-London: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Turner, Mark 1996. The Literary Mind. New York-Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vasari, Giorgio 1987. Lives of the Artists. London: Penguin Books.
Walton, Kendall L. 1997. On pictures and photographs: Objections answered. In Film Theory 
and Philosophy, R. Allen & M. Smith (eds), 60–75. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Watts, Ian 1999. The origin of symbolic culture. In The Evolution of Culture: An Interdisciplinary 
View, R. Dunbar, C. Knight & C. Power (eds), 113–146. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press.
Webster, Richard 1995. Why Freud was Wrong: Sin, Science and Psychoanalysis. London: Harper 
Collins Publishers.
Weinberg, Gerald M. 1975. An Introduction to General Systems Thinking. New York-London: 
John Wiley and Sons.
Wheen, Francis 1985. Television: A History. London: Century Publishing.
	
2004. How Mumbo-Jumbo Conquered the World: A Short History of Modern Delusions. Lon-
don: Fourth Estate.
Whorf, Benjamin Lee 1940. Science and Linguistics. Technology Review 42(6): 229–231.
	
1956. Language, Thought and Reality. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.
Wiener, Norbert 1948. Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Ma-
chine. New York: The Technology Press, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wierciński, Andrzej 1981. Antropogeneza: ewolucja cywilizacji (Anthropogenesis: Evolution of 
Civilization). Warsaw: Centrum Studenckiego Ruchu Naukowego.
	
1983. Symbol and symbolization. Ethnologia Polona 9: 33–44.
	
1994. Magia i religia: Szkice z antropologii religii (Magic and Religion: Studies in Anthropol-
ogy of Religion). Cracow: Nomos.
Wilde, Oscar 1994. Complete Works of Oscar Wilde. Glasgow: HarperCollins Publishers.
Wilden, Anthony 1980. System and Structure: Essays in Communication and Exchange. London: 
Tavistock Publications Ltd (1972).
Willems, Klaas and Ludovic De Cuypere (eds.). 2009. Naturalness and Iconicity in Language. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Co.
Wilson, Brian 1990. Systems: Concepts, Methodologies, and Applications. Chichester-New York-
Brisbane: John Wiley and Sons (1984).
Wilson, Edward O. 1978. On Human Nature. London: Penguin Books.

 From Interaction to Symbol
	
1998. Concilience: The Unity of Knowledge. London: Abacus.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 2001. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. London-New York: Routledge 
(1921).
	
1958. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
Woodford, Susan 1982. The Art of Greece and Rome. Cambridge-London-New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Workman, Lance & Reader, Will 2004. Evolutionary Psychology: An Introduction. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Wray, Alison 2000. Holistic utterances in protolanguage: The link from primates to humans. In 
The Evolutionary Emergence of Language: Social Function and the Origins of Linguistic Form, 
C. Knight, M. Studdert-Kennedy & J.R. Hurford (eds), 285–302. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
	
2002. Dual processing in protolanguage: Performance without competence. In The Transi-
tion to Language, A. Wray (ed), 113–137. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wright, Robert 1995). The Moral Animal: Evolutionary Psychology and Everyday Life. London: 
Little, Brown and Company.

A
adaptation (def.)  23
advertising  64
aesthetic need  65, 82, 86, 118, 
127, 172, 193, 201, 204
Alberti, Leon Battista  131, 191, 
193, 197
Allen, Woody  146, 271
Anderson, Earl R.  210
animal communication  32, 68, 
95, 97, 99, 161–163, 214, 244
anthropomorphic imagery  173, 
175, 178–179, 185, 191
anthropomorphization  169, 179
Antonioni, Michelange-
lo  135–136
arbitrariness  39–40, 207–211, 
228, 231–232, 245–246, 255, 
269
Arnheim, Rudolf  198, 200 
art   81–82, 103–105, 117, 121, 127, 
131, 133–137, 140, 153, 170, 172, 
174–179, 182–188, 267
see also aesthetic need
autism  63
autonomous systems   21–22, 
43, 278 
see also functional equilib-
rium and homeostasis
B
Bad Writing Contest  15, 273
Barash, David P.  84
Barre, Weston La  85
Barrow, John D.  10, 82
Barthes, Roland  15–16
Beckett, Samuel  85
Berlin, Brent  218, 261
Berlin Olympics  155
Bertalanffy, Ludwig von  1, 2, 88
Bickerton, Derek  3, 31, 58–59, 
74, 108, 236, 240, 257, 258
Bildungsroman  65
bio-epistemology  277
bipedalism  226, 254
Boccaccio  195
bodily adornments  101–105, 115, 
118–119, 252
Boyer, Pascal  162, 180
Brunelleschi, Filippo  192, 197
Bühler, Karl  48
burials  170–171 
see also Neanderthals
busts (Roman)  136
Butler, Judith  273
C
camera obscura  130, 140–141, 
201
camouflage  52, 54, 164
Canaletto  130
Capra, Fritjof  2
Carroll, Joseph  74, 82, 278
Carthage  120
cave art  172–179 
see also Upper Palaeolithic
Chandler, Daniel   15
Chauvet cave  129, 175, 178 
see also cave art
chimpanzees  100, 107, 109, 
165–166
Chomsky, Noam  6, 237 238, 
250, 265
chromaesthetic iconicity  220
Cimabue  193–194
cinema  145–148
Clark, Eve V. and Herbert 
H.  223
Classicism  183, 185–189, 
200–201
code (def.)  40
code-switching  213
cognition  93, 112, 169, 257, 259, 
267, 277 
see also consciousness
cognitive modules  93, 123, 258, 
264
colour perception  261–262
combinatorial grammar  234, 
244, 247, 250
combinatorial thinking  237, 257, 
263–268, 271
communication (def.)   31
connotation  58
consciousness  111–113, 169–170 
see also cognition
contagious magic  123–125, 139, 
141 
see also homeopathic magic
contiguous communica-
tion  32–36, 38, 40, 71–72, 
91–93, 94, 123, 158
Corballis, Michael C.   253
cosmetics  102–105
Courbet, Gustave  137, 201
Cubism  202–203
cue (def.)  66, 67
cultural memory  86, 113, 117, 
120, 171
cultural relativity  260
Cunningham, Valentine  15
cut-out portraits  130–131
D
daguerreotypes  138
Dawkins, Richard  2, 12, 22, 84, 
112, 113, 164
Deacon, Terrence  51, 98, 165, 
176, 207, 208, 246
deception (def.)  51–54, 103, 
163, 164 
see also self-deception
deconstruction  19, 49, 273
deduction  12–14
definition (def.)  25–29
denotation  58
Denton, Derek  32, 112, 161
digital cameras  153
digital code  246, 262–263
Dissanayake, Ellen  81, 270
diversification of languag-
es  254–255
Dobzhansky, Theodosius  238
Dodwell, Edward  141
Index

 From Interaction to Symbol
Donald, Merlin  99, 101, 167, 168, 
177, 239, 270
Donatello  192, 193
Dorian Gray  153, 154
duality of patterning   249
Dunbar, Robin  9, 111, 214, 
240–241, 254–255
Dürer, Albrecht  198
E
Easterlin, Nancy  11, 277
Eccles, John C.  111
Eco, Umberto  13–14, 28
Edelman, Gerald M.  7, 169
Egyptian art  185
Ehrenreich, Barbara  15
Ekman, Paul  74
Ellis, John M.  15
Emerson, Ralph Waldo  81
emotions (def.)  74
environment (def.)   32
Etcoff, Nancy  104, 105
exploratory need  79–80, 86, 89
F
fabrication   52, 164 
see also deception
facial expressions  74, 98, 136, 
225, 259 
see also human face
faith  5, 8, 55, 65, 268, 276 
see also religion
family photographs  125, 137–138
fantastic in art  178–179, 182
fire, taming of  108
Fischer, Olga  222
Florence  192
Frazer, James George  123–124, 
139, 152
Friday, Jonathan  127
Frisch, Karl von  163
functional equilibrium  21–23, 
72–74 
see also autonomous systems 
and homeostasis
G
gestures  168, 224–228, 253
Ghiberti, Lorenzo  192
Giotto  194, 195
globalization  159–160
Gombrich, Ernst H.   131, 140, 
168, 174, 185, 189, 196, 199
Gove, Michael  160
grammar  107, 227–228, 236, 244, 
247, 250–251, 264
graphic sex  65
Greek philosophy  9
Greimas, A. J.  28
Gross, Paul R.  274
Grote, Klaudia  226
group hunting  110, 240
H
Hall, Edward  174
hallucinations  58
Halverson, John  174
Hauser, Marc D.  32, 51, 68, 99, 
166, 234
Hinton, Leanne  230
Hirsch. E. D.  48
homeopathic magic  38, 139–140, 
175 
see also contagious magic
homeostasis  22, 72, 88 
see also autonomous systems 
and functional equilibrium
Homo erectus  108, 167
Homo habilis  109
Homo sapiens  102, 170, 231, 
239, 243
honeybees  163
human face  74, 130, 136, 262
see also facial expressions
humanism  186, 189, 196, 277
humanities  10–11, 274, 276–277, 
279
humour  62–63
Humphrey, Nicholas  108
Hurford, James R.  234, 249
I
icon (def.)  36
iconic communication  36–38, 
45
iconic indexes  128, 132, 148–149
iconicity in language  215–217, 
219–222
ideology  89, 184, 189, 268
idolatry  38, 190–191
imitation  165–169, 192–193, 216
Impressionists  202
incomprehension (def.)  50
index (def.)  34
indexical communication 
(def.)  34–36
indexical icons  148–150
induction  12–13
information (def.)   29–31 
see also parainformation and 
metainformation
Intentionality  66
interaction (def.)  21–22, 29–31
Internet  159
invention of painting 
(motif)  131
J
Jackson, Michael  149
Jakobson, Roman  181
K
Kaplan, Stephen  79
Kay, Paul  261
Keller, Hellen  261
kinaesthetic iconicity  216–217
Knight, Chris  98, 252–253
Kramer, Peter  154
Kuhn, Thomas S.  4
L
language   25–26
(origins)  233, 239–241
(acquisition)  235, 238
Laszlo, Ervin  2, 4, 14, 22, 112, 113
laughter  99
Lavater, J. K.  130
Lee, Michael  260
Leonardo da Vinci  121, 197–198
Leroi-Gourhan, André  175–176, 
178
Levitt, Norman  274
Lewis-Williams, David  118, 
170–171, 176, 199
linguistic determinism  260
Linz, Erika  226
live television  154–158
Locke, John  210
Lumière Brothers  147–148, 150
lying  51–52 
see also fabrication and 
deception
Lysenko, T. D.  66
M
Magee, Bryan  6, 27, 270
Masaccio  132, 192
Matisse  140
Mazur, Marian  30
meaningful information 
(def.)  42, 43 
see also information

	
Index	 
meaningless information 
(def.)  42 
see also information
Medawar, Peter B.  274
Medawar, Peter B. and 
Jean S.  113
medium (def.)  31, 32
Melchior-Bonnet, Sabina  152
memory (def.)   106–107
Mendeleev, Dmitri  20–21
Merrell, Floyd  16
message (def.)   67
metacommunication  61
metainformation (def.)  57–58, 
60–65 
see also information and 
parainformation
metameaning (def.)  58
metaphors  180–182
metasignificance  58
metonymy  181
Michelangelo  193
Miller, Geoffrey F.  242
mimesis  167–172
mimicry  163–154
mirror  151–152
miscommunication  50
misunderstanding (def.)  50
Mithen, Steven  53, 74, 101, 104, 
107, 109, 168–169, 170, 177, 214, 
225, 241
Moholy-Nagy, László  133, 202
Morris, Desmond  165, 183
movement (perception of)   31, 
145
music  63, 93, 213–215
N
Nadar, Félix Tournachon  138
Nänny, Max  222
Narcissus  152
narrativity  277–278
natural environment  79–81
naturalism in art  171, 183, 186, 
189–190, 193, 195–197, 201
natural selection  2, 22, 23, 72, 
238, 242, 243
Neanderthals  53, 107, 108, 114, 
117, 170–172, 239, 243
need (def.)   73, 76–79, 81–83, 
85–86
negative feedback  22, 23, 72 
see also autonomous systems 
and functional equilibrium
New Criticism  46, 47
newspaper photogra-
phy  143–144
non-verbal communication  75
nutritional need  77, 86
O
Only Fools and Horses  50, 62, 
213
onomatopoeia  212, 215–216, 
218, 229
Otherworld  129
overinterpretation (def.)  50
Ovid  140
P
painting (origin of)   126, 171, 
172–175 
Panofsky, Erwin  191
parainformation (def.)  41–42, 
58–60, 65 
see also information and 
metainformation
Pascal, Blaise   205
Peirce, Charles Sanders  1, 16–17, 
27–28, 67–68, 94–95, 207–208
Pendergrast, Mark  152
perception (def.)   32
perspective in painting  173, 
174, 185, 187–188, 194–200, 
202–203
philosophy  3, 6–8, 10, 12, 27, 
59, 269
philosophy of science  8, 14
phonaesthetic iconicity  220–221
photographic anxiety   139, 
141–142
photographic portraits  137, 143
photography  37, 125–128, 
132–136, 138–139, 142–144, 
201–202
Picasso, Pablo  202, 203
Pinker, Steven  61, 78, 181, 239, 
243, 248, 249, 258
Pirenne, M. H.  197
Plato  13, 19, 21, 145–146, 196
Plotkin, Henry  74, 115
Poe, Egar Allan  135
Polanski, Roman  132
Polaroid camera  153
Popper, Karl  3–5, 13, 27, 59
postmodernism  6, 14–17, 26, 47, 
66, 245, 270, 271, 273–276
Postmodernism Generator  275
Power, Camilla  102–103, 
252–253
procreative need  76, 85, 86
protective need  77, 85–87
protolanguage  236, 247
Pygmalion  140
R
realistic art  172–174, 183, 
186–188, 189, 192, 195, 198, 
201–202
recursion  251
red colour  102–104
reference  242–245, 249–250
referential displacement  105, 
167
religion  8, 9, 55, 65, 83–84 184, 
188–190, 195, 267–268 
see also faith
religious art  183–185, 190
religious myth   83, 278
Renaissance art  131, 185, 
192–194, 195–200
replica (def.)  121
rock carvings  117
Romance of the Rose  103
Rosenbleuth, Arturo  14
Russell, Bertrand  9, 270
S  
Sapir, Edward  260, 271
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis  260, 
261
Saussure, Ferdinand de  245
Schacter, Daniel  116
science  3–6, 268–269, 274
sculpture  173–174, 186–187, 
192–193
Sebeok, Thomas A.  26–27, 31, 
95–96, 97
self-deception (def.)  54–56 
see also deception
self-regulation  22–23, 72–74 
see also homeostasis and 
autonomous systems
semiotics  15–17, 26–27, 28 
sexual selection  242
shadow  129, 131–132
sham menstruation  102–103, 
252
sign (def.)  27–28, 67–69
signal (def.)   66–67, 69
significance  48
sign languages  224–228

 From Interaction to Symbol
silhouette cut-outs  130–131
sitcoms  157–158
Sless, David  15
social need  78
social grooming  240–241
Sokal hoax  274–276
Solso, Robert L.  112
Sontag, Susan  128, 134, 135, 137, 
202
spandrels  266
Sperber, Dan  258
sport  77
Stankiewicz, Edward  212
structural linguistics  209
substitution  53 
see also deception
suppression  53 
see also deception
symbol (def.)  39
symbolic compulsion  8, 272, 
276
sympathetic magic  124, 127, 139 
see also homeopathic magic
symptom (def.)  97
synaesthetic iconicity  217–219
syntax  221, 222, 234–236, 251, 
264, 265
system (def.)  17–19, 20–21
T
Tallis, Raymond  15, 49, 50, 209, 
245, 274
teleological need  82–85
television  149, 154–158
theory  3–6, 9, 14–15
theory of mind  54, 78
tools  109, 114–115, 119–121
Turin Shroud  96
U
Uccello  198
understanding (def.)   49
Universal Grammar  250
Upper Palaeolithic  117, 126, 129, 
170, 171–174
V
Vasari, Giorgio  131, 193, 194, 200
vervet monkeys  52, 100, 235
visual instructions  168
vocabulary, acquisition of  248
vocal signals  98, 211, 215
W
Waiting for Godot  85
Warsaw  120, 121
Whorf, Benjamin  260
Wilde, Oscar  37, 76, 153–154, 
182, 205, 277
Wilson, Edward O.  5, 10, 11–12, 
113
Wittgenstein, Ludwig  7–8
Wray, Alison  247

In the series Iconicity in Language and Literature (ILL) the following titles have been published 
thus far or are scheduled for publication:
8	
Sadowski, Piotr: From Interaction to Symbol. A systems view of the evolution of signs and 
communication. 2009. xxi, 300 pp.
7	
Willems, Klaas and Ludovic De Cuypere (eds.): Naturalness and Iconicity in Language. 2008. 
ix, 249 pp.
6	
De Cuypere, Ludovic: Limiting the Iconic. From the metatheoretical foundations to the creative 
possibilities of iconicity in language. 2008. xiii, 286 pp.
5	
Tabakowska, Elżbieta, Christina Ljungberg and Olga Fischer (eds.): Insistent Images. 2007. 
xiii, 361 pp.
4	
Maeder, Costantino, Olga Fischer and William J. Herlofsky (eds.): Outside-In — Inside-Out. 
2005. x, 427 pp.
3	
Müller, Wolfgang G. and Olga Fischer: From Sign to Signing. 2003. xiv, 441 pp.
2	
Fischer, Olga and Max Nänny (eds.): The Motivated Sign. 2001. xiv, 387 pp.
1	
Nänny, Max and Olga Fischer (eds.): Form Miming Meaning. 1999. xxxvi, 443 pp.

