
From Topic to Tale

Theory and History of Literature
Edited by Wlad Godzich and Jochen Schulte-Sasse
Volume 47. Eugene Vance From Topic to Tale: Logic and Narrativity in the
Middle Ages
Volume 46. Jean-Francois Lyotard Le Differend
Volume 45. Manfred Frank What is Neostructuralism?
Volume 44. Daniel Cottom Social Figures: George Eliot, Social History, and
Literary Representation
Volume 43. Michael Nerlich The Ideology of Adventure, Volume 2
Volume 42. Michael Nerlich The Ideology of Adventure, Volume 1
Volume 41. Denis Hollier The College of Sociology
Volume 40. Peter Sloterdijk Critique of Cynical Reason
Volume 39. Geza von Molnar Romantic Vision, Ethical Context: Novalis
and Artistic Autonomy
Volume 38. Algirdas Julien Greimas On Meaning: Selected Writings in
Semiotic Theory
Volume 37. Nicolas Abraham and Maria Torok The Wolf Man's Magic
Word: A Cryptonymy
Volume 36. Alice Yaeger Kaplan Reproductions of Banality: Fascism, Liter-
ature, and French Intellectual Life
Volume 35. Denis Hollier The Politics of Prose
Volume 34. Geoffrey Hartman The Unremarkable Wordsworth
Volume 33. Paul de Man The Resistance to Theory
Volume 32. Djelal Kadir Questing Fictions: Latin America's Family
Romance
Volume 31. Samuel Weber Institution and Interpretation
Volume 30. Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari Kafka: Toward a Minor
Literature
Volume 29. Peter Szondi Theory of the Modern Drama
Volume 28. Edited by Jonathan Arac Postmodernism and Politics
Volume 27. Stephen Melville Philosophy Beside Itself: On Deconstmction
and Modernism
Volume 26. Andrzej Warminski Readings in Interpretation: Holderlin,
Hegel, Heidegger
Volume 25. Jose Antonio Maravall Culture of the Baroque: Analysis of a
Historical Structure
Volume 24. Helene Cixous and Catherine Clement The Newly Born
Woman
For other books in the series, see page 132.
ii

From Topic to Tale
Logic and Narmtivity in
The Middle Ages
Eugene Vance
Foreword by Wlad Godzich
Theory and History of Literature, Volume 47
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis

Copyright © 1987 by the University of Minnesota
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Published by the University of Minnesota Press
2037 University Avenue Southeast, Minneapolis MN 55414.
Published simultaneously in Canada
by Fitzhenry & Whiteside Limited, Markham.
Printed in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Vance Eugene.
From topic to tale.
(Theory and history of literature ; v. 47)
Bibliography: p.
Includes index.
1. Chretien, de Troyes, 12th cent.—Technique.
2. Narration (Rhetoric) 3. Narrative poetry, French —
History and criticism. 4. Logic in literature.
5. Logic, Medieval. 6. Rhetoric, Medieval.
I. Title. II. Series.
PQ1451.V36 1987 
841'.1 
86-7032
ISBN 0-8166-1535-7
ISBN 0-8166-1536-5 (pbk.)
The University of Minnesota
is an equal-opportunity
educator and employer.

To Adam and Jacob

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents
Acknowledgments viii
Foreword: In Memoriam by Wlad Godzich x
Introduction xx
1. From Grammatica to a Poetics of the Text 3
2. De voir dire mot le conjure: Dialectics and Fictive Truth 14
3. Selfhood and Substance in Erec et Enide 28
4. Topos and Tale 41
5. Si est homo, est animal 53
6. From Man-Beast to Lion-Knight: Difference, Kind, and Emblem 80
Notes 111
Index 127

Acknowledgments
I wish to express my gratitude to colleagues, students, and friends who have
generously given of their time and knowledge during the writing of this book.
Norman Kretzmann furnished not only bibliography about topical theory, but
also cautious encouragement as I began to write this book. Eleonore Stump sent
me offprints of her substantial publications on topical theory and copies of forth-
coming works which proved useful to me. Monique Canto, Claude Imbert, and
Michael Leff were helpful during discussions of topical theory both preceding
and following the Middle Ages. Several friends read the manuscript in earlier
versions and made helpful suggestions pertaining to both content and style:
Howard Bloch, Kevin Brownlee, Bernard Cerquiglini, Denyse Delcourt, Alex-
andre Leupin, Stephen G. Nichols, Jr., and Brian Stock. Rupert Pickens, with
his extensive experience as an editor, was especially sharp as a close reader of
the manuscript, including the notes. I have also benefited from discussions of
points in the material of this book with Timothy J. Reiss, Peter Haidu and
Michel Zink. As a reader and editor of the series in which this book has been
published, Wlad Godzich has made many excellent suggestions for improving
the manuscript during its final revision for publication. My students in several
seminars at both the Universite de Montreal and Emory University have been
cordial and constructive while listening to sessions devoted to the material of this
book.
In the Middle Ages, during a dialectical dispute, one partner would com-
monly ask another, wide locus?—or, what is the basis of your argument? This
question was frequently put to me in heated family discussions by my sons Adam
viii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS D ix
and Jacob during the period when this book was written. During such moments
neither the appeal to authority nor to Aristotle or Cicero ever helped me very
much. Finally, the only "place" of truth during such times was a bond of love
that was being stretched by growth, changing needs, and new understanding on
both sides. It is to them that I dedicate this book.

Foreword
In Memoriam
Wlad Godzich
"They have tampered with verse," Mallarme once wrote with that sense of awe
that does not yet know whether it shall give way to righteous wrath at the horror
being perpetrated or turn into exhilaration at the boldness of the stroke. Anyone
who looks at recent scholarship on the Middle Ages is likely to experience a
similar reaction: they have tampered with the Middle Ages, and the anxiety un-
derlying the awe at such sacrilegious behavior does not know whether to ex-
perience the rush of release or to cower in fear of the consequences. Why should
this be so? What is at stake in this reputedly obscure and generally peaceful
province of the realm of scholarship? What does it matter that in recent years
we have learned that technology and science were launched on their subsequent
careers during this period, that the legal concepts with which we organize our
social and private relationships were forged then, that a particular conception
of language emerged at that time, that literacy became the measure of human
beings —to cite but a few of the claims made by those who toil in this field. After
all, the Middle Ages is not a given of nature but a construct of culture and, as
such, subject to alteration. The very progress of knowledge presupposes the ca-
pacity to alter constructs, indeed that is one of the justifications for the entire
enterprise; we should thus greet with pleasurable excitement the results of recent
medieval scholarship. Yet the ambivalence of feeling will not be so easily dis-
pelled; it will merely underscore the fact that tampering with the Middle Ages
may be as momentous for us as tampering with verse was for Mallarme: an ep-
och is coming to an end. But which is the threatened epoch: The Middle Ages
X

FOREWORD D xi
or our own? Or is it the conceptual system upon which the difference between
the two was drawn that is at risk?
We all know that the modernity asserted in early modern times, in the Italian
Renaissance, was proclaimed by its promulgators as a definite break with the im-
mediate past and that the latter, variously labeled as the "Dark Ages" or the
"Middle Ages" came to constitute the field of otherness against which all that was
modern was to emerge. A simple set of dichotomies was then constructed in
which all negative attributes—blind faith, unreflecting prejudice, stagnation, ab-
sence of learning and free inquiry, and so on —were relegated to the epoch that
was conceived as a hiatus in the course of civilization. Even the rationalism of
medieval schoolmen was overshadowed by their obedience to a Church authority
that was viewed as arbitrary, mindful of its own political interests, and ulti-
mately dedicated to holding knowledge and its pursuit under tight control. It is
only with the first crisis of modernity, precipitated by the extravagance of reason
in the course of the French Revolution, that a reexamination of the Middle Ages
appeared possible and desirable. The impetus may have come from the Roman-
tic reassessment of reason and the distrust of its claims to universal application,
but it was quickly taken over by the very sort of rationalism that the Romantics
feared the most: instrumental reason in the service of the state. Much nineteenth-
century medieval scholarship was concerned with the legitimation of existing or
emergent states as the culmination of national aspirations traced to their putative
origins in the Middle Ages. Although philology was its method, a literary his-
tory in the service of nationalism was its ultimate motor. The rising vernacular
societies and their cultures were privileged over the common font of Latin learn-
ing. Since interest was focused on the erection of boundaries within the latter,
little attention was paid to the relations it maintained at its own boundaries with
the rich cultures of Islam, Judaism and the Greek-speaking East.
Medieval scholarship in this century has corrected this process. It has become
far more attentive to the inner complexities of medieval culture and, most re-
cently, has pursued a line of inquiry that seems motivated by the following string
of syllogisms. If indeed the culture of early modern times marks such an abrupt
departure from what preceded it, then this rupture must have had its seeds in
the culture of the Middle Ages. Yet, if that is the case, we do not have a break
but a more or less orderly development from the Middle Ages to early modern
times. Since however these two appellations can be maintained only if the notion
of an abyss between the periods they designate is preserved, either we have to
reposition the abyss at some earlier historical juncture than the conventional
middle or end of the fifteenth century or we must abandon the distinction al-
together.
The second course is unpalatable for many reasons, not the least of which has
to do with the rather considerable institutional investment in medievalism (insti

xii D FOREWORD
tutes, conferences, grants, chairs, scholarships, journals, and so on). Even more
importantly, to follow such a course would be to wreak havoc with the very basis
of the organization of knowledge in the humanities, that is, the ability to define
historical constructs as territories of inquiry. And since this very mode of in-
quiry is characteristic of modernity, it would threaten the latter at a time when
it is already coming under considerable pressure from postmodernism. An un-
stated consensus has thus slowly been emerging: the boundaries of the Middle
Ages should be reexamined in such a way as not to disturb the general edifice
of which the Middle Ages turns out to be a keystone.
The location of the new boundary thus involves two sets of stakes: a renegoti-
ation of the beginnings of modernity with respect to that which precedes it and
an alteration in the relation of the forces that determine the tracing of such a
boundary. History, as a discipline, played the major role in the determination
of the limits of the older construct: it pointed to "historical" events, such as the
fall of Constantinople or the great discoveries, for the purpose of distinguishing
the periods at hand. It pointed, in other words, to the kind of evidence it had
under control. The new boundary setting pushes this process to the extreme and
sets the boundary precisely where history runs out of evidence: with literacy,
prior to which the documentary evidence upon which the historian must rely is
simply lacking. The emergent consensus has indeed been increasingly distin-
guishing between an oral Middle Ages and a literate one wherein the latter marks
the preparation of, and anticipates, early modern times. The boundary is thus
being set where history and literary scholarship both come against that which
challenges their conceptual and methodological grasp. To say this, however, is
to say that the boundary will be set where it is possible to detect the emergence
of a discursive regime in which literary and historical functions can both be dis-
tinguished yet are inexorably intertwined. It is to presuppose further that we
know the economy of the discursive order we are dealing with. This is far from
being the case, argues Gene Vance in the pages that follow, as he proceeds to
tell the story of the emergence of narrative in medieval discourse.
Vance focuses on the learned Latin culture that had been somewhat ne-
glected, or perhaps more accurately, left to the care of those literary medieval-
ists whose field would not encroach upon the so-called national literatures.
Vance examines the organization of learning and knowledge in the middle of the
twelfth century, and he discerns a pattern of floating boundaries in that orga-
nization. The trivium and the quadrivium, like any other systematization of
knowledge, have always had a secret hierarchy, and it is this hierarchy that is
undergoing a mutation. Since the underlying structure of the organization of
knowledge is a semiotic one and takes the form of a conception of language, it
is in this realm that the mutation becomes visible for ultimately it concerns the
way in which language organizes and articulates the relation of things, words,
and intellect, and it is here that Vance will document the mutation that takes

FOREWORD D xiii
place not only in learned circles but also in vernacular poetics, and especially
in the writings of Chretien de Troyes. The argument he traces is clear, cogent,
persuasive, and illuminating of a number of historical and textual conundrums,
and there is no sense in anticipating it here. I should like to offer the following
remarks as a complement to his argument.
Vance notes the rise of logic to a position of preeminence over rhetoric, and
goes on to show that topics come to play a most important role in the elaboration
of narrative. Most present-day narratological theory has been, paradoxically for
a theory of narrative, uninterested in the history of narrative. Vance's argument
forces us to confront this subject since he shows that narrative has not always
been what we take it to be. Specifically, Vance focuses on the way in which
topics, that is, argumentative structures that are part of dialectic, came to struc-
ture narrative. Thus, instead of having a story move from event to event —a no-
tion not available to dialectic in any case—a section of the narrative would pro-
vide concrete and particular instantiation of a universal abstract process such as
the articulation of the particular to the whole, for example. The narrative would
be organized around these particular concrete instantiations of the universal ab-
stract patterns constituted by the topics, and, given the latter's universality, it
would necessarily have cognitive import and thus, ultimately, ethical value as
well.
The process or mutation Vance is concerned with may be usefully contrasted
with what is known to medieval exegesis as applicatio. Here a story is told first,
but it cannot be any story. It has to be drawn from sacred sources or from the
life of a saint so that it is immediately received by the audience as a validated
narrative of authority. The application seeks to relate the story to the everyday
lived experience of the audience by pointing out its meaning. In other words,
the movement is from literal narrative to tropological discourse where the latter
has a strong injunctive power over the audience. Topically formed narratives do
not operate this way since they do not enjoy the primacy of the applicational nar-
rative. This primacy is reserved to the abstract universal topic which, being a
universal of reason, is self-validating, as a simple logical operation can always
verify. The narrative is to be judged by its degree of well-formedness in relation
to this universal. It is capable of injunctive power but only as a result of a prior
cognitive operation in which a prevailing state of affairs is implicitly, rather than
explicitly, contrasted with the concretization derived from the universal. In other
words, in application, the story's authority, which is beyond question, is rhetori-
cally exploited during the tropological moment, whereas a narrative based on
topics seeks to bring about a confrontation between two states of affairs, one de-
rived from, and endowed with the authority of, universal and logical principles
of reason, and the other merely being the case. Such a confrontation, staged for
the benefit of rational beings, should have an injunctive power; however this

xiv D FOREWORD
power does not derive from rhetoric since the injunction proper is never formu-
lated, but rather from the fact that rational beings are capable of making rational
value judgments and seek to validate them through their actions, that is, it de-
rives from the ethical dimension of human beings. It invokes the distinction be-
tween the is and the ought and captures the praxical energy that arises from their
disjunction. The realm of the ethical is brought under the sway of cognition, and
its existence is conceived on an individual scale, whereas in the applicational
narrative the ethical has a collective dimension and is mediated through
language.
The passage from the rhetorical to the logical is thus accompanied by a paral-
lel transition from the collective to the individual. Why this should be the case
is not immediately apparent, even though it has been further noted that both
movements take place alongside a third which is often invoked as the cause of
the other two: the transition from orality to literacy or, more properly, from a
culture of the oral to one of the written. It is in this latter transition that the
changes in the nature of narrative we are interested in take place.
The point has been made repeatedly that in an oral culture narratives are col-
lective property, yet the consequences of this statement are rarely drawn out.
To begin with, such a statement means that no storyteller presents himself or
herself as the originator of a story but rather as a relay in a long chain of tellers,
the earliest of whom, if they are known at all, are either mythical ancestors or
divine emissaries. It means further that no new stories are elaborated, except at
most as variants of older stories. We should expect then a waning of interest in
stories which are fundamentally repetitive and rehashed over and over again, yet
paradoxically all such human societies put a great deal of stock in storytelling,
so much so that we tend to think of them as narrative-bound. To tell a story un-
der such circumstances entails a different attitude toward narrative from the one
moderns bring to the same experience. The performance or the telling of stories
in oral societies is essentially commemorative.
This term refers to the peculiar function of memory in oral societies. On the
basis of empirical evidence, members of a literate culture have a far more
limited mnemonic capability than their counterparts in an oral culture. This has
led anthropologists and other students of literacy to overlook a crucial differ-
ence: far less is at stake in a literate society than in an oral one as far as memory
is concerned. It would not be an exaggeration to say that oral societies ex-
perience a particular form of anxiety linked to the fear of losing their memory
that literate societies cannot even begin to imagine. For it is in this vast memoria
that are contained all the sacred texts, all the foundational myths, all the explana-
tory regresses that provide the members of a particular collectivity with a hold
on their lived experience and distinguish them from their neighbors. In this type
of mindset, a story told is not cognitively processed for the information it
contains^ there are other ways of accomplishing such a utilitarian task; it is told

FOREWORD D xv
in order to animate as many of the constitutive elements of memoria as possible.
Since the audience is familiar with the narrative, be it an epic or a myth, it is
not interested in its thread, structure, or even its thrust, as much as in the way
in which the storyteller's performance can achieve this function of animation in
which large numbers of dormant memorial strands can be set into motion and
vibrate together, thereby giving its meaning to the term commemorate. Com-
memoration in such a context does not have the modern meaning of an action
whereby a number of individuals come together in order to recall some event
or figure; it designates the process through which the latent powers of memoria
are brought to life. There are no individuals here, for those who are gathered
at such a storytelling do not conceive of themselves as autonomous entities that
have the power or the right to associate freely among themselves. They are there
as the necessary material correlatives of the memoria from which they derive
their sense of identity and purpose. Rather than being individuals with inherently
endowed rights and privileges, they are persons in the etymological sense of the
term, that is, material purports of roles which they do not write but accept, in
the form of fate, from the power that resides in memoria, a power that is beyond
human ken or control.
To be a person in this sense is to accept the fact that one's life does not obey
a discernible order of coherence while maintaining a belief in the ultimate exis-
tence of such a coherence. In other words, if I perceive myself as playing roles
that are handed down to me, I am aware of the fact that I am generally called
upon to play more than one role and that there is no inherent link between two
or more of the successive roles I play. At the same time, I believe firmly that
all roles being played simultaneously somehow make sense, but not necessarily
to me who am but one player among many. Sense, in the form of the coherence
of the global play, resides at a higher level, that of the memoria no longer con-
ceived as a pure repository but as an animating force itself. By contrast, persons
are largely heterogeneous since they do not necessarily achieve any coherence
in the roles they play. Yet this heterogeneity does not give rise to any anxiety;
quite the contrary: it reinforces the belief that one's sense transcends oneself and
that such a sense resides in a transcendental dimension that is at the same time
immanent.
To be a person in this sense, to see oneself as assuming roles that are cast
upon one, requires a conception of language and of the larger semiotic system
as a set of parts available to oneself. A part is a limited ordering of verbal and
nonverbal behavior endowed with internal coherence and designed to achieve
specifiable effects. In contemporary semiolinguistic terms, it is a discourse.
Each discourse is organized in such a way as to place its utterer in the position
of the subject of that discourse, which is what we call role playing. Since persons
are heterogeneous insofar as they are called upon to play different roles, we can
define a person as someone with the ability to assume different subject positions.

xvi D FOREWORD
Such a definition is overly voluntaristic however and presumes that one chooses,
or has the right and the ability to choose, the roles one will play. It is, in other
words, a definition of an individual assuming the function of a person. We have
seen earlier that persons do not choose their roles but have them thrust upon
them and that they experience them as fate. It is more accurate then to define
persons as the loci in which discourses intersect and produce subject positions.
Persons are thus not defined ontologically but discursively, and their ag-
gregate, the community of persons, is equally derived from memoria as the
treasure trove of discourses. Objects are similarly defined: such standing as they
have is granted to them by the discourse which grounds them, that is, locates
them in the vast edifice of memoria. Just like persons, objects can find them-
selves at the intersection of two or more discourses. In fact, an object that is lo-
cated in such a manner has the capacity to animate more than one discourse and
thus to induce the peculiar vibration of memoria that we have earlier seen to be
one goal of storytelling in this type of society. To put it even more simply, any
object that can serve as the point of convergence, intersection, and refraction
of a number of discourses, will have a privileged place in memoria since it can
animate a sizable portion of the latter by enabling the activation of all the dis-
courses that course through its specific locus. And if we recall that it is this ani-
mation that counts rather than any specific content, then the privilege accrues
to the place, the locus, or, as the Greeks had it, the topos. This conception of
topos is neither rhetorical nor dialectic — the versions that Vance is concerned
with; it is discursive. Topoi are the places from which the ordering of the com-
plex universe of discourses which is memoria can be intuited as ... 
topogra-
phy, that is, as an ultimately ordered universe which offers the promise of coher-
ence against the immediate experience of heterogeneity.
This is the conception of topos that Ernst Robert Curtius appeals to in his Eu-
ropaische Literatur und lateinisches Mittelalter (Bern: Francke Verlag, 1948),
though he fails to trace its provenance. The reason he invokes it is, as Vance
rightly sees (p. 42), because he wants to reassert the ultimate unity of Western
civilization in the face of the heterogeneity produced by the two world wars. As
a political project such an appeal was doomed to failure since the discursive
economy had radically changed in the meantime and memoria had evaporated.
But it does cast a shadow over potentially too euphoric a vision of dialectical
topoi.
The most curious, and ultimately the weakest, feature of the economy of
memoria is the strange coexistence of the acknowledgment of a discursive mul-
tiplicity and even heterogeneity with the belief in their ultimate, and unverifi-
able, coherence. One could readily view this admixture of experiential fact and
belief as an ideological strategy for the suspension of societal antagonisms in
view of real differences between groups and individuals. These antagonisms can
be held in check as long as no one identifies with a given subject position, that

FOREWORD D xvii
is as long as there prevails a realm of persons in which no one seeks to erase
the difference between a subject position and the material purport that assumes
it. For as soon as this difference, and the arbitrariness that presides over its as-
signment, are effaced, roles are taken to be entitlements and specific discourses
are felt to be somehow natural to those who wield them, and they may not easily
shed them in order to assume others. Furthermore, the entire universe of dis-
courses is no longer conceivable as a general flux whose sense resides in its
specific, yet unfathomable, economy, but must be hierarchized, that is, must be
brought under the control of a discourse that can account for the operations, and
especially the localization, of other discourses.
The controlling discourse will be that of logic, the discourse that identifies
itself with reason. It does so by pretending that it is a discourse whose internal
coherence is such as to render all of its components devoid of any sense on their
own and therefore unable to enter into any commerce with the internal organiza-
tion of any other discourse. In other words, as a discourse logic differs from all
other discourses by the fact that it does not intersect with any other discourses
and, as a result, it comprehends them all. It makes them all answerable to itself.
The advantages are immediately obvious. Instead of a belief in the ultimate co-
herence of the universe of discourses, logic provides a verifiable methodology
for the determination of such a coherence. Since it appeals to universals of rea-
son, it is inherently more egalitarian as long as one is willing to consider all hu-
man beings as rational beings. It opens the door to the emergence of the in-
dividual as someone endowed with rights.
But it also runs into some problems, two of which need remarking upon
here. The first and the most obvious has to do with the claim that a given dis-
course, that of logic in this instance, has the capacity not only to function au-
tonomously but also to preside over other discourses and adjudicate disputes
among them. Logicians have become painfully aware of the intractability of hu-
man language on this score. Words as well as other linguistic features —and the
problem is even greater with other semiotic systems —are not easily confined
to one discourse; they tend to cross boundaries and to render them fuzzy,
thereby rendering the operations of logic difficult. Logic has sought to over-
come this difficulty by becoming increasingly formalized. The more formalized
it has become, the less it has been able to assert a grasp over other discourses
without invoking various mediating instances, such as pragmatic rules or the
structure of the mind, all of which are but a way of acknowledging that the
problem will not go away.
The second problem is even greater since it derives from the first. Given the
fact that a logical discourse can internally structure itself but can only claim to
therefore have the capacity and the right to structure other discourses and to or-
der them, it must reach outside of itself to assert such a right. This crossing be-
yond its own boundary does not result from some sort of voluntaristic act, some

xviii D FOREWORD
will to power, on the part of logical discourse as we may wish to hastily con-
clude. It results rather from a necessity once logical discourse has dismantled
the edifice of memoria. It will be recalled that the latter does not have a merely
thesaurizing function but a sustaining one as well. It provides the animating
force that brings discourses forth and, through their interplay, organizes those
human beings who live by it in their mutual relations and in their dealings with
the universe. The exact functioning of this agency escapes cognition in the
memorial universe which thematizes it as fate. But it now becomes the burden
of the logical discourse.
There comes into being then the specific discursive economy of modernity.
The logical discourse, patterned upon universal and abstract reason, seeks to as-
sume this agential burden by positing that the universe, by which it means na-
ture, is itself rationally organized and thus accessible to its own operations. This
axiom will require the development of a theory for its justification. But what is
easily posited of nature is much more difficult to assert of such human order as
prevails especially in view of the latter's capacity for diversity and variation.
One may proceed in the topical way that Chretien does in Vance's demonstration
to construct ideals of human relations and development that are answerable to
reason, but this does not do away with concrete behavior that, in this light, ap-
pears to be residual of an older mindset. Hence the project of modernization,
in which a variety of means, primarily coercive and ranging from persuasion to
the imposition of collective death, are applied in order to insure the compliance
of the human order to the rational one. Agential power here is vested in the agent
of modernization, that is, the state as the embodiment of ultimately rational con-
viviality.
The situation that obtains as a result is in many ways quite confused: the pres-
ent is lawless in relation to the promised lawfulness of a future in which nature,
the sphere of the human, and rationality are expected to coincide. In the mean-
time, the agent of rationality, the state, must behave in irrational ways in order
to bring about rationality. In the process it may foster as much irrationality as
rationality and thus cast doubt over the ultimate outcome. What is perhaps even
more important is that agency in the present is beyond cognitive grasp. The
state, at best, only usurps its place from the fraudulent position erected upon the
claim that rational discourse has the ability and the right to adjudicate dis-
courses.
And yet we know that discourses are being somehow organized and managed
in their operations. There is a covert economy to modernity that escapes from
the all-embracing claims of universal rationality. At the level of discourse, this
managerial function begins to manifest itself shortly after the experiment which
Vance documents collapses under the weight of its own pretensions. For in the
space of the fictional opened here by Chretien, it was readily apparent that a
creative process whereby all concreteness had to be derived from abstract and

FOREWORD D xix
universal schemas could result only in the death of concreteness, whereas the
real problem was the management of the vitality that manifested itself there.
Topical writing cannot play that role and will soon come to an end. Prose,
which begins to emerge then, can, and it will constitute the secret economy of
modernity. The Middle Ages may well be the epoch that labors toward this dis-
covery .

Introduction
With the surge of vernacular literacy in the second half of the twelfth century,
many enduring types, forms, and codes of what, for lack of a better term, we
commonly call "medieval literature" permanently embedded themselves in Euro-
pean culture. The extraordinary dynamism of secular vernacular letters at that
time corresponded to mutations in the social order that were no less radical: for
instance, the rise of urbanism, the division of the labor force, the monetarization
of social relationships, the articulation of a new class consciousness, the exploi-
tation of writing and accounting as new instruments of political power, and the
emergence of international commerce.
During those decades and during the thirteenth century, almost every impor-
tant rhetorical or discursive strategy of the vernacular mainstream as it has
evolved up to our own time was first elaborated and contested. If ever there was
a specific period of European culture germain to builders of "general" critical
theories, this is it.
The impact of literacy upon twelfth-century society has been a commonplace
of cultural historians for some time, though no one has been so bold as to address
this subject squarely until recently, when Brian Stock wrote The Implications of
Literacy: Written Language and Models of Interpretation in the Eleventh and
Twelfth Centuries (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1983). Stock deals exclu-
sively with the domain of church Latinity. Yet by its substance and method, this
book lays an important foundation for understanding specific developments of
secular vernacular literacy that I shall study in the chapters to follow. It is true
that study may detect, as Paul Zumthor's has, an impact of literacy upon the
XX

INTRODUCTION D xxi
workings of vernacular language and thought well before the twelfth century.1
However, such developments occurred in clerical spheres remote from the ter-
rains of practical political power. We may also point to features of /?reliterate
medieval culture—for instance, the marks of an oral poetics-mat endured in
vernacular writing, perhaps as conscious archaisms, well into the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries. Once again, though, such discursive reflexes were hardly
determining forces in their culture.
I would propose, by contrast, that the Oxford version of the Chanson de
Roland may justly be considered as a testimony to a cultural crisis that was cen-
tral to the political and intellectual ideals of twelfth-century society, especially
those concerning warfare, as they were perceived in their own time. The elev-
enth century had given rise to peace movements whose goal was to limit the
ravages of chivalry; the development of commerce in the twelfth century had
intensified the need for civil order. Even the techniques of combat were evolving
in ways that challenged the preeminence of the miles as bellator.
Not only were the traditional ideals of the warfaring aristocracy under strain,
but so too was the art that expressed those ideals. As I have proposed elsewhere,
the Chanson de Roland embodies in vivid and poignant terms the impact of tex-
tuality upon a consecrated oral poetic discourse which, up to then, had also
served as the living discourse of history.2 The first half of the Oxford Roland
recounts the exploits of a hero who, despite his flaws, ultimately shows himself
to be at one with the traditional idiom of oral epic, with its inherent code of
ethics, and (what is important for us here) with its modes of production: Roland
goes into battle wielding a God-given sword and certain that his exploits, which
have been blessed in advance by Archbishop Turpin, will beget future songs (1.
1014). Since God, as Roland knows, never lies, we too may infer by Roland's
apotheosis that his martyrdom is eternally singable, memorable, good, and true.
However, the second half of the Roland depicts a far less buoyant barnage
(barony): it depicts a world of stricken survivors who no longer yearn to incar-
nate the values of the dead hero, because these men are old and tired, cowardly,
forward-looking—or simply scrawny, as is Charlemagne's champion Thierry.
Only Pinabel, the ill-fated relative and champion of a traitor, conserves in the
eyes of his peers (and of the poet himself) something of the now-obsolete splen-
dor of Roland's heroic universe.
The tragedy of the Chanson de Roland is inseparable from the disclosure that
not only words, but even things and events to which words refer, are equivocal.
The Roland inaugurated in the most hallowed legends of vernacular culture a
new but troubled consciousness of the radical difference between the knower and
the known, between unquestioning memory and exercised judgment, between
the claims of blind loyalty and of assumed responsibility, and between past or
present actions and their future historical consequences. The Roland made its
culture glimpse a terrifying centrifugality, not only in the institutions of political

xxii n INTRODUCTION
power, but also in the very discourse by whose conventional formulas that
power had been celebrated. This tragedy was all the more brutal because of the
poem's failure to invent and utter new, compensatory values upon which to base
the hero's quest for unequivocal honor in this world —and for salvation in the
next.
If the Roland does indeed testify to a crisis in the discourse of power, surely
this crisis stemmed in part from the impact of writing as it brought new con-
straints to vernacular language which disrupted the economy and latent episteme
of traditional epic discourse. Indeed, a shift from epic mouvance toward a cul-
ture of grammatica and monumentality is already indicated in the body of the
Roland itself, for Charlemagne plans to perpetuate the memories of Roland and
the twelve peers not by the invention of songs (cantilenes), but by the construc-
tion of white marble tombs that will presumably bear written inscriptions. To
suggest that literacy was crucial to the disruption of the semantic processes of
Old French epic is also to point to a broader relationship between writing and
political power that was transforming the modalities of twelfth-century culture
as a whole. What Robert-Henri Bautier has written of France in the time of
Philippe Auguste (1165-1223) already applies in many ways to the Champagne
of Count Henri-le-liberal (1152-1182) in whose court was nurtured the first
great poetic movement of the Old French language:
La grande nouveaute du regne est precisement le recours constant a
1'ecrit. On sail, en effet, que le sceau a pris une large extension dans
la seconde moitie du Xlle siecle; pratiquement tout chevalier s'engage
sous son sceau, et Ton peut desormais disposer d'actes authentiques
susceptibles d'etre opposes a 1'interesse en cas de manquement de sa
part. L'une des forces de Philippe-Auguste fut d'exiger de chacun de
ses partenaires a commencer par les fils et les vassaux de Henri II, de
telles reconnaissances scellees. Cela amene le roi a constituer des ar-
chives qui entre ses mains deviennent un instrument de gouvernement,
une reserve d'armes juridiques. . . . C'est que dans ce qu'il faut bien
desormais appeler un Etat et ou 1'ecrit commence a jouer un tel
role, . . . la chancellerie joue un role extremement important. Le
nombre des actes expedies est sans commune mesure avec celui des
regnes anterieures.3
The great novelty of the reign was precisely the constant recourse to
writing. We know, indeed, that the use of the seal became broadly ex-
tended during the second half of the twelfth century: practically every
knight became engaged under his seal, and those in power could
henceforth rely upon authentic acts capable of being used against those
concerned in the case of delinquency on their part. One of Philippe-
Auguste's strengths was to demand sealed statements of recognition
from each of his partners, beginning with the sons and the vassals of

INTRODUCTION D xxiii
Henri II. This led the king to establish archives, which in his hands
became an instrument of government and a reserve of judicial
weapons. In what henceforth must be called a State where writing be-
gan to play such a role, the chancellery became extremely important.
The number of acts expedited was without any common measure with
that of preceding reigns.
In the present study, I shall suggest that as a writer—a litteratus—and as a
probable initiate into at least the rudiments of the three linguistic disciplines of
the trivium (of which grammatical was the first in order of access) as they were
taught in later twelfth-century France, Chretien de Troyes found and perfected
the models for a new poetics of vernacular fiction and of the text, as well as a
set of new intellectual and ethical principles that compensated very well for the
obsolescence of traditional epic in twelfth-century culture. Since it was held by
intellectuals throughout the Middle Ages that the structure of language and its
functions served to reflect, within the human soul, exterior reality, we may pre-
sume that as textuality became a new determinant of vernacular language and
its operations, so too came the imperative to elaborate new and specifically tex-
tual models for understanding and expressing reality —and, by extension, to in-
vent a "possible world" whose presuppositions were rooted in its textuality. We
now call that "world" romance. To judge by the uses that later medieval writers
made of Chretien's art, Chretien was by far the most resourceful vernacular
model-maker of his age.
It perhaps seems natural that a medievalist should consider writing and textu-
ality as determinants of medieval poetic art, yet such an undertaking is neither
easy nor simple. Given the prominence and subtlety of theories of writing
("grammatology") that have emerged from recent critical thought, we are of
course tempted to contemplate the workings of medieval texts above all through
a modern prism. Indeed, a Levi-Straussian or Derridean or Lacanian "reading"
of a medieval text may very well reveal things about the text that we might not
otherwise have perceived. Inversely, the medieval text may very well instigate
in us new perceptions about the workings of our own culture. Our age would
not be the first to have considered texts of the Middle Ages as "modern."
However, given that medieval culture-whose very foundation was a Book
whose letter and law were thought to "kill" if read without "spirit"—endowed it-
self with a rich tradition, both speculative and pragmatic, of demonstrating the
functions and limits of writing in human understanding, why should a modern
theory of textuality be allowed to eclipse the intelligence of that tradition?4 If
the discipline of orthodox medievalism itself has shunned studying the features
of a specifically medieval textual poetics, it is not because of reverence for that
tradition. To the contrary, "literary" medievalists have by and large avoided sys-

xxiv D INTRODUCTION
tematic study of the trivium, within which medieval writing was nurtured, until
the last several decades, when the study of rhetoric began to attract serious criti-
cal attention and when the study of dialectics and grammatica began to follow
suit. In the programs of orthodox medievalism, the reasons for the neglect of
the trivium as an epistemic system are multiple and extend back to the rise of
philology as a hermeneutical science in the early nineteenth century. Romantic
philologists considered ancient poetic texts less as objects of analysis in their
own right than as mere vestiges, as traces, of some anterior, originary meaning
(whether cultural or subjective) that we as philologists must attempt to recover
by a systematic hermeneutics, proposed as a science of Understanding (Verste-
hen). Schleiermacher proposed that the philologist's goal is to understand an au-
thor better than the author understands him- or herself. As Hans W. Frei writes
of the early hermeneuticians:
Both the historical-critical and the more philosophical (romantic,
idealistic, and historicist) users of myth could agree with the claim.
They believed themselves able to grasp, as it were from within, a
mythological writer's necessary and unconscious belonging to, and ex-
pression of, the particular primitive consciousness of his era, its
preconceptual and childlike sensuous level in inception, conception,
and expression. . . . Where the Romantics sought immediate access
to the spirit of the ancient myth-forming consciousness, the
mythophiles thought that understanding or explanation of the ancient
writings was finally synonymous with the assessment of their reliability
as reports of factual occurrences and of their usefulness for explaining
the origins of the traditions they express.5
Schleiermacher's disciple Wilhelm Dilthey expresses very succinctly what
have become the implicit presuppositions of orthodox medievalism as a modern
discipline. The primary goal of human studies, he says, is to understand the rules
of Understanding (Verstefieri), "which is that process by which we intuit, behind
the sign given to our senses, that psychic reality of which it is the expression."6
(Such an undertaking is conconant with Augustine's hermeneutics, which also
defined the sign as "a thing which causes us to think of something beyond the
impression the thing itself makes upon the senses.")7 The proper domain of Un-
derstanding is written speech, "for only in written speech does the inner life of
man find its fullest expression. That is why the art of understanding centers on
the exegesis or interpretation of those residues of human reality preserved in
written form" (p. 233). The text is not, however, an entity that we study as an
object whose signification is immanent, but as something exterior to its semantic
process, as a mere residue of something other. "The exegesis of such residues,
along with the critical procedures inseparable from it, constituted the point of
departure for philology. Philology is in its essence a personal skill and virtuosity

INTRODUCTION D xxv
in the scrutiny of written memorials. Other types of interpretation of monuments
or historically transmitted actions can prosper only in association with philology
and its findings" (p. 233).
The originary priorities of romantic hermeneutics became the guidelines for
orthodox medievalism during the next century and a half, even though practicing
scholars were not always conscious of these guidelines. The inverse idea-that
the semiotic constraints of writing or that the disciplines of the trivium (by which
writers were trained to think, speak, and write) might be determinants of the
supposedly inner artistic process of a text—was repugnant to orthodox
medievalists. Because of an inherent romantic belief that written language,
though it is external to consciousness (whether individual or collective),
nevertheless bears the stamp of that consciousness, medievalists were reluctant
to recognize the importance even of rhetoric as a determinant of the artistic proc-
ess until, during the sixties, incursions by nonmedievalist critics such as
Todorov, Kristeva, and Barthes virtually compelled younger medievalists to ex-
plore more carefully the "disciplinary" grounds of medieval texts.8 Although the
study of rhetoric has since become a minor academic industry, the disciplines
of grammatica and logic are only beginning to command the mature critical at-
tention that they deserve among students of medieval poetics.
Paradoxically, the first serious efforts to probe the textual dimensions of me-
dieval French vernacular art were undertaken by a scholar who had been max-
imally embued with the skills of philology, yet who had begun very early in his
career to seek new models of critical analysis. An important threshold in the
study of medieval poetics was crossed with the publication, in 1963, of Paul
Zumthor's Langue et techniques poetiques a Vepoque romane (Paris: Klinck-
sieck). In this book, Zumthor asserted the radical primacy of writing, whether
as a pragmatic process or or as an ideological program, to modes of vernacular
thought and expression. Zumthor's flair for grasping the textual dimension of
vernacular poetics was substantiated in a series of subsequent essays written dur-
ing the sixties and seventies. These were published together under the title Lan-
gue, texte et enigme (Paris: Le Seuil) in 1975, after the appearance in 1972 of
Zumthor's most famous book, Essai de poetique medievale (Paris: Le Seuil),
made their republication appropriate. In the latter book, an observation in the
chapter "Le poete et le texte" shows how remote Zumthor had become from the
tenets of orthodox philology - and also how "modern," in the daunty sense given
to the term in the early seventies:
"Quelles que soient les modalites du phenomene, le corpus medieval
nous apparait comme une poesie presque totalement objectivee, c'est-a-
dire dont le sujet, la subjectivite qui jadis s'investit dans le texte, s'est
pour nous abolie. Sans doute n'est-ce pas la un simple effct de 1'cpais-
seur des sieclcs qui nous en separent, mais cette opacite tient-clle

xxvi D INTRODUCTION
egalement a quelque caractere specifique des textes, a un decentration
du langage dans le pratique qui les produisit." (p. 64)
Whatever were the modalities of the phenomenon, the medieval corpus
seems to us now like a poetry that is completely objectivized—one
where the subject, or subjectivity, which once was invested in the text,
is abolished, as far as we are concerned. It is not simply the passing
of centuries that separates us from the subject. Rather, such opacity is
a consequence of the specific character of these texts, that is, of a de-
centering of language in the practice which produced them.
In his Essai, however, Zumthor's concern with the specifically historical dimen-
sion of grammatica remained subordinate to his theoretical and descriptive
priorities —such were the ways, then, of Paris (and Montreal). But suddenly,
with his book Le masque et la lumiere (Paris: Le Seuil, 1978), on the grande
rhetoriqueurs, came a renewed concern to grasp and express the socio-historical
determinants of a textual praxis that would otherwise be nearly unintelligible to
us in our time. Again, in his short retrospective book Parler du moven-age
(Paris: Minuit, 1980), in which he illustrates his journey away from "le
medievisme de papa," Zumthor summarizes his attempts to define the textual
dimension of medieval poetics, though without specific allusion to the discipline
of grammatica, whether as a productivity or as a mode of understanding.
In recent years, several viable (but complementary and often overlapping) ap-
proaches to the textual dimension of medieval poetics have emerged. The first,
which I shall call the generalist-theoretical approach, may be understood as a
broad grouping of structural and post-structural analytical procedures where no
attempt is made to legitimize modern critical suppositions through an appeal to
the terms of medieval culture itself as a framework for the production of texts.
To the contrary, such procedures involve carrying to a medieval text a set of
modern presuppositions about literacy that are formulated by a science (such as
anthropology or linguistics), by a doctrine (such as Marxism), or by a philosoph-
ical debate (such as that surrounding the Heideggerian-Derridean notion of
difference).
As does any other approach, the generalist-theoretical approach to medieval
documents influences the actual selection and editing of texts, for these opera-
tions produce the objects of subsequent analysis. The criteria for selecting and
editing texts have varied with changes in critical objectives. Bernard Cerquiglini
has written a succinct article outlining three major phases of French editorial
practices since the rise of romantic medievalism in France.9 The first period,
from 1830 to 1860, was one in which editors tended to respect a given text as
it appeared, noting variations or publishing several versions, but leaving ques-
tions of judgment to the reader. The second period, from 1860 to 1913, was

INTRODUCTION D xxvii
dominated by the search for the urtext, which medievalists sought to reconstruct
from its traces in multiple extant versions. The third, after 1913, stimulated by
Joseph Bedier, involved taking the best extant manuscript of a work and correct-
ing it in accordance with good editorial judgment. None of these methods has
accepted what are determined to be variants as being valid in their own right,
but rather as effects of some kind of degeneracy. As we might expect, more re-
cent linguistic and critical theories are generating the need for textual editions
that are less determined and more flexible. For instance, because of the tendency
of modern historical grammarians to cling to readings of individual words and
to problems of morphology—to what Cerquiglini calls la pensee de I'element et
non pas du systeme (p. 34) —questions of syntax have not been given their due
nor, by extension, have questions pertaining both to the internal dynamism of
a text and to its variations at the hands of the scribe by whom it was executed.
However, to deal with these questions simultaneously raises new and complex
problems of visualizing the text and of relating variants to each other, and Cer-
quiglini believes that computer science now offers textual editors the possibility
of placing textual data on disks in such a way as to allow the critic to interrogate
and construe these data in multiple ways, according to the specific information
that he or she seeks.
The necessity for medievalists to define relationships between variants of a
given text extends to that of defining relationships between a single text and the
network of other texts that constitutes its cultural horizon. This problem is com-
monly designated by the term "intertextality." In a more positivistic age, critics
were content to imagine the filiation of texts according to a simplistic model of
"sources and influences," but nowadays we often find ourselves assuming that
medieval writers would privilege and emulate this or that predecessor because
of priorities specific to the later, rather than the earlier, culture. For instance,
only after a vernacular author had achieved a certain technical initiation into the
art of writing would he or she presume to legitimize his performance by "receiv-
ing" and transforming the Virgil or the Ovid that once would have been called
a "source."
However, medievalists are not always at ease with the paradigms derived
from general linguistics and semiotics, in particular with what is implied by the
notion of "intertextuality." The word intertextuality was already diffused in
meaning by the early seventies, and by the time the word reached medieval cir-
cles, it could be construed in any number of ways, not all of them compatible.
A colloquium organized in 1979 by Columbia and Princeton universities and
published as a special number of Litterature (41, 1981) illustrates the lack of
concensus that makes medieval studies seem at times not like one, but like
several, distinct disciplines. Despite Michael Riffaterre's precautionary words,
none of the texts by the medievalists in the colloquium seeks to anchor its
premises specifically in either a medieval or a modern doctrine of writing or of

xxviii D INTRODUCTION
the text. Indeed, certain older polemical issues of traditional medievalism have
been more fecund, in my opinion, as occasions of systematic critical reflection
about medieval notions and practices of writing. Think, notably, of the famous
and ongoing debate about the so-called oral technique of poems such as Beowulf
and the Chanson de Roland, which survive now only in written form. Or think
of the venerable search for the meaning(s) of Chretien's metapoetic terms, sens
and conjointure, a search that I shall extend in the pages to follow.
Neverthless, the modern disciplines of linguistics and semiotics have stimu-
lated new interest in such questions as the relationship between language and
literacy, the evolution of the tense system in Old French, the evolution of ver-
nacular prose, and the discursive hybridism of medieval texts. These have been
the concerns of younger French linguists such as Christiane Marchello-Nizia,
Bernard Cerquiglini, and Marie-Louise Oilier, who practice what is often re-
ferred to as the linguistics of enonciation, after the term of Emile Benveniste.10
In a less specifically linguistic vein, Peter Haidu has explored the semiotic fea-
tures of early French poetic texts in a Marxist perspective, while Jane Burns has
attempted to approach the textual and narratological dimensions of the Arthurian
prose vulgate cycle from the side of the reader's performance, rather than that
of the writer.11 Two recent articles in Poetique 50 (1982) treat the impact of
writing on French vernacular poetics in the Middle Ages. David F. Hull, "Vers
la societe de 1'ecriture: le Roman de la Rose" (pp. 155-172), deals with the rela-
tionship between the roman (a term that designates first and foremost a language,
not a style or form) and the work of writing as seen in Jean de Meung. Michele
Ferret, "De 1'espace romanesque a la materialite du livre" (pp. 173-182), con-
siders the relationship between writing and enonciation, in the sense that French
discourse analysists give to that term.
In Germany, where philology never entirely lost its dynamism, the dis-
ciplines of communication theory, pragmatics, and modern hermeneutics have
also nourished formal reflection about the function of medieval texts in their cul-
ture, often insisting upon the reception of texts as a kind of productivity and
upon writing as an unending process of reading. It is through its rereadings in
posterity that a medieval text comes to signify, and for that reason its significa-
tion is never static. Such is the position of what is sometimes referred to as the
"Constance" school, whose best known spokesperson in the medieval field is
Hans Robert Jauss.12 Jauss's empirical attempts to formalize the process of Re-
zeptionsgeschichte do not, however, depend upon recourse either to medieval
history itself or to properly medieval theories of culture for their validity. By
contrast, the late Erich Kohler, thinking in a more Marxist historical and socio-
logical perspective, preferred to raise questions about the role of courtly literacy
as a class activity within the political structure of the twelfth-century nobility
during a radical transformation of its power basis.13
After the generalist-theoretical approaches to medieval textuality, I shall

INTRODUCTION D xxix
speak next of the psychoanalytical approach. The great forerunner in this ap-
proach is of course Denis de Rougement's still provocative book, Love in the
Western World, first published in French in 1939.14 Rougement's loose Freudi-
anism does not, however, measure up to the more precise Freudianism of Henri
Rey-Flaud's more recent book, La nevrose courtoise (Paris: Navarin, 1983). Yet
neither critic deals with the process of writing itself as a factor in medieval
poetic eroticism. It is in the Lacanian movement, rather, that we find the inclina-
tion to address this question. Lacan's own sensitivity to questions central to me-
dieval culture—for example, to the constitutive role of the letter as "law" in hu-
man consciousness and to the circular processes of language, consciousness, and
desire—has made his psychoanalytical writings so suggestive to those who are
concerned with the linguistic and textual elements of courtly eroticism.15 For in-
stance, Roger Dragonetti's La vie de la lettre au moven-age (La quete du Graal)
(Paris: Le Seuil, 1980) is a robust study of the "imagination littemire" of medie-
val culture, which Dragonetti sees essentially as an extended poetics of the letter
that was already intact in Isidore of Seville. In Dragonetti's perspective, the me-
dieval text rivals — or mirrors — the unconscious as a hidden source of significa-
tions. By insisting on the letter as a determinant of consciousness, Dragonetti
bypasses the romantic preoccupation with individual subjectivity that has been
such a hindrance to the study of medieval texts, especially those that happen to
bear an individual author's name. The Lacanian approach has been especially
fertile for the analysis of courtly lyric, as Dragonetti and Giorgio Agamben have
shown in their essays.16 Dragonetti's colleague Charles Mela shares his Lacan-
ian bias and has recently published a profound and massive study of conjointure
(this is Chretien's term for narrative coherence) in the Grail romances entitled
La reine et le Graal. La conjointure dans les romans du Graal de Chretien de
Troyes au Livre de Lancelot (Paris: Le Seuil, 1984). Like Lacan and Dragonetti,
Mela recognizes the primacy of the letter in the unconscious (whether literary
or individual) and of writing and reading as specific modes of producing a sens:
"Lettre" s'etend du support signifiant-dont 1'arbitraire ne cesse d'etre
mis en appel-de la signification, et cette derniere requiert, en ce cas
precis, que le signe soil, comme tel, pris en compte. . . . Dans le
traitement litteraire de la signification, les signes sont dessaisis de leur
fonction propre, occupent, dirions-nous par metaphore necessaire, le
devant de la scene, pour y jouer un role qui ne soil plus de simple
figuration. . . . A travers les unites, elements ou ensembles de signi-
fication, d'etranges liens se nouent, en effet a partir et autour des mots
eux-memes, attirances reciproques ou abimes, qui imposent peu a peu
leur dessin et leur rythme et definissent une regie qui est d'ecriture:
Chretien en appelle le resultat: "conjointure." (p. 16)
By "letter" is meant the signifying foundation—whose arbitrariness is
never to be neglected —of what is signified, and signification requires,

xxx D INTRODUCTION
in this case, that the sign, as it is constituted, be taken into account. In
instances of literary signification, signs are despoiled of their proper
function and move, to resort to a necessary metaphor, to the fore of
the stage, playing a role there that is not one of simple figuration.
Among units, elements, or combinations that signify, strange bonds are
formed, especially starting with and around words themselves: mutual
attractions or abysses which little by little impose their pattern and
their rythm, expressing a rule which is that of writing itself. Chretien
calls the result "conjointure."
Mela has elaborated on his notions of medieval textuality in subsequent arti-
cles.17 Dragonetti's pupil Alexandre Leupin has written a book, Le Graal et la
literature (Lausanne: L'age de 1'homme, 1983), and a series of astute articles
about the textual dimension of other genres as well —epic, prose romance, thea-
ter, fabliau, and lyric.18 Jean-Charles Huchet's Le roman medieval (Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France, 1984) is a penetrating study of the primacy
of language and of writing in the eroticism of the Roman d'Eneas. The Swiss
psychoanalytical periodical L'Ane occasionally contains provocative notes about
medieval writers, often written by the critics just named.
A third viable and very current approach to the relationship between medieval
textuality and poetics may be called the historical-theoretical. This approach
differs from both the generalist-theoretical and the psychoanalytical to the extent
that it emphasizes study of both the social and doctrinal contexts in which medie-
val texts are actually produced. What social imperatives and what models of in-
vention and of interpretation subtended the processes of writing and reading in
the twelfth century? How do these differ, for example, from those governing the
production of the humanist or romantic text? How do poetic texts encode the so-
cial reality surrounding their own begetting? Paradoxically, it is the very success
of antihistorical modern critical theory that has stimulated medievalists to return
with a whole new set of questions to the cultural history of that age, and particu-
larly to the history of the trivium.
It would be misleading, though, not to recognize that there have been notable
exceptions to the almost careful neglect by medievalists of the trivium as a
source of richly suggestive theories for the modern critic of medieval texts. A
few examples must suffice for the moment. Edmond Faral's Les arts poetiques
du Xlle et du XHIe siecle: Recherches et documents sur la technique litteraire
du moyen-dge (Paris: Champion) appeared in 1924, and Charles Sears Baldwin's
Medieval Rhetoric and Poetic (New York: Macmillan) was published in 1928.
(Both books were reprinted within a year of each other a generation later, Bald-
win's in 1959, Faral's in 1958.) In the field of grammar, R. W. Hunt wrote a
series of pioneering essays on the study of Priscian in the twelfth century, and
in 1980 these were reprinted together as a book entitled The History of Grammar
in the Middle Ages, ed. G. L. Bursill-Hall (Amsterdam: Benjamins). E. de

INTRODUCTION D xxxi
Bruyne's far-reaching Etudes d'esthetique medievale (Bruges: Tempel) appeared
in 1948, and Andre Pezard's Dante sous la pluie de feu (Paris: Vrin) in 1950.
R. H. Robins's invaluable Ancient and Medieval Grammatical Theory in Europe
(London: Bell) was first published in 1951, and was condensed in 1967 into A
Short History of Linguistics (London: Longman's), the same year that Jan Pin-
borg published his Die Entwicklung der Sprachtheorie im Mittelalter (Munster:
Aschendorf). In 1960, Heinrich Lausberg's resourceful Handbuch der liter-
arischen Rhetorik was published (Munich: Max Hueber). G. L. Bursill-Hall has
renewed the study of medieval grammatica with his Speculative Grammars of
the Middle Ages (The Hague: Mouton) in 1971. There has been follow-up in this
field by Irene Rosier in La grammaire speculative des Modistes (Lille: Presses
universitaires de Lille, 1983). Thanks to the tireless historical and archival
labors of James J. Murphy, surer foundations have now been laid for an under-
standing of the institution of rhetoric within medieval culture; see his books Me-
dieval Eloquence: Studies in the Theory and Practice of Medieval Rhetoric (Ber-
keley and Los Angeles: Univ. of California Press, 1978) and Rhetoric in the
Middle Ages: A History of Rhetorical Theory from Saint Augustine to the Renais-
sance (Berkeley and Los Angeles: Univ. of California Press, 1980). The recent
book by the distinguished German scholar Hennig Brinkmann, Mittelalterlicher
Hermeneutik (Munich: Fink Verlag, 1980), is helpful for grasping the larger in-
tellectual context of medieval interpretive theory. A recent survey entitled The
Seven Liberal Arts, ed. David L. Wagner (Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press,
1983) contains good chapters on grammar and dialectics by Geoffrey F. Hunts-
man and Eleonore Stump, respectively. Although we have every reason to speak
of the epistemic impact of writing on medieval culture, it is also important to
bear in mind thai reading and writing are based upon the materialities of ink and
parchment that are the page produced by the hard work of human hands. In his
L'Amour des lettres et le desir de Dieu (Paris: Le Cerf, 1957), Jean Leclerq has
written about the monastic context of the medieval scriptorium as a place of sa-
cred literary labor, and, more recently, Richard H. Rouse and Mary A. Rouse
have illustrated very concretely the functions of writing as a organizing and re-
trieval system of medieval learning in their article "Statim invenire: Schools,
Preachers, and New Attitudes to the Page," in Renaissance and Renewal in the
Twelfth Century, ed. Robert L. Benson and Giles Constable (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard Univ. Press, 1982), pp. 201-205).
Although the above references exemplify an increasing awareness of medie-
val sciences of language as a compelling matrix for thought and for artistic
production, modern studies dealing with the interaction of the disciplines of the
trivium upon each other and upon the other liberal arts have been scarce. A ma-
jor investigation of the economy of the trivium will, however, be found in Jean
Jolivet's Arts de langage et theologie chez Abelard (Paris: Vrin, 1969). Other
more recent collaborative works have followed suit—in particular, the rich and

xxxii D INTRODUCTION
yet searching volume The Cultural Context of Medieval Learning, ed. J. P. Mur-
doch and E. D. Sylla (Boston: Reidel, 1976), and the gigantic and endlessly
provocative collection of essays Sprache und Erkentniss im Mittelalter, ed. Al-
bert Zimmerman et al., (Berlin and New York: De Gruyter, 1981). There is still
a tendency among modern critics, however, to impose false boundaries on this
or that discipline and to overlook the refractions of a given problem (such as that
of "metaphor") through the other disciplines as well. A perception of the inter-
play, and even of the interference, between the disciplines of the trivium is im-
portant for students of literature, since the same processes are implicated in the
dynamism of poetics of the same era.
As I shall show in the chapters to follow, Chretien's poetics not only bears
marks of all three disciplines, but also reflects above all the dynamism of rela-
tionships between the disciplines in twelfth-century intellectual life. Thus, Chre-
tien's Cliges may be read, as Peter Haidu has done, as a poetics most grounded
in rhetoric, while Erec et Enide and Yvain are shaped more by logic than by rhet-
oric. Le conte del Graal is perhaps the most eclectic and balanced of Chretien's
romances in its manner of exploiting the arts of the trivium.
I shall conclude this introduction on a note of caution, which ought not to be
taken as an apology for what follows. Although I have chosen to deal with only
one aspect of Chretien's narratology — its relationship to twelfth-century logic —it
must be stressed that the twelfth century was a time when no prevalent vernacu-
lar poetic norms existed, except perhaps in lyric. A logically minded Chretien
could very well strive for virtuosity of narrative form in one romance and for
a far less formal rhetorical brilliance in another without betraying any rules.
Thus, we cannot adopt the same modes of reading Yvain as those of reading
Lancelot or Cliges. Perhaps it would be fair to suggest that the openness to ex-
periment of twelfth- and thirteenth-century vernacular poetics is unsurpassed by
that of any subsequent period, including our own. Moreover, as I proposed at
the outset, the experiments of twelfth- and thirteenth-century writers became, in
some way, determining forces in the cultural horizons of subsequent centuries.
In other words, what the discipline of logic brought to Chretien's narratology
endured as a permanent legacy of vernacular poetics, even though logic itself
did not always directly exert its powers upon the storytelling mind. This book
about logic and narrative in Chretien's writing is a study, then, of merely one
phase or aspect of a great poet's ongoing search for what we may now call
"models" of writing.
As is the case with most scholarship that deals in good faith with Chretien's
sources and with his cultural environment, much of what follows remains
hypothetical since we do not know who Chrtetien was, where he lived, what he
read, and least of all what he himself thought. However, the intellectual compe-
tence that I shall impute to Chretien remains very much within the sphere of
probabilities of anyone even minimally embued with the intellectual resources

INTRODUCTION D xxxiii
of twelfth-century humanism. As any Celtisant, any rhetorical critic, or any
would-be biographer of Chrfien has inevitably had to acknowledge, much of
what we would like to impute to Chretien is often warranted simply because it
is "in the air." I hope that the arguments that follow will not strain the credibility
of Chretien's readers any more than do those of more established scholarship
devoted to Chretien.

This page intentionally left blank 

From Topic to Tale

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 1
From Grammatica to a
Poetics of the Text
That a poet named Chretien existed, that he composed vernacular narrative
poems in writing, and that he was a litteratus in the sense that he could also
translate and exploit such classical auctores as Virgil and Ovid, are all facts be-
yond dispute. Chretien names both himself in his functions as conteur and
rimoyeur and his courtly patrons (Marie de Champagne and Philippe de
Flandres), and he links the name "Chretien" with a specific corpus of vernacular
poems and translations from the Latin.1
Obviously, to claim that Chretien was "literate" is to suppose that he pos-
sessed far more than the manual skill to set words down on parchment and more,
even, than the intellectual competence to undergo the influence of and to trans-
late classical auctores. It is to suppose that as a twelfth-century writer, Chretien
espoused a mode of expression that entailed, as well, specific and culturally de-
termined modes of understanding both the written word and the world.
We may find in John of Salisbury, who became Bishop of Chartres during
Chretien's lifetime, a nearly contemporary (but scarcely original) reflection upon
grammatica as a discipline. Grama (this is John's spelling), he tells us, means
"letter" (littera) or "line," and grammatica is a "linear" art (linearis est). Letters
are figures (figure) which serve as visual indicators, first, of spoken words, and
second, of things. Letters have the power to "speak the words of people who are
absent, but without a voice." Grammatica takes newborn infants from nature's
breast and nurtures them in her culture throughout their lives.2 William of
Conches, contesting Macrobius's remark that the fables of the poets belong in
the nursery, interprets the "nursery" as schools of the poets and auctores: "By
3

4 D FROM GRAMMAT1CA TO A POETICS OF THE TEXT
children's nurseries he means schools of poets: for as the bodies of infants in
the cradle are nourished by milk, so minds are nurtured in the schools of poets,
or, again, so must the less experienced be brought up on on the literary authors,
that is on matter less heavy [than philosophy]."3
Because written signs signify by convention (ad placitwri), they, John says,
are distinct from natural signs (1.14). Grammatica is not unnatural in a perverse
way, though, because it "imitates" nature (natura tamen imitatur, 1.14). Poets,
likewise, must imitate nature as they write, which is to say that they must faith-
fully represent an order of material things in an order of writing that is divorced
from those things: culture presumes to include nature by imitating it, yet also
determines the understanding of the object it imitates.
If grammatica is artificial, it is also durable and, through its alliance with
monuments of stone, survives the flux of time. In the introduction to his
Policraticus, John of Salisbury underscores the monumental function of gram-
matica in a most concrete way:
Triumphal arches add to the glory of illustrious men only when the
writing upon them informs in whose honor they have been reared, and
why. It is the inscription that tells the spectator that the triumphal arch
is that of our own Constantine, liberator of his country and promotor
of peace. Indeed no one has ever gained permanent fame except as the
result of what he has written or of what others have written of him.
The memory of fool or emperor is, after a brief lapse of time, the
same unless it be prolonged by courtesy of writers.4
At a period of history when there were obviously many more extant stone monu-
ments of Roman antiquity than have survived in modern times and at a period
when medieval builders of churches, bridges, and castles were emulating antiq-
uity by building new stone monuments appropriate to their own gods and heroes,
the challenge of classical grammatica was also being cheerfuly taken up by ver-
nacular writers (including Chretien) who were appropriating the great legends
of past history (Thebes, Troy, Athens, Rome) as predecessors of their own liter-
ate modemitas. Indeed, grammatica came to be seen in the vernacular roman
d'antiquite as the very foundation of ancient civic order.5 Thus, Cadmus, in-
venter of the alphabet, was known as a founder of Thebes; inversely, Capaneus,
in the Roman de Thebes, threatens to dismantle all the stones of Thebes that Am-
phyon "assembla ci par artimaire / et par la force de grammaire / et par le chant
de sa viele . . . " (vol. 1, 11. 9329-25) ("assembled here by magic and by th
force of grammar and writing, and by the song of his viele").
A pupil learned grammatica not only from books of grammar (Donatus, Pris-
cian, and others) but also by reading and explicating the works of the classical
authors, and the lesson (lectio) was useless without the commentary (enarratio).
The exposition of a given text began with the littera, or the grammatical explana-

FROM GRAMMATICA TO A POETICS OF THE TEXT D 5
tion, then passed to the sensus, which was the signification of the words in their
context, and finally to the sententia, or the understanding of the author's
thought.6 The reception of texts from the auctores was hardly a passive process.
To the contrary, a responsible reading was also a rewriting, a production of a
new meaning through the old. If twelfth-century intellectuals called themselves
"modern," it was because their new hermeneutical vision taught them both the
timeliness of meaning and the meaningfulness of time.
The mere mise en escrit of vernacular discourse may very well have disrupted
a hallowed formal and semantic tradition of oral epic and surely coincided with
a cleavage in the modalities of political power. But the formal discipline of
grammatica brought to the twelfth-century romance poet a sharper historical
perspective upon his or her inherited matiere. Douglas Kelly has sought to define
this hermeneutical perspective thus:
Marie de France says that poets examine the monuments of the past in
order to penetrate their obscurity and to rediscover, or rather to re-
store, their meaning. This illumination of monuments of the past rev-
eals, then, "what used to be" (ceo k'i en). Chretien restores a bele con-
jointure to the story of Erec and Enide that his contemporaries, he
says, make ugly by their disjunctions and suppressions (depecier et
corrompre, v. 21). It is thus out of the disiecta membra of his material
that the poet reconstructs the ancient edifice, the domus reconstruenda.
A demolished and ruined house will be restored into a beautiful
romance.7
This hermeneutical perspective of the poet as litteratus marks Chretien's dis-
course with the fiction of a double temporality whose tense structure differs from
that in the Roland? On the one hand, we observe a temporal axis of past events
comprised by the matiere of the story itself, whose privileged tense is the
preterit—that is, the temporal indicator of a discrete past holding its own spe-
cificity, its own marvelous space, its own encoded truth, a past whose continuity
with itself could be conveyed by the precise and systematic exploitation of the
perfect, imperfect, and pluperfect tenses.9 Suspended as it is in preterits, the die-
getic world belongs to a documented past whose preterit tense was already
proper above all to writing (and not to the living voice) even though such writing
is inflected, in long long stretches of direct discourse, so as to imitate dramati-
cally the living voice.10 The voice has become the primal fiction of the romance
text.
On the other hand, there is the axis of an extradiegetic temporal present (ex-
pressed in writing) which conveys the fiction of the poet's living voice as it both
utters and comments here and now upon the exalted events of ancient times:11
Mes por parlcr dc caus qui furcnt,
Leissons caus, qui an vie durent!

6 D FROM GRAMMATICA TO A POETICS OF THE TEXT
But in order to speak of those who once were,
Let us leave those who are now living.12
As Marie-Louise Oilier has written,
"La fiction dans le roman en vers est clairement situee a la fois dans
un passe et dans un ailleurs, dissociee de 1'experience actuellement
vecue, ne serait-ce que par 1'intervention d'une ecriture hautement
revendiquee. Mais le 'present du recit' est ici celui de la voix, qui in-
troduit dans le passe de 1'histoire le present, concret, charnel, de sa
propre respiration, institue une sorte de dialectique nonchalante entre
la fiction contee et le reel de 1'acte poetique."13
The fictive in the poetic romance is clearly situated at once in a time
past and in another place, dissociated from present experience, thanks
to the strong revindication of writing. But the "narrative present" is
here that of the voice, which injects the presence, the concreteness, the
corporeality of its own breathing into the past, thereby instigating a
kind of nonchanlant dialectic between narrated fiction and the reality of
the poetic act.
In a more recent study of tense usage in Old French narrative, Rupert T. Pickens
has gathered broad statistical evidence to document what he calls the "overall
tension created by opposing historicizing and anti-historicizing forces" in narra-
tive. Pickens indicates that, beginning with Cliges, Chretien "undertook ex-
perimentation with more pervasive anti-historicization in the composition of his
narratives," and that in Yvain, anti-historicizing features predominate.14
This hermeneutical opposition between present and past corresponds to a
growing sense in the twelfth century of the distinction between estoire as "his-
tory" and estoire as "story." Stephen G. Nichols, Jr., has recently shown in his
book, Romanesque Signs: Early Medieval Narrative and Iconography (New Ha-
ven: Yale Univ. Press, 1983), to what extent a broad new historical conscious-
ness emerged out of eleventh century theology and marked the dominant semi-
otic systems of Romanesque culture. Nichols stresses, however, the teleological
nature of that historical consciousness. Douglas Kelly sees this development
maturing rather later in vernacular poetics. He writes, "Though about 1175 no
real distinction was made between history and romance, from a modern point
of view, an evolution is apparent from the nearly historical to outright fiction.
That romancers were writing fiction was undeniable by 1200, and the increasing
criticism of their fabulous 'lies' brought that fact home."15
Like the literature of most periods in our culture, medieval vernacular poetry
tends both to fictionalize the process of its own begetting and to celebrate in its
heroes cognitive processes that reflect the author's own. If there is any warrant
for my claim that Charlemagne's designs to erect a splendid marble sarcophagus

FROM GRAMMATICA TO A POETICS OF THE TEXT D 7
for Roland and the twelve peers signal a new awareness, in the Roland, of the
difference between oral culture and a cult of monumental literacy,16 so too in
Chretien's Chevalier de la charrette we find a hero who not only knows how to
read the tombstones of his future peers from the Round Table, but also can raise
the lid of the most splendid tomb of them all: this is the tomb reserved (as the
inscription and its monkish reader tell us) for the hero himself as the liberator
of the Queen and the people of Logres. Lancelot shows himself to be a master
of the text, of both its "outside" and its "sweet," hidden "inside," despite the her-
mit's attempts to discourage him:
"C'est un veissiax qui a passez
toz ces qui onques furent fet;
si riche ne si bien portret
ne vit onques rie je ne nus;
biax est dedanz et defers plus;
mes ce metez en nonchaloir,
que rien en vos porroit valoir,
que ja ne la verroiz dedanz."17
"This is a vessel that surpasses all that were ever made; one so rich
and well designed was never seen, by me or by anyone: it is beautiful
inside, and more beautiful without; but put it out of mind, for you can
do nothing about it: never will you see what is inside."
Lancelot's miraculous display of strength in lifting the cover of the tomb, es-
pecially in the face of an unbelieving monk, is a hermeneutical deed of the most
heroic sort. However, Lancelot does not tell us, finally, what he sees inside this
splendid crypt. To the contrary, an interesting displacement occurs: having
opened the tomb, Lancelot himself becomes a living crypt whose inner secret he
refuses to disclose to the curious monk. The sweet, inner mysteries of a courtly
messiah are simply not destined for monkish ears. Chretien is quite clearly and
very boldly appropriating, for his vernacular story and its heroes, a textual her-
meneutics once reserved for the domaine of the auctores and of Scripture.18 Nor
do Chretien's male heroes have a monopoly upon the power of reading. Women
can do it too, and nothing, it would seem, is more overpowering to a knight than
the spectacle of a woman reading a well-wrought text. Such is the case with
Yvain, in any case, who falls in love with Laudine as she reads a Psalter with
golden letters (11. 1414-1415). The letter instigates in Yvain a fetishistic erotic
desire that competes with the young widow's longing for sacred consolation.
Thus, if a hermeneutical privilege proper to the poet as litteratus marks the
primal relationship between his enunciating voice and the inherited matiere be-
ing redeployed in his narrative text, so too a new hermeneutical imperative
marks the secondary, fictive relationship between the adventuring hero and the

8 D FROM GRAMMATICA TO A POETICS OF THE TEXT
Arthurian world of equivocal people and things in which he moves. And through
heroic actions, a questing knight "invents" a new meaning of his world whose
ultimate form is the revivified body of romance itself. Chretien's critics are
unanimous, moreover, in underscoring the primacy of judgment and understand-
ing to heroic action in his romances. For instance, Rupert T. Pickens claims that
"the Conte del Graal is a poem largely 'about' signs and the interpretations of
signs."19 "Specifically, judgment and evaluation are involved in the interpreta-
tion of signs, a theme close to the heart of the poem's meaning. Signs, in this
sense, are words, gestures, and objects" (p. 57). "His entire poem, which is con-
cerned thematically with judgment, evaluation, and interpretation, is itself the
product of Chretien's judgment, evaluation, and interpretation of a fictive
source" (p. 58).
In the opening episodes of Yvain, as well, Chretien brings strong dramatic
relief to the tendency of medieval narrative fiction to double its own extradie-
getic processes of invention. The setting is Arthur's court, where the knights of
the Round Table have gathered for a feast at Pentecost, whose theme celebrates
that archetypal hermeneutical triumph over the legacy of Babel that occurred
when the Holy Spirit enlightened, in their own tongue, each of the peoples from
every nation under heaven who were gathered in Jerusalem (Acts 2.1-8). After
dinner, the proper moment has come for tales of prowess and love to be told
and interpreted. Arthur's court is a place of double abundance, offcasts and sto-
ries to nourish both body and soul. Here raw events that have occurred during
adventures in sauvage terre are enculturated as cooked, courteous narrative. Just
as the writer of narrative must withdraw from human company into his clausum
cubiculum, as Quintilian puts it,20 in order to thrash out the text that he will later
perform before the public, so too the questing knight must withdraw from the
court, enclose himself in his armor, and depart alone into the wilderness in order
to invent, by his deeds, a story that he will later submit to the indicium of his
peers in the court. A hero's quest as a knight, like Chretien's as writer, is to pro-
duce the best possible story. In King Arthur's court, matiere is (or is supposed
to be) crowned with sens.
However, if Chretien shows us through the struggles of his heroes that the
invention of excellent narrative is a difficult and dangerous process, so too we
see in Yvain that the proper interpretation of a fine story is anything but a fait
accompli, and that it involves overcoming hard obstacles in its reception as well.
For, exactly at the moment in the feast when chivalrous tales are to be told, Ar-
thur abruptly withdraws from the assembly of knights and ladies that he is sup-
posed to govern and retires to his bed. Arthur has abdicated his duty of presiding
over those festivities of food and word where knights celebrate and renew, in
both body and spirit, their collective, aristocratic identity. Although the Queen
has dutifully followed Arthur to his bed until that time when he has "forgotten
himself and gone to sleep" (1. 52), the Queen has not lost, even in Arthur's bed,

FROM GRAMMATICA TO A POETICS OF THE TEXT D 9
her keener appetite for stories of heroic love. Thus, when she hears that a tale
is about to be told among the assembly of knights and ladies outside her door,
she rises from the King's bed to join them: marvelous stories of love, for Guene-
vere, are as compelling as the act of ordinary carnal love itself. Guenevere
desires to desire.
As the Queen joins the assembly of knights, Calogrenant, who is on the verge
of telling his tale, sees her first and courteously rises. Kay is jealous, and in the
King's absence Kay dares to blaspheme both the Queen and Calogrenant. Kay
is a medisant, that is, a stock figure of the courtly habitat who constantly trans-
gresses the code of true courtesy-or of courteous truth. However, Kay's verbal
anarchy only reinforces the obligation of the court to revalorize the institution
of courtly discourse, and for this reason his transgressions actually belong to the
customs of the court. As the Queen says of Kay, " 'It is his custom to speak
evil' " (" 'Costumiers est de dire mal,' " (1. 134). In other words, Kay dialecti-
cally defines those norms of courtesy that must prevail in the social group before
the world of romance fiction may become possible and true. Kay's verbal trans-
gressions instigate courtly narrative in the same way that the medisant's scandal-
mongering and mockery of fin'amor instigate the "true" courtly lyric song.21
Calogrenant goes on to tell a tale about himself that occurred long ago, hence,
belongs to history, yet one that has been previously concealed because it is "not
of his honor, but his shame" ('Won de s'enor, mes de sa honte," 1. 60). In a court
where nothing succeeds like stories of success, Calogrenant's tale is deficient,
not only in terms of its matiere, but even in those terms by which he himself
says his tale ought to be judged. Just as, for the dialectician, the processes of
inventing and of judging arguments are distinct, so too for Chretien and his hero
the processes of narrating and interpreting a story are distinct. Calogrenant does
not grasp, himself, the sens of the matiere that he exhorts his audience to grasp,
not with their ears, but with their hearts. Calogrenant does not see the connec-
tion in his own story between his failure as a potential lover of the vavasor's
beautiful and unwedded daughter, whose acquaintance he makes in a garden,
and his subsequent failure in chivalric combat with Esclados. Calogrenant has
not mastered the art of conjointure, whether as concrete exploit
narrative feats in verbis. Calogrenant is a bad poet, and he has put the domus
of chivalric romance in shambles. Calogrenant's audience, as well, is in sham-
bles: its King is absent, and the pure anarchy of medisance prevails. It is not
difficult to see an analogy between the fiasco of Calogrenant's narrative and the
"disjoined" state of courtly art that Chretien thinks he has inherited. Whenever
bad art becomes the subject of good art, the problem of critical understanding
becomes metacritical, and this shifting of priorities is very much characteristic
of the climate of hermeneutical debate that marked twelfth-century intellectual
life from Abelard onward.
Yvain, however, is galvanized by this story of shame, defeat and confusion,

10 D FROM GRAMMATICA TO A POETICS OF THE TEXT
and the young knight vows to bring the story to a new conclusion which will
restore the pre-scribed norms of "true" courtly narrative. We should note that
this untried knight does not, himself, create either the story in which he is about
to figure or his role in it: he inherits that story and he vindicates his role in it.
So too, the untried litteratus inherits his matiere from the past and "translates"
it into new monuments, not Greek or Roman, but French and "Christian" (that
is, both Christian, and by Chretien). As Chretien says in the prologue to Erec
et Enide:
Des or comancerai 1'estoire
qui toz jorz mes iert an mimoire
tant con durra crest'ientez;
de ce s'est Cresti'ens vantez.22
Right now, I shall begin the story, which will always endure in mem-
ory so long as Christianity endures: this is Chretien's boast.
Like Chretien is by his writing, so Yvain is by his deeds a remanieur of
courtly narrative, not only as it is produced, but also as it is received, for both
Chretien the writer and his story-making hero show that the invention and recep-
tion of art are distinct but also mutually determining processes. Yvain's first ges-
ture is to restore the code of courtly discourse: he silences Kay by declining to
argue with him on his own unworthy grounds: "He does not start a fight who
strikes the first blow, rather he who venges himself ("Que cil ne fetpas la mes-
lee, I Quifiert la premiere colee, I Ainz la fet cil, qui se revange" 11. 641-43)
When the King awakens from his unkingly sleep and returns to the assembly,
the Queen renarrates Calogrenant's story, though only, we are told, "word by
word" ("mot a mot" 1. 559) —that is, passively without interpreting it. Chretien
reflects, here, the schoolman's distinction between mere recitatores, who only
pronounce the words of their "author's" text, and interpretes, who "declare"
(declarant) the meanings of obscure things in their author's text. Although the
king is properly stirred by Guenevere's reporting of this defective tale and vows
to undertake Calogrenant's failed adventure (hence, to restore the norms of
courtly art), Yvain is so determined to make this quest his own that he decides
to set forth by himself, "whether for his joy or his grief ("Ou a sa joie ou a
son duel" 1. 694). Yvain already imagines himself as the new protagonist of
each event in the story that Calogrenant has just recounted (11. 695-722), though
he does not yet know whether his forthcoming poesis of this inherited tale will
bring honor or shame:
Mes il ne s'an quiert ja vanter,
Ne ja son vuel nus nel savra

FROM GRAMMATICA TO A POETICS OF THE TEXT D 11
Jusqu'a tant que il an avra
Grante honte ou grant enor cue,
Puis si soil la chose seiie.
(11. 718-22)
But he scarcely wants to boast, or that anyone should know his desire,
until he shall have earned great shame or great honor: then might the
thing be known.
We are witnessing, here, the transformation of a story as it passes through three
distinct phases: first, what "really happened" to Calogrenant; second, what
Calogrenant has told us about what happened; third, what Yvain imagines and
wants to happen—and Chretien surely expects his audience to observe here what
is occurring in his own process of narrative invention. Moreover, Chretien's
highlighting of two different psychic perspectives upon "what happened" —
Calogrenant's which is defective, Yvain's which is perfective—corresponds in
certain ways to Abelard's distinctions between the perception (sensus) of an ex-
isting thing (res) and the intellection (intellectio) of the thing, the latter being
arbitrary, susceptible to error, and proper to the life of the soul itself: "Just as
the meaning (sensus) of something is not the thing itself, neither is the intellec-
tion the form of the object conceived. It is, rather, a certain action of the soul,
thanks to which the soul is called intelligent, while the form that orients such
action is an imaginary and fictive thing (res imaginaria et quaedam est et field)
that the mind fabricates (conficit) when it wishes and as it wishes, such as thos
imaginary cities we see in our sleep or such as that form of a building that the
artisan conceives of when something is to be built."23
As heroes, respectively, of epic and romance, Roland and Yvain clearly do
not move in the same ontological landscape or think according to the same model
of mind. Roland's world is one of hierarchies, and ascendance is the ethical im-
perative of that world; and, with ascendance, comes the merger of individual
heroic will with that of a heroic God in whose belligerent image Roland wills
to fight. Yvain's world is primarily one of immanent, horizontal relationships be-
tween things and people, and a true perception and proper judgment of those
relationships here and now is a precondition of ethically responsible action. Like
Roland, Yvain is a creature of will; however, the sagesse represented externally
(and so tentatively) by Roland's friend (and subordinate) Oliver is now intrinsic
to the courtly heroic soul and must govern the life of that soul.
By defeating Esclados at the marvelous fountain and conquering the heart of
the dead knight's widow Laudine, Yvain succeeds in redressing Calogrenant's
previously defective conjointure of combat and love. Yvain is Chretien's coun-
terpart as a remanieur of courtly narrative, for he has made a story complete
or "perfect" in the medieval sense of that word.

12 D FROM GRAMMATICA TO A POETICS OF THE TEXT
However, Yvain's redeemed story calls for a redeemed audience, and Chre-
tien sees to it that justice is done on that score as well. When Arthur himself
appears in the forest of Broceliande to spill liquid from the basin onto the stone
by the marvelous fountain, now Yvain, rather than Esclados, appears as the
fountain's anonymous protector, and Kay is now his adversary in the joust.
Yvain easily puts medisance in its place (on the ground), yet Yvain is reluctant
to inflict any other punishment. The courtly world proves it is right whenever
it proves that Kay is wrong, and obviously the whole process of demonstrating
that Tightness is quite worthwhile:
Mes sire Yvains cop si puissant
Li dona, que par son la sele
A fet Keus la torneboele,
Et li hiaumes an terre fiert.
Plus d'enui feire ne li quiert
Mes sire Yvains
(11. 2254-59)
My lord Yvain gave him such a blow that Kay did a somersault over
his saddle, and his helmet hit the ground. My lord Yvain does not
want to harm him any more than this.
At the King's request, Yvain now narrates the fourth and final —and properly
courtly —version of his (and Chretien's) inherited tale. Arthur is now anything
but sleepy, and "covets" to hear about Yvain's adventure. Auctoritas, understood
as a dynamic but reasonable principle of cultural renewal, is alive and well, and
a new hero (Chretien) joins its ranks as Yvain flawlessly narrates his tale and
as the King invites the whole assembly (including Kay) to his lodging:
Onques de mot n'i antreprist,
Ne rien nule n'i oblia.
Et apres ce le roi pria
Que il et tuit si chevalier
Venissent o lui herbergier.
(1. 2300-2304)
Never did a word go astray, nor did he forget a single thing. And af-
ter that, the King prayed that he and all his knights come to lodge
with him.)
In sum, the opening segment of Yvain dramatizes, through the avanture of
the romance's titular hero, a writer's quest to achieve artistic excellence, and he
has done so by running the risk of making bad art into a subject of good art.
However, truth in good fiction was never a simple concept, nor was it ever com-

FROM GRAMMATICA TO A POETICS OF THE TEXT D 13
patible with troth that has not been severely tried. Chretien's bent was to explore
truth and troth together, and in doing so, to inculcate new depth and complexity
to both. Chretien's poetics of love is also a poetics of understanding. As we shall
see in the next chapter, Chretien drew broadly upon the intellectual resources
of his age to make one art as subtle as the other.

Chapter 2
De voir dire mot le conjure:
Dialectics and Fictive Truth
Chretien's romances express more than one hermeneutical concept pertaining to
the relationship between matiere, language, and truth, or, in more philosophical
terms, between things, words, and intellect. For this reason Chretien's art may
be seen as a crossroad of different epistemological trends in twelfth-century cul-
ture in general and in the discipline of grammatica in particular.
On the one hand, we find in his art the persistence of a conservative and fun-
damentally Augustinian hermeneutics, a mystical one to the extent that the per-
ception of truth was above all an operation of the charitable human will that is
rewarded by divine illumination. For instance, Calogrenant's claim that in order
to grasp the truth of his tale we must listen not only with our ears, but inwardly,
with our hearts as well, is strongly reminiscent of Augustine's theory that
spiritual understanding is imparted by God to humanity not through fleshly ears,
but through the inner "ears of the heart" (aures cordis, Confessions 1.5). For
Augustine, it is the human capacity for spiritual understanding that sets men and
women apart from the human as mere animal (homo animalis), the latter being
capable only of corporeal perception. Spiritual knowledge is bestowed by the
Holy Spirit upon the charitable soul. Charity is attained through will. It is plau-
sible to see Perceval's sinful refusal to ask the Grail's meaning in the castle of
the Roi Pescheor as a failure of will and charity in understanding. Such is the
tenor of the response of the hermit to whom Perceval has just confessed:
"Peschiefz] la langue te trencha
Quant le fer qui one n'estancha
14

DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH D 15
Se sainier devant toi vei's,"
Ne la raison n'en enqueis.
Et quant del graal ne seus
Cui Ten en sert, fol sens eiis."1
"Sin cut off your tongue when you saw before you the lance that never
stopped bleeding, and you did not ask its meaning. And when you did
not learn who is served from the grail, this was folly."
On the other hand, we discover in Chretien's romances a valorization of
knowing which is rational and dialectical, rather than volontaristic and mystical,
and which reflects an intrusion of dialectics upon grammatica and rhetoric.2
With dialectics came a more refined epistemological awareness of the difference
between things, perceptions of things produced by the senses, and notions of
things produced by the rational power of the intellect. Abelard writes thus:
The soul has different natures (vires'), corresponding to its different
powers. It is animating, feeling, and thinking. The animating power,
i.e. that it can animate the body and further its growth it has in com-
mon with the souls of plants and animals. The sensation it has in com-
mon only with the souls of animals. The sensation is a power of the
soul exercised only by organs of the body, e.g. feeling by touch, com-
mon to all animal souls, with the hand or other parts of the body, or
seeing with the eyes, and the other senses through other parts of the
body as if through windows. Where there is sensation, but not yet rea-
son, there may be imagination, but no notion because the notion is
quasi the effect of reason. Reason is the power of discernment, i.e. of
considering and deliberating something as existing in its specific nature
(quasi in aliqua natura vel proprietate consistens) when someone con-
siders a thing as a thing or as a substance, which is corporeal or sensi-
ble or coloured, or imagines (excogitare) it in its specific nature even
if it does not exist, like the goatstag or the morrow or the laughing
stone.3
Abelard is vehement, moreover, in denying that the forms of things that we
imagine have existence or that likenesses produced by the soul are identical to
the soul itself:
If anybody asks whethere these imaginary forms, through which we
have imagination or notion, are something, we say no. They are nei-
ther substances nor forms supported by substances: If, after I have
seen a tower, I remember it when it is not present or completely de-
stroyed, that immense, high, and quadrangular likeness which my
mind shapes, which takes form, so to speak, before the mind's eye, is
no substance and no form. . . . But someone will say . . . the in-
tellect itself is that likeness. But we do not accept this. The intellect,

16 D DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH
which is the form of the indivisible soul, cannot go beyond its object
so as to accomodate itself to the extent of all things or to transfigure
itself into all forms, nor can the soul. Therefore we maintain that these
images and likenesses of things which the mind creates for itself so
that it can contemplate the absent things, are nothing, (pp. 239-240)
Although grammar and dialectics had already begun to overlap by the middle
of the eleventh century, the early twelfth century was a period of massive in-
filtration of logic into grammar. For Hugh of St. Victor, the discipline of gram-
mar is a subcategory of logic, though he concedes that this classification is open
to question:
Logic is separated into grammar and the theory of argument (rationem
disserendi). The Greek word gramma means letter, and from it gram-
mar takes its name as the science of letters . . . There are those who
say that grammar is not a part of philosophy, but, so to say, an ap-
pendage and an instrument in the service of philosophy, just as the
foot, hand, tongue, eyes, etc., are at once the body's parts and its in-
struments. Grammar, simply taken, treats of words, with their origin,
formation, combination, inflection, pronunciation, and all things else
pertaining directly to utterance (pronuntiationem) alone. The theory of
argument is concerned with the conceptual content of words (de voci-
bus secundum intellectus). (Didascalicon 2.28, pp. 79-80)
Here is how J. Isaac describes the interaction between the disciplines in the first
half of the twelfth century:
Depuis le milieu du Xlle siecle de nombreux ecrits d'Aristote jusque-la
inconnus ou tout au moins laisses a 1'abandon, sont mis en circulation;
1'enseignement sur texte de la dialectique s'en trouve considerablement
elargi et les artiens voient s'ouvrir de nouveaux domaines leurs investi-
gations. Dans ces conditions, des que Ton possede avec la grammaire
les bases indispensables, on se lance a corps perdu dans la logique et
la philosophic en passant par-dessus la rhetorique, et Ton est de moins
en moins attire par les disciplines du quadrivium\ tout naturellement
aussi les Categories et le Peri hermeneias perdent la valeur qu'ils
tenaient de leur exclusivite et Ton cesse de recourir avec autant d'avi-
dite aux commentaires de Boece sur ces deux ouvrages.4
Since the mid-twelfth century, numerous of Aristotle's writings that
had been either unknown or ignored began to circulate. The teaching
of dialectics on the basis of a text became considerably more preva-
lent, and the the practitioners of the art found their investigations ex-
tended to new domains. In such circumstances, as soon as one ac-
quired the indispensible basics of grammar, one threw oneself
wholeheartedly into logic and philosophy, bypassing rhetoric. The at-
tractions of the quadrivium diminished more and more. Quite natu-

DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH D 17
rally, the Categories and the Peri hermeneias lost the value that they
had because of their exclusivity, and one turned less avidly to
Boethius's commentary on these two works.
According to R. W. Hunt, who has studied twelfth-century glosses on Priscian,
"This preoccupation with questions of logic is the distinguishing mark of the
early twelfth-century glossators. They were not engaged in teaching the rudi-
ments. They were addressing students who had mastered the elements and who
had made some progress in dialectic."5 Hunt accounts for the confluence of dis-
ciplines as follows:
Such an encroachment is easily understood, when we consider that
their two main sources, Priscian and Boethius, stimulated inquiry into
the logic of language, and that dialectical questions have never aroused
more passionate interest than at the time when these glosses were writ-
ten. Furthermore, the terminology of the two branches of study was
largely the same. Priscian uses the words substance and quality in his
definition of the noun, and speaks of the accidents of the various parts
of speech. It is not surprising that the early glossators were unsuccess-
ful in separating the grammatical and logical uses of such terms,
though they tried hard to do so. (pp. 22-23)
During this early period of convergence of grammar and logic, the use of liter-
ary illustrative quotations waned, and the purpose of grammatica ceased to be
primarily the study and imitation of the classical authors, even though the same
masters taught both exercises. Roughly at the same time that the Roland was
probably transcribed, a new concern arose among grammarians to understand
how the meanings of words determined each other in our utterances, that is, to
study the syntactic dimension of semantics. As G. L. Bursill-Hall puts it:
The generation of grammarians following Peter Helias achieved a syn-
thesis between logic in grammar and the study of classical authors;
such a synthesis was achieved in the study of syntax, and it is from
this time that the first independent treatises on syntax date. As early as
the second half of the 12th century we find separate treatises on syntax
and this became the outlet for the grammarian's interest in logical anal-
ysis. In this respect the work of Ralph of Beauvais is significant, since
it is in his work that the development of syntactic theory and the
renewal of the study of classical authors appears.6
At the same time, an interesting shift occurred in grammatical doctrine concern-
ing the epistemic function of verbal signs: language came to be seen by the
grammarian as an instrument, not of human will but of reason. Hunt observes
that

18 D DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH
Petrus Helias had said that the general cause of the invention of words
was that men might have a means of showing their will (uoluntas) to
one another. In the gloss Tria sunt this becomes "that we might have a
means of expressing our concepts (intellectus) and of showing them to
others." The significant change is the substitution of intellectus for
uoluntas, and the point of it is made plain by a passage in the gloss
Promissimus. The glossator says that in all conversation, that is in the
speech of one man to another, three things are necessary, a thing sup-
poned, a concept and a word-a thing so that there may be discourse
concerning it, a concept so that by it we may know the thing and a
word so that by it we may represent the concept, (pp. 32-33)
Such epistemological distinctions, now so easily made by grammarians, had
been impossible in the Roland, and that impossibility was a determining element
of the tragedy of that poem. Had Roland been less willfull and more reasonable,
his Chanson would never have existed. Hunt continues by claiming that with
Petrus Helias and with Ralph of Beauvais (who had come as a student from En-
gland to France by 1140), the boundaries between grammar and logic were once
again distinct, even though a logical intelligence persisted in the systematic ex-
ploration of syntax. Grammatica once again became responsive to poetry, and
new poetic examples began to be drawn by grammarians from the classical poets
and freely used along with the old. Surely the active recourse to Ovid by twelfth-
century grammarians contributed the new concern with structure and form in
courtly Ovidianism. According to Hunt, Ralph of Beauvais was widely known
as a man learned in profane as well as sacred letters and was still teaching gram-
mar in the 1180s (p. 50), hence, while Chretien was in his prime.
By the second half of the twelfth century, the logical corpus was abundant
and included translations of the whole of Aristotle's Organon, all of Cicero's and
Boethius's extant logical commentaries and writings, and also a properly medie-
val tradition of logical thought embodied in works by Augustine, Alcuin, John
Scot Eriugena, Garlandus Compotista, Anselm, and Abelard. Thus, Chretien
belonged to a culture whose intellectuals could confidently meet the classical lo-
gicians on their own terrain. It is surely no coincidence that on their side, ver-
nacular poets could now presume to welcome into their young language the great
poetic legends of classical antiquity as well —those of Thebes, Troy, Alexandria,
and Rome.7
Abelard describes the logician's venture thus:
In writing a logical treatise, this order must be followed: since argu-
ments are composed from a sequence of propositions, and since propo-
sitions are formed from words, he who writes thoroughly about logic
must begin with simple terms, then write about propositions, and then
complete his logic with arguments, according to the example of our
master Aristotle, who devoted his Categories to terms, his Peri her-

DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH D 19
meneias to propositions, and his Topics and Analytica to arguments.8
Surely the prospect of systematically combining words into propositions, and of
disposing propositions as valid arguments whose truth could pertain to reality,
yet be ontologically distinct from reality, was invaluable to a burgeoning poetics
of written vernacular fiction. For fiction, too, was a discourse whose textual ut-
terances could presume to reflect things that truly exist, yet whose truth could
be autonomous from what exists because such truth resided in the internal coher-
ence of the story itself.
When theories of the proposition diverge from the grammarian's conception
of the sentence as a mere "competent conjunction" (competens conjunctio) of
words or as a "complete construction" (constmctio perfecta), logic begins to
offer concepts and examples fecund to poets as "makers," not of arguments, but
of vernacular stories.9 If grammatica may be considered as the art of marshal-
ling signs into sentences whose Tightness does not depend on referring rightly,
logic may be seen as the art of marshalling sentences into a discourse whose
truth docs not depend on what "is," but upon their consignijying coherently: both
grammar and logic deal with language that is empty. Following Aristotle and
Boethius, Abelard held that a proposition is composed minimally of a noun and
a verb, and that the verb makes an assertion ("Socrates runs"). The two terms
forming a proposition correspond to an intellection, and they signify that in-
tellection before they signify things. As a combination of a noun and a verb, a
proposition is a predicative act whose object may be a single being, but one
thought about from different points of view and expressed by different terms.
The meaning of a proposition is therefore not reducible to its separate terms, but
signifies as a whole. A proposition's truth is neither wholly in the intellect nor
wholly in the thing intellected, but in between. Thus, a proposition expresses
a "something" that is not an existing thing (essentia), but a "sort of thing" (quasi
res), a "nothing at all" (nihil omnino), an "absolutely nothing" (nullam omnino
rem) (Jolivet, pp. 81-82). Because it does not exist, but is outside of being, the
meaning of a proposition escapes from the limits of material being; but what it
loses on the plane of ontology, it gains on the plane of logic. Hence, the formal
truth, but onto logical error, of the statement that if all men are birds and So-
crates is a man, Socrates is a bird. The whole mechanism of dialectical conse-
quences develops in a domain exterior to things and even to ideas (Jolivet, p.
84).
An argument is a discursive unit comprised of a sequence of propositions,
and, as Abelard defines it, is "something inducted rationally by dialectical
reasoning which brings faith to something doubtful, that is, to a proposition
about which there was doubt" (Jolivet, p. 138). A syllogism, for Abelard, is a
complete and perfect inference. An argument, however, is distinct from ar-

20 D DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH
gumentation: a physicist, Abelard says, makes arguments, but he learns the dis-
cipline of argumentation from the philosopher (Logica ingredientbus, p. 2).
If an argument is a sequence of propositions, so too, a kernel story is a dis-
crete discursive unit made up of a sequence of narrative statements or events.
Like a proposition, a narrative event is composed minimally of a noun and a
verb, with the verb predicating some perceived state or happening in time, some
"accident," and the truth of a series of consignificant, fictive events is inherent
to narrative discourse itself, and not to reality. An event expresses a relationship
between things that has been perceived or postulated by the mind of the narrator.
Both a proposition and a narrative statement reflect "happenings" which are
above all mental phenomena, in the root sense of that term (phanaein means "to
shine," "to appear"), in that they express "phantasies" or presentations of reality
to the mind. (The Aristotelian term for "proposition" was logos apophantikos or
apophansis.)10 It is worth noting that the impact of logic was accompanied by
a willingness, on the part of William of Conches, to redefine fabula not as the
realm of unbridled fantasy (as Cicero did, De inventione 1.19.27), but rather as
"whatever has been or can be construed in fiction" (omne illud quod confingitur
vel confingi potesi). Furthermore, William also gave maximal breadth to the no-
tion of argumentum, which he stated to mean "rational argument by which
doubtful things are proved," "fictive things which cannot occur," "brief sum-
maries of material," or else "metaphorical discourse" (quod nos similitude aliqua
arquit) (Glossae Super Macrobius, p. 69).
The fiction of romance is a sequence of avantures or "happenings" (or else,
"accidents," in the logical sense of that term). If an "event" (Old French, avene-
ment) demands a complete narrative "proposition" of subject plus verb, Chre-
tien's narrative propositions engage criteria of credibility or probability that ex-
ploit (or contest) criteria of necessity proper to modal logic as well. The narrator
himself often questions or defends such necessity in his story, and Chretien's
characters often exercise their judgment and act according to logical necessity
(or, just as importantly, conspicuously in defiance of it). Furthermore, what hap-
pens in Chretien's stories happens as much in his heroes as to them or by them,
which is to say that Chretien often fictionalizes, through his heroes, dilemmas
of perception and judgment that were also matters of concern to the logicians
of his time.11 There is, in short, a strongly hermeneutical dimension to Chre-
tien's notion of avanture, and this dimension is only reinforced whenever Chre-
tien transgresses or parodies laws of logical reasoning. In a recent book, Daniel
Poirion has described the different types of "marvelous" (le merveilleux) that
characterize the major vernacular genres of medieval literature, among them,
the marvelous of twelfth-century epic and romance.12 While in the Roland, the
marvelous corresponds to "an esthetics of force" (p. 20), the marvelous of ro-
mance is linked with the quest for sens or senefiance and even with the very pro-
cess of ecriture, understood as a pleasure in subtlety. (What Poirion calls ecri-

DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH D 21
ture, I am calling grammatica.) Speaking of Marie de France, Poirion says (pp.
64-65) that
1'auteur des Lais fait allusion a ces gloses des modernes qui rendent
aux texte "de leur sen le surplus" (Prologue, v. 16), et a 1'intelligence
des nouveaux ecrivains "plus . . . subtils de sens" (v. 20). Nous
avons la un systeme complexe: corite breton + sen de la glose + sens
de 1'ecriture. Mais pour bien le comprendre il faut le completer parce
qu'il y a avant et apres. Avant, dans un passe confus, le mythe archa-
i'que dont le conte, puis le recit romanes que gardent le souvenir frag-
mentaire. Apres, on a cet effet de lecture a quoi Ton attribue la
plaisance, et que nous pouvons rattacher au probleme du merveilleux.
(pp. 64-65)
The author of the Lais alludes to these glosses of the moderns which
give to the texts "the surplus of their meaning" (Prologue, 1. 16), to
the minds of new writers "more subtle meanings" (1. 20). We have
here a complex system: Breton tale + meaning of the gloss + mean-
ing of the text. But in order to understand it well, it must be com-
pleted by what came before and after. Before, there was a confused
past, an archaic myth that the tale, and then the romance narrative,
preserve as a fragmented memory. After, there comes the effect of
reading associated with pleasure and with the problem of the mar-
velous.
Poirion suggests, however cautiously, that the senefiance of the marvelous,
which is linked to the pleasure of the text, also rejoins the deep, hidden sub-
stance of the archaic myth. While I am in agreement with, and shall later extend,
Poirion's intuition, for now, I would add quite simply that the "marvelous" sub-
tlety of early romance ecriture constitutes itself specifically as a transgression
of the subtlety of logical reasoning, while exploiting it at the same time. 1 would
add, furthermore, that a similar tension marks the Tristan material as well: in
one instance, Iseut both lies by intention and tells the truth in fact when she
claims in her trial that no man but her husband and the leper who has carried
her across the stream on his shoulders (Tristan in disguise) were ever between
her thighs; and in a second instance, Iseut reasons logically about the identity
of the fool in Mark's court (again, Tristan in disguise). Moreover, Matilda T.
Bruckner has recently underscored the play of truth as fiction in the Tristan d'Ox-
ford as a reflection of that poem's status as a vernacular text.13 Like the Tristan
poets, Chretien seems concerned to assign epistemological limits to the claims
of logical truth in his fiction, that is, to show us that fiction can perfectly well
include logical necessities without being constrained by them. In short, if Chre-
tien was exposed, in his training as a young clerc, to the "logical" grammar of
his age, now a more worldly Chretien seems to want to reclaim, as the grammar-
ians were themselves beginning to do, the rights of poetic understanding, and

22 D DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH
it is within this dialectic of cultural imperatives that Chretien invents and deploys
his new marvelous.14
Although Chretien himself never makes known his thoughts about the rela-
tionship between narrative fiction and logic, within fifty years of his supposed
period of composition, a relationship between logical hermeneutics and modes
of narrative "truth" did become an active issue with the grammarian and rhetori-
cian John of Garland. Writing, probably between 1231 and 1235, John mentions
in his Parisiana poetria a broad category of "interpretive" narrative that is called
"hermeneutic" (ermeneticori). This includes all narrative that is alien to legal
causes and is of two basic types: "One is rooted in plot, the other in character."
The kind rooted in plot or structure has three species or parts, namely, fabula,
historia, and argumentum. A "fable," John says, "contains events that are untrue,
and do not pretend to be true; it follows that avoiding vice in fabulous narrative
means lying with probability, as it says in the An of Poetry." "A history," John
continues, "reports an event which has taken place long before the memory of
our age." The third term, argumentum, is more elusive. I am not satisfied, for
example, by the term "realistic fiction" which is Traugott Lawler's way of trans-
lating it, for it insists too much on a notion of narrative truth as an effect of the
mimetic. The definition of argumentum, though it certainly implies a sense of
the probable, seems to suggest that a plot is probable when it is architectonically
or formally coherent, that is, structured, just as an argument must be logically
structured in order to be (probably) correct or true. Argumentum, according to
John, is something constructed (resficta), "which nevertheless could have hap-
pened, as in the case of comedies. And no invocation should be made in a
comedy, except for an insoluble complication in the plot . . . That is, a god
shold not be called on unless an insoluble complication develops."15
Chretien's much discussed term conjointure expresses, then, a syntagmatic
notion of truth lacking in traditional epic, a sense that, like terms in a proposi-
tion, things and events not only signify, but consignify, which is to say that their
significations become mutually determining in narrative discourse. Many critics
have sought the implications of conjointure in classical and medieval treatises
on rhetoric and poetics in order to account for Chretien's virtuosity as an ar-
chitect of narrative form. However, the classical writers are not very illuminat-
ing on this subject. Quintilian, for example, considers "conjoined discourse"
(sermo coniunctus) as stylistic continuity or else as the systematic exploitation
of figures of thought (translatio),(Institutio oratoria 8.3.40). Critics have not
had any better results with twelfth-century rhetorical treatises. Douglas Kelly
writes that "the treatment of invention and disposition seemed to most critics
completely inadequate; here the authors had very little to say of real sig-
nificance. That they say little is certainly true; and, as the same scholars found
in studying the arts of poetry, their instruction is not very inspired or inspir-
ing."16 Although Chretien underwent enormous influence of rhetorical theory in

DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH D 23
the area of tropes and figures, as Peter Haidu and others have shown, I suggest
that his poetic technique in Yvain was so innnovative in questions of structure
and form because his most fecund models came more from logic than from rhet-
oric.17 John of Garland, writing after Chretien, was less of a theoretician on this
score, then, than an observer of literary fails accomplis. In short, if twelfth cen-
tury rhetoric is strong in dealing with all of those figural resources of speech that
exploit and amplify the inherent equivocity of conventional signs, the goals of
twelfth-century logic are quite opposite: logic teaches us how to overcome the
radical equivocity of conventional signs and to utter truths that are univocal, dis-
tinct, necessary, and permanent. One science of discourse is centrifugal, play-
ful, relativistic, opportunistic, and subversive; the other is centripetal, serious,
totalizing, constant, and recuperative. Both forces exert themselves wholly
within the order of discourse itself, at the expense of the myth of referentiality,
and the tension between them is an important constituant of twelfth-century ver-
nacular poetics.
Chretien's interest in the actual process of dialectical reasoning is evident al-
ready in Erec et Enide, for at one point in that romance such reasoning enters
into the dramatic action of his characters. When Erec defeats Yder, the knight
who had insulted Guenevere at the beginning of the romance, Erec orders his
captive to precede him back to Arthur's court as a sign announcing that a victory
has occurred. Guenevere and Gawain watch Yder's approach from a window,
and the window accentuates the opposition between inner and outer, between ob-
jects perceived and the understanding of objects —an opposition that Abelard
also metaphorized as a "window," as we saw before. When existing things are
perceived, they become signs, and such signs become equivocal when they enter
the intellect, as do words as signs. Chretien interrupts the trajectory of his story
in order to highlight the interpretation of Yder's equivocal approach: has Erec
venged Guenevere by defeating Yder? or has Yder defeated Erec? Erec has
deliberately created what we may call a hermeneutical situation, one where in-
terpretation becomes heroic action in its own right. Formally speaking, the ques-
tion that Guenevere and Gawain ponder is what Abelard called a questio quae-
rens, that is, an interrogative proposition that is really composed of two
contradictory propositions where there is doubt as to which one is true (Jolivet,
p. 192). This is an exercise in probable argumentation, as opposed to the demon-
strative or sophistical:
Lors s'est la rei'ne esmeiie
as fenestres s'an est venue,
lez mon seignor Gauvain s'estut;
le chevalier molt bien conut:
"Hai'l fet ele ce est il.
Molt a este an grant peril;

24 D DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH
conbatuz s'est. Ce ne sai gie,
se Erec a son duel vangie
ou se cist a Erec vaincu,
mes molt a cos an son escu;
ses haubers est coverz de sane,
del roge i a plus que del blanc.
— Voir est, fet mes sire Gauvains;
dame, je sui trestoz certains
que de rien nule ne mantez:
ses haubers est ansanglantez,
molt est hurtez et debatuz;
bien pert que il s'est conbatuz;
savoir poons, sanz nule faille,
que forz a este la bataille.
Ja li orrons tel chose dire
don nos avrons ou joie ou ire,
ou Erec 1'anvoie a vos ci
an prison an vostre merci,
ou s'il se vient par hardemant
vanter antre nos folemant
qu'il a Erec vaincu ou mort.
Ne cuit qu'autre novele aport."
Fet la reine: "Je le cuit."
— Bien puet estre", ce die'nt tuit.
(11. 1137-1165)
The the queen became stirred and came to the window and stood by
my lord Gauvain; she recognized the knight very well: "Ah!" she said,
"it's he! He has been through great danger; he has fought. I do not
know whether Erec has avenged his grievance or whether this man has
vanquished Erec, but his shield has taken many blows; his hauberk is
covered with blood. There is more red on it than white." "True," said
my lord Gauvain; "lady, I am very certain that you are in no way ly-
ing: his hauberk is bloody, very dented and beaten in. It is very obvi-
ous that he has fought, and we may infer without the least error that
the battle was hard. Surely what we will hear will bring joy or grief:
either Erec sends him here to you to be the prisoner of your mercy, or
else he comes in arrogance to boast foolishly amongst us that he has
defeated Erec to the death. I do not believe there can be any other
outcome." The queen said, "I believe it." "It may well be," they all
said.

DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH D 25
Although this hermeneutical episode staged by Erec and decoded by Guene-
vere and Gawain is not indispensable to Chretien's plot, and although the answer
to their quaestio comes not in the form of inferences drawn by them, but from
the logic of the story itself, such speculations by characters about events as they
unfold in the story of their world call attention to the kind of cognitive efforts
that Chretien demands of his own audience. If we compare this moment to that
in the Roland where Charlemagne and the Franks hear and interpret Roland's
horn, we see that a considerable shift has occurred in modalities of heroic con-
sciousness: for Charlemagne, truth in external events is something intuitively
recognized; for Guenevere and Gawain, truth must be rationally deduced.
In Yvain, epidsodes of dialectical thinking become pivotal, by which I mean
that conclusions dialectically founded by characters both figure in and determine
the course of events that make up the plot. A much discussed case in point is
Laudine's dispute with herself as to whether she may love the knight who has
just slain her husband. The question is emotionally charged, to say the least, and
Laudine must first discipline her emotions, as Lunette bids, so as to deal with
it rationally. Psychology is momentarily subordinated to reason, as the exercise
of logic demands. During Yvain's imagined "trial," a sequence of logical opera-
tions transpire in Laudine's mind which radically alter his status in the world,
and these may be summarized as follows. If ladies love knights for their valor,
valor is not a substance, but an accident that may be in many substances. There-
fore valor did not die with Esclados. Moreover, since accidents (unlike sub-
stances) are relative, and admit "more" or "less," if Erec beat Esclados, he is
relatively more valorous than Esclados was.18 Since Esclados would have killed
Yvain if Esclados had won, Yvain committed no grievance when he killed Es-
clados. If he committed no grievance against Esclados, he certainly had no inten-
tion to commit a grievance against the person of Laudine. Thus, Laudine
"proves" to herself that she has no right to despise Yvain. Once this logical ques-
tion has been resolved, the greater necessity of passionate love quickly supplants
the lesser necessity of modal reasoning, and the plot speeds on:
Si le desresne tot einsi,
Con s'il fust venuz devant li,
Lors si comance a pleidoiier:
"Va!" fet ele, "puez tu noiier
Que par toi ne soil morz mes sire?"
"Ce", fet il, "ne puis je desdire,
Ainz 1'otroi ben."—"Di done, por quoi?
Fei's le tu por mal de moi,
Por haine ne por despit?"
"Ja n'aie je de mort respit,
Si onques por mal de vos le fis."

26 D DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH
"Done n'as tu rien vers moi mespris,
Ne vers lui n'eiis tu nul tort;
Car, s'il poist , il t'eiist mort.
For ce mien esciant cuit gie
Que j'ai bien et a droit jugie."
Einsi par li mei'smes prueve
Que droit, san et reison i trueve,
Qu'an lui hai."r n'a ele droit.
(11. 1757-75)
Thus she debates, as if he were before her, and she begins to plead:
"Now," she says, can you deny that my lord was killed by you?"
"This," he says, "I cannot deny; thus, I clearly grant it." "Tell me,
then, why? Did you do it to harm me, out of despite or hatred?" "May
death never spare me if ever I did it to harm you." "Therefore, you
did nothing to harm me, nor did you wrong him, for, had he been
able, he would have killed you. It seems to me that I judged well and
rightly." Thus by herself she proves that il is right, sensible, and just
that she has no right to despise him.
Although Laudine exclaims afterward that she would like to remain in Lu-
nette's "school," the purity and objectivity of her logic are of course questiona-
ble. At a time when logicians themselves were careful to discriminate between
logic and rhetoric, surely Chretien was aware that Laudine is using logic rhetori-
cally here that is, with a particular end in view.
If Chretien keeps an ironic perspective upon logic as an instrument of pure
reason (or, by extension, of justice), he does not denounce it. Indeed, Chretien
seems eager at times to dispose the resources specific to romance narrative in
such a way as to emulate the formal methods of dialectics. Near the end of
Yvain, two close friends, Yvain and Gawain, are unknowingly brought by the
force of circumstances into combat with each other, and Chretien asks dialecti-
cally whether it is possible that such enemies who hate each other may still be
said to love each other as friends:
"Oil" vos respong et "nenil."
Et 1'un et 1'autre proverai,
Si que reison i troverai."
(11. 6002-4)
"Yes," I reply, and "no." And I will prove both one and the other, and
will find the argument for it."
Surely Chretien was aware that he was raising a venerable question —that of
the possibility of contraries coexisting in a single substance —a question that was

DIALECTICS AND FICTIVE TRUTH D 27
a matter of active debate among the logicians of his time (Jolivet, p. 110). More-
over, Chretien's boast that he will "find" the argument (reison i troverai) is an
index of his awareness of dialectical topical theory, understood as the method
for either "finding" or judging arguments. (We shall deal with topical theory and
its bearing upon Chretien's narrative shortly.) Chretien dispels his own apparent
logical contradiction by explaining that Yvain and Gawain do truly love each
other, but that they are now prepared to destroy each other because they do not
know that they are adversaries in battle. Their love and hatred are not contraries
because they result from separate causes. Having "proved" the "marvel" that
Love and Hatred are simultaneously involved in the joust between the two
knights, Chretien so relishes his own capacity to argue that he dialectically ques-
tions what he has just "proved," and at the same time initiates an analogy which
allows him to reformulate his question more sharply:
Par foi, c'est mervoille provee
Qu'an a an un veissel trovee
Amor et Hai'ne mortel.
Deus! mei'smes an un ostel
Comant puet estre le repeires
A choses, qui si sont contreires?
A un ostel, si con moi sanble,
Ne pueent eles estre ansanble.
(11. 6021-28)
In faith, it's a proven marvel, that we have found Love and mortal Ha-
tred in a single vessel. Lord! How can a single house lodge two things
that are so contrary? It seems to me that they cannot be together in
one house.
Chretien's recourse to the analogy of the house as an "integral whole" with
separate parts allows him to answer the question that he has just raised:19 a hu-
man soul is like a building with several different rooms, he says, and while Love
remains concealed in one of them, Hatred may choose to manifest itself on one
of the balconies. Such rational distinctions can only seem very rudimentary to
us, and Chretien's analogy —or what logicians called adjuncta — is by scholastic
standards a modest one; but we must see such poetic gestures as part of an im-
portant interdiscursive process which both liberated poetic narrative from the
obsolete epistemological constraints of epic (at least as that genre is exemplified
by the Roland) and opened vernacular poetic narrative up to the possibility of
far more ambitious intellectual constructions, as embodied, for example, in the
Roman de la Rose and the Divine Comedy.

Chapter 3
Selfhood and Substance in Erec et Enide
The play of oxymoron and of thematic opposition is a strong feature of Chre-
tien's narrative art, as it is of all courtly poetry. However, whenever Chretien
indulges conspicuously in a poetic convention,we may expect that he does so
with a lucid artistic strategy in mind. Chretien is not only a writer who experi-
ments whenever he writes, but also one who draws his audience into the pro-
cesses of invention and understanding, both through intrusions of the narrative
voice into his stories and through dramatizations of the life of the mind in his
fictive heroes.
In the case of oxymoron, Chretien is clearly aware that dialectical debate is
one formal strategy for expressing and yet of enclosing and mastering the provo-
cations of the impossible in a framework of narrative whose closure arrests the
anarchies of language and desire and points ultimately to a vision of harmonious
presence of the universe to itself. However, I would suggest that the most impor-
tant contributions of dialectics to Chretien's technique and vision as an artist are
to be found not at the verbal surface of contrary opinions dividing a single
character's soul or of passionate dialogue between two characters, but rather at
far more fundamental levels of perception, by both Chretien and his characters,
of a complex world of equivocal actions, things, and events.
Among the elementary preoccupations of twelfth-century logicians to become
most fecund for narrative poets as well was the rational necessity of discriminat-
ing between substances and accidents. Such a distinction enabled poets such as
Chretien and Marie de France to conceive of human identity in terms quite
different from those manifested earlier by the heroes of the Chanson de Roland.
28

SELFHOOD AND SUBSTANCE IN EREC ET ENIDE O 29
There, heroic identity does not admit change, but may fulfill itself only by adher-
ing to an a priori paradigm of the ideal self and its external obligations, as deter-
mined by kinship, friendship, custom and oath.1 In such an ethical system,
change or inconstancy is tantamount to treason. Heroic judgment in the present
must remain subordinate to memory, which is the throne of truth in a duteous
man's soul.
For Chretien, by contrast, change within the self is both possible and neces-
sary in a world which, itself, is also changing.2 A change of heart can lead to
truly heroic action.
Apparently in advance of the return of Aristotelian psychological theory to
the intellectual program of the twelfth century, a renewal of philosophical specu-
lation about the distinction between substances and accidents among logicians
in the late twelfth century brought to poets, as well, a new apprehension of the
problem of humans as creatures with a dynamic consciousness dwelling in a dy-
namic world. In his Categories, which was part of the Old Logic (hence, one
of Aristotle's most widely read and assimilated logical treatises), Aristotle says
that primary substances (individual human souls, by the way, are primary sub-
stances) may exhibit contradictory aspects, for "what is most characteristic of
substance appears to be this: that, although it remains, notwithstanding, numeri-
cally one and the same, it is capable of being the recipient of contrary qualifica-
tions. Of things that are other than substance we could hardly adduce an example
possessed of this characteristic . . . One and the same individual at one time
is white, warm or good, at another time black, cold or bad" (p. 31).
Such a conception of substance was thoroughly elaborated upon by Abelard
in his gloss on the Categories and also in his Dialectica, which, as it stands, be-
gins with an attempt to define and describe substances and which maintains
Aristotle's claim as to the capacity of substances to receive contraries (Jolivet,
pp. 110-11). Some logicians (but not Abelard) held that if humans may be said
to exist as individual substances, it is through their accidents (which are also in-
dividual) that subjects become individuals distinct from their genus and species:
"Socrates is defined by his accidents"3 Substances never have contraries, nor are
they comparable, nor do they admit degree into their being. What is substantial
is said of a subject; what is accidental is in a subject. A subject "changes in it-
self." As Aristotle says, "For whenever a substance admits of such contrary
qualifications, it is by a change in itself. It is by a change in itself that a thing
that was not becomes cold (having passed from one state to another) or a thing
that was white becomes black or a thing that was good becomes bad."4
Although the Categories deals with the distinction between substance and ac-
cident, the real emphasis of that text is the proper knowledge of accidents. As
Abelard writes, "Who can doubt whether the knowledge of accident belongs to
the categories, since nine categories out often concern only accidents?" (Glossae
super Porphyrium, p. 6). To define a thing is to deal with it as a substance; to

30 D SELFHOOD AND SUBSTANCE IN EREC ET EN1DE
describe a thing is to deal with accidents. If accidents may be said to "happen"
(accidere', Old French, avenir), then Arthurian romance is an art of the
accident—avanture — which "happens" to or in a noble primary substance, for in-
stance, a knight who now fights and now loves. A heightened concern with those
multiple accidents by which a single being may be said to inhabit the physical
world marks Chretien as a modemus, in the twelfth-century sense of the term:
that is, someone concerned not only with truth and morality, but also with
knowledge of the natural world.5
Questions concerning the inevitability and even the ethical necessity of ac-
cidental change within the individual subject are especially central to Erec et
Enide, Yvain, and Perceval, though the specific terms of Chretien's apprehen-
sion of the problem modulate from romance to romance. In Erec et Enide, which
is the story of a young knight who gives himself first to the art of combat and
then to the art of love, Chretien implicitly raises this question: does individual,
heroic honor preclude change? or is change not necessary to honor? In other
words, is Erec's honor as a warrior diminished by his ardor in love? Can Erec
be an ardent lover and remain a good warrior at the same time?
Such questions involve more than the nature of heroic identity in romance;
they implicate the very language and form of romance narrative itself. The lexi-
con of courtly erotic discourse tends to constitute itself as oxymorons whose
common denominator is the binary pair joie/dolor.6 These two sentiments cor-
respond to the soul's two basic passions, concupiscentia and ira, desire and
wrath, which constitute men's appetitive faculties and whose proper social
manifestations ideally take the forms of courteous love and chivalric combat.7
Chretien's task as a creator of narrative form is to "invent" a coherent story
where antinomies of language, mind, and heroic action are fully expressed and
"conjoined," rather than mutually suppressed.
Chretien experiments artistically with these fundamental questions about hu-
man identity in several different modes in the Erec, and as he does so, his appre-
hension of the questions themselves deepens. In the first major segment of the
romance, which extends from Erec's departure on the quest of revenge upon the
discourteous knight to his marriage with Enide, Erec deals with the problem of
accidental change largely in terms of extrinsic social roles.
The romance opens with Arthur's revival of the custom of the hunt of the
White Stag and the giving of a kiss by the victor in the field to the most beautiful
lady of the court. This social ritual deals with the basic problem of ensuring the
possibility of social mobility among the nobility while maintaining order within
this process of change. At a time when social classes, including both the nascent
bourgeoisie and the nobility, were becoming defined less and less by their func-
tions within the body politic and more and more by strict judicial terms, the
problem of social mobility was obviously becoming a crucial one. It is interest-
ing that Chretien should insist precisely upon an ancient custom such as the hunt

SELFHOOD AND SUBSTANCE IN EREC ET ENIDE D 31
of the White Stag as a means of promulgating, rather of than stifling, social
change.8 Ancient custom, like the ancient texts of the auctores, is seen by Chre-
tien, as a resource that both binds and renews the social order, a paradox of
twelfth-century modernity that would repeat itself even more dramatically in the
Renaissance revivals of classical and Jewish antiquity.
Because Arthur is bound by feudal custom, the hunt of the White Stag must
take place. But Arthur is unswerving in his commitment to that custom. Gau-
vain, however, is less committed to custom than Arthur and perhaps less vision-
ary as well, and he voices strong resistance to change and a preference for the
status quo for fear of total anarchy:
"Sire, fet il, de ceste chace
n'avroiz vos ja ne gre ne grace.
Nos savomes bien tuit piece a
quel costume li blans cers a:
qui le blanc cerf ocirre puet
par reison beisier li estuet
des puceles de vostre cort
la plus bele, a que que il tort.
Maus an puet avenir molt granz,
qu'ancor a il ceanz .vc.
demeiseles de hauz paraiges,
filles de rois, gentes et sages;
n'i a nule qui n'ait ami
chevalier vaillant et hardi
dont chascuns desresnier voldroit,
ou fust a tort ou fust a droit
que cele qui li atalante
est la plus bele et la plus gente."
(11. 41-58)
"Sir," he said, "you will gain neither pleasure nor thanks from this
hunt. We all know the custom of the White Stag: whoever kills the
White Stag must therefore kiss the most beautiful maiden of your
court, no matter whom he offends. But great harm can come of this,
since there are five hundred damsels here of high mark, daughters of
kings, nobles, and wise men, and there is not one of them who does
not have a valiant and hardy knight as her lover, and each will want to
assert, rightly or wrongly, that she who attracts him is the most beau-
tiful and the most noble."
That Arthur should acknowledge and even welcome passion as the primary mo-
tive of social change sets him ethically apart from the legacy of Virgilian epic,

32 D SELFHOOD AND SUBSTANCE IN EREC ET ENIDE
where passion is seen to destroy city after city in a pattern of cyclical violence.
Chretien's debt to Virgil as an artist was large, but ethically the two poets are
at opposite poles, at least with regard to questions of passion and change in the
human soul. If Virgil never acknowledged a standard of human behavior which
included sexual passion, Ovid, on his side, could only celebrate—or even
vaunt—sexual passion as a splendid but anarchic force in the cosmos.
The Chretien of Erec and of Yvain is not, in this sense, more "Ovidian" than
"Virgilian," but is rather closer to the platonism of his own time, especially that
of the Chartrians Bernard Sylvester and Alain de Lille, who acknowledged sex-
ual passion as that force by which Nature succeeds herself in the process of being
as becoming.9
When Erec is received by an impoverished vavasor, who is Enide's father and
his future father-in-law, we are invited to ponder the relationship between a
man's intrinsically noble identity (or substance) and mere accidents of wealth or
poverty. Erec later himself explains before the court, to which he has brought
this impoverished but lovely maiden, that the vavasor's nobility is perfectly in-
tact, even if his fortune is not:
"D'un povre vavasor est fille:
povretez mainz homes aville;
ses peres est frans et cortois,
mes d'avoir a molt petit pois."
(11. 1539-42)
"She is the daughter of a poor vavasor. Poverty lays low many a man;
but her father is free and courteous, even though he possesses very
little."
That the vavasor's daughter Enide is also of noble and potentially queenly sub-
stance is confirmed not only by the bestowal of the kiss of the White Stag upon
her by Erec, but also by Guenevere's gesture of giving her a dress —not an old
one, Chretien specifies, but one that is "fresh and new" (11. 1564-66).
But these are are only accidents of Enide's personal condition, and Chretien
is eager enough to insist upon the substantial or "natural" nobility of Enide (as
opposed to its accidental manifestations) to summon Enide's parents to the atten-
tion of Arthur, who confirms Enide's pedigree: she is beautiful, he deems, but
this is because of her beautiful lineage:
— "Certes done puis je tres bien dire
que molt doit estre bele et ente
la flors qui ist de si bele ante,
et li fruiz miaudres qu'an i quiaut,
car qui de boen ist, soef iaut.

SELFHOOD AND SUBSTANCE IN EREC ET ENIDE D 33
Bele est Enyde, et bele doit
estre, par reison et par droit,
que bele dame est molt sa mere,
biau chevalier a en son pere."
(11. 6556-64)
"Certainly, then, may I say that the flower that has sprung from such a
graft must surely be beautiful and noble, and the fruit must be the best
that can be gathered, for what springs from something good will itself
smell sweetly. Enide is beautiful, and must be beautiful, both by na-
ture and by law, for her mother is a very beautiful woman, and she
has, in her father, a beautiful knight."
Clearly, the opening segment of Erec Enide promulgates an ethos where a
new ideology of change and exchange was being brought to bear upon an older
(but not simple or complacent) concept of heroic honor based exclusively on
traits of constancy and prowess. We may measure the difference between this
new ethics and the old one by comparing the semantic range of the word bel in
epic and romance.10 In the Roland the word bel is extremely limited in semantic
range. If we put aside its occurrences as an honorific term of address ("bel sire"),
bel is almost without exception invoked to praise weapons, violent gestures, and
warlike appearances. The Saracens, seeing the approach of Charlemagne's
army, make the following observation:
Li emperere i fait suner ses greisles
E 1'olifan, ki trestuz les eclairet.
Dient paien: "La gent Carlun est bele.
Bataille avrum e aduree e pesme." AOL
The Emperor orders his trumpets to sound, and the olifant, which fills
the air with brightness. The pagans say, "Charles's army is beautiful:
We will have a battle that will be hard and painful."
Beauty in this older ethic is practically a synonym for raw force—or else, for
the social status conferred by force. One exception to this generality is the allu-
sion to Roland's fiancee Aude as a bele damisele (1. 3708), but such beauty has
as its sole gesture of expression Aude's falling down dead when she hears the
news of Roland's death at Ronceval. Such "beauty" is a mere analogue of male
chivalric fanaticism. In Erec et Enide (as we see in the passage just quoted),
feminine beauty not only exists in its own right, but has fully amplified modes
of proving itself. For, if Aude heroically gives up her life for love of her dead
lord, Enide by contrast, gives up only her virginity and is renewed by this happy,
accidental change in her condition:

34 D SELFHOOD AND SUBSTANCE IN EREC ET EN1DE
De 1'amor qui est antr'ax deus
fu la pucele plus hardie:
de rien ne s'est acoardie,
tot sofri que qu'il li grevast,
envois qu'ele se relevast,
ot perdu le non de pucele;
au matin fu dame novele.
(11. 2048-54)
In the love that was between them, the maiden was the bolder of the
two. She was afraid of nothing: she suffered all, no matter what the
consequences. Thus, before she arose she had lost the name of virgin:
in the morning she was a new woman.
Moreover, the consummation of love between Erec and Enide unleashes, as
well, a flood of remunerations and gift-giving in the world around them: in an
Arthurian court surpassing those of Alexander and Caesar, jouissance does re-
new the social order and bring abundance, even to vernacular jongleurs! Here
is translatio at its very best:
Ce jor furent jugleor lie
car tuit furent a gre paie:
tot fu randu quanqu'il acrurent,
et molt bel don done lor furent:
robes de veir et d'erminetes,
de conins et de violets,
d'escarlate, grise ou de soie;
qui vost cheval, qui volt monoie,
chascuns ot don a son voloir
si boen com il le dut avoir.
(11. 2055-64)
That day, jongleurs rejoiced, for they were all payed to their satisfac-
tion. Everything was given that was owed, and very beautiful gifts
were given to them: robes of grey fur and of ermine and rabbit, and
of violet, scarlet, and grey colors, or of silk. Whoever deserved a
horse, whoever wished money, each had a gift as he wished, accord-
ing to what he should have.
If Chretien is an astute proponent of dynamism within the social order, his
bent for exploring the inner dynamism of the soul is equally strong. Thus, fol-
lowing the marriage between Erec and Enide, his story moves away from the
social sphere and more into the psychological. And, the more Chretien explores
the life of the mind, the more he tends to exploit logical dilemmas in order to

SELFHOOD AND SUBSTANCE IN EREC ET ENIDE D 35
highlight events of the soul, even though such dilemmas are expressed through
carefully contrived narrative episodes, rather than logical arguments.
The question that Chretien addresses in the middle portion of Erec et Enide
is profound: can love between two individuals subsist when accidental changes
of behavior occur which cannot, themselves, be loved? After his marriage with
Enide, Erec becomes overindulgent in love, at the expense of his chivalry, and
Enide reports to him the malevolent rumors about him that are circulating among
the medisants of the court. Erec wrongly doubts Enide's love for him, and in
order to test her loyalty he forces her to accompany him on a quest during which
he commands her to remain silent, no matter what should occur. Each time that
Erec is about to be attacked by an enemy unseen except by her, Enide must de-
cide whether or not to speak out—and speak out she does.
Assuming that most readers will grasp a basic "rightness" in Enide's behavior,
such a judgment on our part (as on hers) involves two implict logical operations.
First, we are invited to discriminate between human identity as individual sub-
stance and accidents which occur in or to that substance. Erec himself, of
course, cannot yet make such a discrimination, so he assumes that the disloyal
feelings among his knights that Enide reports to him are signs of her own
disloyalty—hence, signs of a radical change in her nature. Out of Erec's cogni-
tive inadequacy a good story is born. We, of course, know that Erec is mistaken
in his judgment of Enide and that his own behavior toward her is an accident
to be deplored, all the more since Enide's womanly obedience to Erec's com-
mand would both harm him and help his enemies. By disobeying Erec's unjust
command, Enide is not being disloyal to Erec as an individual subject, but is
only disregarding an improper accident that has beset that subject.
Secondly, we must see that Enide needs to solve the problem of identifying
and understanding true contraries before she can act responsibly. Aristotle deals
systematically with this logical problem in his Peri hermeneias and his Topics,
Cicero touches on it in his own Topica 11.47, and Abelard elaborates upon it
in his commentary on the first Aristotelean text. When contrary attributes bear
upon two different subjects, we are told, these attributes do not necessarily retain
their relationship of contrariety. In Topics, 2.7, Aristotle discusses the problem
of properly construing contraries when contrary accidents bear upon two sub-
jects, and Aristotle specifically discusses relationships between the pairs
friend/enemy and help/harm: to harm a friend is clearly the contrary of helping
a friend, but to harm an enemy is not the contrary of helping a friend. In short,
for Enide to be disloyal to Erec's command of silence is quite proper on two
scores: first, as I have said, her disloyalty is not to him as subject, but only to
his accidental disposition; second, if she were to remain silent, she would not
help him, rather she would help his enemy. Helping an enemy is the true con-
trary of helping a friend, so Enide's love quite rightly dictates that she help Erec
by speaking instead of harming him by remaining silent.

36 D SELFHOOD AND SUBSTANCE IN EREC ET ENIDE
Such distinctions were of course beyond Roland at Ronceval, when, out of
loyalty to Charlemagne (and against Oliver's more logical advice), he blindly
obeyed Charlemagne's command to defend the rearguard and refused to summon
help. When the complexities of logical thought began to infiltrate literature, the
path to true honor suddenly involved a new necessity for heroes to make deci-
sions based on the proper exercise of judgment. It would be silly to claim that
Chretien needed to be thoroughly Aristotelean (obviously, he was not) in order
to be attracted to the complexities of human reason, any more than a modern
writer must be a devout Freudian systematically to explore a hero's unconscious,
but it would be equally silly to deny that Aristotle (through Abelard) and Freud,
each in a different epoch, radically altered the priorities of human perception as
expressed in literature.11
If Enide (and the reader) must learn to discriminate between true loyalty to
a person and loyalty which is only apparent because it is determined by change-
able accidents of a person's extrinsic being rather than by that person's sub-
stance, Erec too must learn a similar lesson, even though, because of difference
of sex, the two protagonists of Erec et Enide have different roles and espouse
different modes of action. As a knight, Erec must dispel by deeds of martial
prowess the doubts that have arisen in the court about the state of his chivalry,
as well as doubt that has arisen in his own mind about his wife's loyalty; Enide,
whose "victory" on her wedding night was achieved in a skirmish of a less mar-
tial sort, must prove her steadfastness in love by warring against temptations of
adultery and of wealth, in particular, against the sexual and social aggressions
of the Count Oringle de Limors. The Count chances upon Enide and her seem-
ingly dead husband in the forest and, captivated by her beauty, spontaneously
offers her the privileges of high estate if she will marry him. Enide spontane-
ously refuses. Pressing to win her favor, Oringle promises an honorable burial
for Erec and brings the couple to his domain in Limors. He summons his chap-
lain and commands him to marry them, without Enide's consent: "si li ont a force
donee, I car ele molt le refusd" ("they gave her to him by force, for she fully
refused him," 11. 4732-33). When Enide rejects the Count's renewed promise
of high estate in exchange for her resignation to her imposed role of spouse, the
Count beats her before the assembly of his knights, who are both appalled by
his brutality and sympathetic to her loyalty to Erec even in widowhood. The
Count, however, claims her as his property and proclaims himself as her master:
" 'la dame est moie et je sui suens, I si ferai de li mon pleisif " (" The lady is
mine and I am hers; thus I will do with her what I please,' " 11. 4800-4801). Pre
cisely when Enide vows defiance of the Count to the very death, Erec miracu-
lously revives from his faint and slays the Count, whereupon the couple is joy-
ously reunited. Chretien is the first vernacular narrator to use simultaneity —
temporal conjuncture —as a sign of logical conjointure.
As is so often the case in Chretien's art, this episode very deftly addresses

SELFHOOD AND SUBSTANCE IN EREC ET ENIDE D 37
a major social issue of his age, namely the apprehension of marriage as a rela-
tionship that is at once personal, social, and divinely instituted. And the renewed
science of the theologians (especially Richard of St. Victor) instigated and shar-
pened the new values that Chretien so clearly endorses.12 Not only did marriage
become a sacrament during Chretien's century, but the very notion of marriage
became centered upon the exercise of free consent between legitimate partners
(rather, for instance, than upon cohabitation or consummation) in a relationship
that is only afterwards solemnized by God: consensus facit nuptias. Such a con-
cept (which still endures) clearly reflects a logical distinction between marital
union of two beings as a substantially personal one and marital union of two be-
ings on the basis of what were seen during the twelfth century as the extrinsic
or accidental social considerations dictated by the older customs of Germanic
feudalism, where power over a woman (nundium) was purchased by a negotiated
contract (Verlobung). Chretien is meticulous about presenting the Count's point
of view fairly in order that a facile judgment of the older code will not be made.
It is the Count's extremism and his brutality which finally reveal the tyrannous
consequences of an ethical position about marriage which at first had revealed
itself in Chretien's story as plausible. This episode illustrates the extent to which
the seemingly abstract techniques of logic became decisive in social and political
controversies of a more concrete sort, and I may add that Chretien's formation
as a literate court poet in the administration of Henri and Marie de Champagne
clearly conditioned him as a progressive interpreter of social and judicial con-
troversies in his age.
However much Chretien's sensitivity to social issues was sharpened by an in-
troduction to at least basic principles of logical reasoning, we see in the Joy of
the Court episode that follows the reconcilation of Erec and Enide how capable
Chretien is of deepening a question (at the same time as he extends its conse-
quences) through the devices not of logical argumentation, but of narrative dis-
position. Chretien tells the episode in such a way that we are compelled to share
Erec's astonishment at an event that has "truly" occurred—even in fiction, what
"happens" must be seen as truly happening-but which seems logically impossi-
ble both to Erec and to us: when Maboagrain is defeated in combat by Erec, why
in the world does he rejoice? How can a knight meet his defeat in combat as
if it were a victory?
Maboagrain explains why, in this case, such narrative propositions are not,
in fact, contraries. He explains to Erec that as a child he had fallen in love with
the lady who is now his wife. Maboagrain had unwisely sworn an oath that he
would never leave the marvelous orchard in which they lived together until an-
other knight defeated him in combat, and his lady had unwisely held him to that
oath: " Thus my lady thought she could hold me here for a very long time,' "
(" 'Einsi me cuida retenir /ma dameisele a lone sejof " 11. 6040-41). This gar
den of seemingly paradisial beauty had thenceforth become, for him, a "prison"

38 D SELFHOOD AND SUBSTANCE IN EREC ET ENIDE
(1. 6047). Because of his enduring love for his lady, Maboagrain could never
bring himself to break his oath; nor, because of his inviolable sense of chivalric
honor, could Maboagrain ever fight without doing his very best. For
Maboagrain to be defeated now by a knight better than he is not a dishonor, for
it is just; in this case it is even a victory because a bad oath has been fulfilled,
but not broken. Both Maboagrain's knightly honor and his love are intact, now
that this unfortunate accident of his youth has been reversed. Therefore,
Maboagrain's defeat is in fact a victory over an accidental shame of his past, but
not over his soul as an honorable substance.
However, the main surprise of the Joy of the Court is that Maboagrain's
childhood had been spent in the court of Erec's father; moreover, Enide and his
lady are first cousins: close bonds of common origin and of kinship suggest not
only that the members of the two couples have shared identities (substances), but
also that their relationships as married couples have even more in common. In-
deed, in each couple, a knight has, by his own consent, allowed himself to be
improperly circumscribed by a woman's love, owing to an improper perception
of married love as a static human relationship, rather than as a dynamic one built
upon the renewed freedom of choice. We may suggest, here, that Chretien is
extending a burgeoning judicial concept of marriage into a new, wowjudicial
ideal of ongoing marital love based not upon constraint, but upon continually re-
newed freedom of choice. It is difficult for us to just know how Chretien came
to hold such opinions, whether by listening to arguments of logicians or simply
by looking at the world around him with new vision: whatever the case, we may
suspect that Chretien is not only sharing in, but also helping to forge, the most
radically innovative doctrines of his age.
Erec's victory over Maboagrain reinforces his victory over an undesirable as-
pect of himself, and it also leads to our grasp of a human problem as one that
reaches beyond Erec's individual relationship with Enide to love relationships
within the human species as a whole. The dilation of their consciousness of a
new human truth coincides, moreover, with the reintegration of Erec and Enide
into the social group, and this leads ultimately to Erec's and Enide's coronations
as king and queen. Progress beyond individual selfawareness may make Erec
and Enide poor candidates as forerunners of the full-blown romantic subjective
hero, yet such progress does coincide with the epistemological objectives of
twelfth-century logic. Although logicians did ascribe ontological priority to the
individual over species and genus, the thrust of their discipline still remained
that of perfecting those laws of understanding and predication according to
which individuals may be said to belong to larger groups. In other words, logic
in the twelfth century was a science of abstraction whose purpose, as Abelard
saw it, was to permit the intellect both to transcend and to extend its perceptions
of individual things. When we perceive an object through the senses, we form
an image of that object. The image then becomes subject to intellection which,

SELFHOOD AND SUBSTANCE IN EREC ET EN1DE D 39
if correct, allows us to infer both how that image is similar to images of other
individuals and how it different. This process of abstraction leads finally to in-
tellections of universals (Jolivet, pp. 370-71).
Moreover, the closing episodes of Erec et Enide illustrate a movement cor-
responding roughly to these levels of cognition that Winthrop Wetherbee calls
the "stress on transcendence."13 Having recognized the difficult truth of their
own relationship, Erec and Enide pass to an objectivization of that same truth
in another couple's relationship. Progress, through abstraction, toward the dis-
covery of universals leads to an intellectual victory that coincides very precisely
with Erec's and Enide's victory as they reach, with their coronation, the top of
the social order. Erec's robe during this investiture is embroidered, we are told,
with the works of four fairies "par grant san et par grant mestrie" ("with great
intelligence and great mastery," 1. 6683), and these are portraits of the four
sciences of the quadrivium by which humanity may come to true understanding
of the whole of the physical universe. This quadrivial robe encloses Erec's body.
His scepter, by contrast, is an object of active contemplation by the mind. Fash-
ioned of a substance more transparent than glass, this scepter bears etched upon
it the forms of every animal species existing in the creation. This is more than
mere scientia, it is sapientia, and even Arthur marvels at this exalted vision of
the animate world in its totality. Here the Arthurian marvelous has become the
marvel of the human intellect experiencing, at a moment of fulfillment of human
love and of human freedom and justice, its fullest powers of abstract knowledge.
That abstract knowledge is also spiritual knowledge mediated (if Reto Bezzola
is correct)14 through the green emerald of faith:
Li rois Artus aporter fist
un ceptre qui molt fu loe'z;
del ceptre la fagon oez
qui fu plus clers c'une verrine,
toz d'une esmeraude anterine,
et si avoit plain poing de gros.
La verite dire vos os
qu'an tot le monde n'a meniere
de poisson, ne de beste fiere,
ne d'ome, ne d'oisel volage,
que chascuns lone sa propre ymage
n'i fust ovrez et antailliez.
Li ceptres fu au roi bailliez
qui a mervoilles 1'esgarda,
si le mist, que plus ne tarda,
li rois Erec an sa main destre:
or fu rois si com il dut estre;

40 D SELFHOOD AND SUBSTANCE IN EREC ET ENIDE
puis ont Enyde coronee.
(11. 6808-25)
King Arthur summoned forth a scepter which drew great praise. Hear
how the scepter was fashioned. It was clearer than glass and made of
a single emerald, and was as big as a fist. I shall dare to tell the truth:
there was no manner of fish, of wild beast, of human, of flying bird in
the world whose image was not worked there and engraved. The scep-
ter was brought to the king, who looked upon it with marvel, and did
not wait to place it in Erec's right hand: now he was a king, as he
should have been; and then they crowned Enide.
This is surely one of the highpoints of what has often been called twelfth-century
humanism, and it is also a moment of precocious harmony between fundamen-
tally distinct trends in Western culture, Aristotelian rationalism and neoplatonic
mysticism. As we shall see in the next chapter, Chretien's poetics in Yvain took
a direction that carried him away from concerns with reconciling the mystical
and the rational, the transcendant and the immanent. Rather, his concern is to
deploy the resources of rational thought in the service of ethics of a very social
sort.

Chapter 4
Topos and Tale
If we grant first that Chretien presents heroes for whom proper perception and
argumentation are modes of action in their own right and second that Chretien
similarly challenges his audience with narrative situations and with constructions
of plot which carry what we may call a hermeneutical imperative, then much
remains to be said about the closely related processes of finding or "inventing"
(inveniendi) these arguments and of evaluating (iudicandi) them.
Traditionally, the art of finding and evaluating arguments belongs to the the-
ory of topics.1 The English word "topic" is, of course, a very diffuse way of
translating the Greek topos or the Latin locus, but these original terms were al-
ready embued with ambiguity in classical culture. Such ambiguity is an inevita-
ble consequence of the fact that topical theory was an area where all three dis-
ciplines of the medieval trivium converged, so that different thinkers often used
the term "topic" (or its classical equivalents) at the same time, but with wholly
different purposes in mind.
Topical theory remains one of the most neglected and poorly understood in-
tellectual strands of early Western culture and merits more scrutiny, both histor-
ical and theoretical. The historical dimension of topical theory is especially im-
portant not only because its evolution is rich and interesting in its own right, but
also because many historically significant documents of early Western culture
have to some degree been generated or touched by methods in which topical the-
ory was instrumental. In other words, topical theory has been a determinant of
the broader cultural history to which it now belongs.
The reasons for which topical theory has been so neglected by intellectual
41

42 D TOPOS AND TALE
historians and by literary critics are unclear, but are no doubt attributable in part
to the incompatibility between topical theory itself and the cognitive paradigms
of romantic philology and of classical and medieval studies in modern times such
as I evoked them in the introduction.2
In classical and medieval rhetoric and dialectics, topical theory was oriented
toward the goals of discovering and recognizing universal principles of effective
or probable argumentation. It was, therefore, a highly formal and structural dis-
cipline involving either the production or the evaluation of any discourse in any
circumstances where problems of internal coherence were crucial, as in matters
of justice or philosophical debate.
Philology is a historical discipline grounded upon the systematic and di-
achronic analysis of languages, documents, legends, and myths whose purpose
is to lead backward through dim corridors of time to some specific source, inten-
tion, or moment of origin, of plenitude, or of truth. Topical theory, by contrast,
was invoked to discover truth grounded not upon some distant origin or inten-
tion, but rather upon formal coherence in the production of utterances. Topical
theory taught thinkers how to divest their arguments of truth based on the impor-
tance of their input in favor of truth that was based on universal laws of proper
inference. As Richard McKeon aptly put it, "The whole function of a place is
to get it empty so that you can put something in. But if you don't get it completely
empty, it's not a place. Nevertheless, places are the sources of the discoveries
of science."3
To be sure, philologists could not wholly ignore topical theory, but they re-
defined it in accordance with their own originary paradigm. Thus, the great Ger-
man medievalist Ernst Robert Curtius, in his Europaische Literatur und
lateinisches Mittelalter (Bern and Munich: Franke, 1948), developed, just be-
fore and during the Second World War (which he called the "suicide of German
culture"), a broad notion of the hlstorische Topik which was not a formal genera-
tive principle, but rather any unit of content—be it a cliche, commonplace, liter-
ary theme, habit of thought, archetype or pattern of feeling-which is a perma-
nent legacy of Latinity and which recurs with modulations in different epochs
of Western culture: Man ist Europaer, wenn man civis Romanus ist (p. 3) ("One
is European if one is a citizen of Rome."). A repertory of "historical topics" was
thereupon construed as a source of historical continuity in Western culture, and
it is not difficult to see why Curtius's topical notions were so broadly accepted
by medievalists and nonmedievalists alike during the period of anguish follow-
ing the crisis of European culture that occurred with the Second World War.
However, such notions bear little relationship to topical theory as an indigenous
strain of early Western logic.
There have been serious attempts during the last two decades, especially in
Germany and the United States, to extend some of the theoretical and practical
implications of topical theory, though still as a terrain lying somewhere between

TOPOS AND TALE D 43
intellectual history and hermeneutical philology. Under the general heading of
Toposforschung, a handful of German scholars have begun to refine distinctions
between different kinds of topics ("historical," rhetorical, dialectical) and to seek
(mainly in Jung) a deep psychological basis for the permanence of topoi in West-
ern culture. Given, however, that the medieval treatises in which topical theory
develops are only now being edited and seriously examined (but rarely trans-
lated), even specialists in medieval logic stress that their understanding of the
history of topical theory in postclassical and scholastic thought remains sketchy.
Fortunately, during the last few years topical theory has begun to be explored
as it ought to be by Eleonore Stump, and her rigorous translation of Boethius's
De topicis differentiis, which is accompanied by precious notes and incisive es-
says situating Boethius's topical theory in a broader classical tradition, is a valua-
ble introduction both to the problem and to its history. In the discussion that fol-
lows, I shall not presume either to present the history of topical theory or to
enumerate its ramifications in twelfth-century culture, but I shall suggest certain
ways in which topical theory seems to have infiltrated poetic practice, speci-
fically in demanding new criteria for coherence in narrative art. In doing so, I
shall rely heavily upon Boethius's treatise (and upon Stump's scholarship),
anachronous though such an undertaking might seem at first. My reasons for
doing so are the following. In the twelfth century, the major classical sources
of topical theory were Aristotle, Cicero, and Boethius. Although the topical trea-
tises of all three classical writers were current in the more influential intellectual
centers of France by the mid-twelfth century (for instance, all three were part
of the curriculum of the School of Chartres), there was a tendency among medie-
val thinkers to read the earlier auctores through the later ones. Thus, just as Cic-
ero had proposed to interpret Aristotle's Topics, so Boethius undertook to syn-
thesize the Aristotelian tradition and the Ciceronian in his De topicis differentiis,
and this latter Boethian treatise remained especially prominent in the twelfth-
and thirteenth-century curriculum. Boethius's De topicis differentiis was a stan-
dard introductory textbook for the study not only of dialectics in the later ages —
one that Chretien himself would most likely have read—but also of rhetoric
(Leff, pp. 4-6). The fourth and last book of Boethius's treatise circulated and
was taught separately with the latter priority in mind, and it provided, with a
brief summary of the art of rhetoric as a whole, cogent insights into the dis-
cipline of rhetoric that rhetoricians themselves had never expressed. As Boethius
says, "We have received no tradition from the ancient authors on this subject,
for they taught the particulars but did not work at the whole at all. Let us under-
take this missing part of [their] teaching as best we can."4
Boethius's purpose in defining rhetoric as a discipline was to prepare himself
to make careful distinctions between rhetorical and dialectical topics, distinc-
tions that would be maintained by later logicians such as Abelard. Like Aristo-
tle, Boethius considers both rhetoric and dialectics as disciplines that teach ar-

44 D TOPOS AND TALE
gumentation, and he holds, further, that both disciplines draw on topics (topoi
or loci) as foundations for the arguments that they construct. Boethius wishes
to make a clear distinction between two types of topic, the dialectical and the
rhetorical, because he feels that such a distinction is insufficiently maintained by
Cicero in his Topica. Cicero is mainly concerned, Boethius says (Bk. IV, p. 95),
with rhetorical argumentation:
Cicero's Topica, which he published for C. Trabatius, who was skilled
at law, does not examine how one can dispute about things themselves
but how arguments of the rhetorical discipline may be produced, which
we explained more thoroughly in the commentaries we wrote on
Cicero's Topica. How one disputes about them with dialectical argu-
ments [rationibus] we explained in the commentaries we wrote on
Aristotle's Topics, translated by us. (Bk. 4, p. 95)
Although Aristotle himself is not wholly intelligible to us in his distinctions be-
tween rhetorical and dialectical topics and although Boethius may not have re-
solved even for himself the ambiguities in Aristotle, we nevertheless find in the
Boethian text a clearcut statement regarding the difference between rhetorical
and dialectical topics, at least as he understood it. The rhetorical topic, he says,
is rooted in arguments concerning circumstances and facts, while the dialectical
topic pertains to truths whose laws are universal and eternal. However, Boethius
emphasizes that even the truth of rhetorical arguments derives from laws of truth
proper to dialectics:
The differences are that the dialectical Topics are suited also for
theses, but rhetorical Topics are suited for hypotheses only, that is,
they are arrogated to questions informed by circumstances. For as the
disciplines are distinguished from one another by the universality [of
the one] and the particularity [of the other], so also their Topics differ
in range and restriction, because the range of dialectical Topics is
greater. Since they are independent of circumstances, which produce
individual cases, they are useful not only for theses but also for argu-
ments put forth in hypotheses, whose Topics, composed of circum-
stances, they included and range over.
So the rhetorician always proceeds from dialectical Topics, but the
dialectician can be content with his own Topics . . . Dialectic dis-
covers arguments from qualities themselves; rhetoric from things tak-
ing on a quality. So the dialectician [discovers arguments] from genus,
that is, from the nature of genus; the rhetorician from the thing that is
the genus. The dialectician [discovers arguments] from similarity; the
rhetorician, from a similar, that is, from the thing which takes on
similarity. In the same way, the former [discovers arguments] from a
contrariety; the latter, from a contrary. (Bk. 4, p. 94)

TOPOS AND TALE D 45
Boethius's treatise does more than to make distinctions between rhetorical and
dialectical topics: it creates a hermeneutical distance from rhetoric which makes
us aware that if rhetorical arguments are true, the truth of such arguments lies
not in their actual performance, but in hidden laws of argumentatio. An argu-
ment, which only proves something, is not the same as argumentation, which
is the concern for the actual process of proving something. As Abelard put it,
in a treatise on topics of his own, "Argument is not the same as argumentation.
For that which only proves [something] is an argument. We call argumentation
the very constitution of proving and of proof, as in syllogism and in enthymeme
taken as a whole, so we may say that argument is contained in argumentation
as apart in a whole."5 In other words, a reader of Book 4 of Boethius's De topicis
differentiis, which Leff (p. 3) calls "the logician's rhetoric" (p. 3) or, for that mat-
ter, the reader of Abelard will suddenly become aware that the internal truth or
coherence of a narrative (fictive or not) lies outside that narrative and that its
basis may be apprehended as a set of laws for narrating (or arguing) properly
that are divorced from any specific story or argument. As a metarhetoric, dialec-
tics becomes metafiction as well, and it is this very awareness of the metafictive
that sets Chretien apart from poets who are merely rhetorical, though rhetorical
Chretien himself was.6 Chretien's art (and even the characters and the fictive
narrator who inhabit that art) constantly point beyond "circumstances" (in the
Boethian sense of that term) to the noncontextual reasons by which we judge
these circumstances and apprehend their consequences. The rules according to
which poets, as rhetoricians, generate stories may very well be practical, but
when expressed abstractly, they are identical to the rules of dialectical argument.
Such is Boethius's point in Book 4 of his De topicis differentiis
Despite the lucidity of Boethius's Book 4 concerning the relationship between
rhetorical and dialectical topics and despite the centrality of topical theory to
twelfth-century dialectics (fully a third —over two hundred pages —of Abelard's
Dialectica is devoted to topical theory), medieval rhetoricians themselves re-
mained more or less within the epistemological limits that Boethius so accurately
saw in their discipline. Two recent articles by Douglas Kelly attempt to define
topical invention in rhetoric as illustrated by Matthieu de Vendome and Geoffroi
de Vinsauf.7 In Matthieu, topical invention is part of descriptio, which (as in the
Boethian elaboration of "circumstances") has two main goals, that of describing
persons and that of describing action (negotio).& Descriptio is a process of men-
tal clarification or elaboration (Kelly uses the French and German eclaircisse-
ment and Erlauterung as modern equivalents), and descriptio seems to me to
correspond to the moment when, according to Abelard, confused and indistinct
images of things communicated by the senses to the memory are then clarified
and elaborated upon by the intellect (Jolivet, pp. 365-73). Topical invention oc-
curs during this mental process of descriptio. Here, according to Kelly, is how
the process is understood by the rhetorician Matthieu:

46 D TOPOS AND TALE
L'invention des topiques comporte trois etapes: 1. 1'invention du locus;
2. 1'invention de Vargumentum dans le locus; et 3. Yamplificatio de
Yargumentum. Elles correspondent a Vimaginatio, Vexcogitatio et la
qualitas dans la composition selon Mathieu de Vendome. D'abord on
identifie un lieu (locus, ronos) dans la matiere quand un eclaircisse-
ment semble a la fois souhaitable et possible. Ensuite, on decide du
contenu de cet eclaircissement d'apres la conception qu'on se fait de
1'oeuvre; 1'argument sert ainsi a interpreter la matiere, a la rendre
vraisemblable. Enfin, 1'argument est dispose dans la matiere et y est
adapte selon 11 la technique de I'amplification. ("La specialite," p. 104)
The invention of topics implies three steps: 1. the invention of the lo-
cus; 2. the invention of the argumentum in the locus; and 3. the am-
plificatio of the argumentum. These correspond to imaginatio, ex-
cogitatio, and qualitas in composition, according to Matthieu de
Vendome. First, we identify a place (locus, Tonos) in the material
when a clarification becomes both desirable and possible. Then, we de-
cide on the content of that clarification, according to the conception we
hold of the work; the argument thus serves to interpret the material
and to make it probable. Finally, the argument is deployed in the ma-
terial and is adapted to it according the technique of amplification.
To the extent that it neither derives from abstract principles of cognition nor
demands their perception, Matthieu's "topography" (at least, as Kelly defines it)
remains strictly rhetorical, or circumstantial, in the sense that Boethius gives to
that term, and in no way dialectical, and therefore leads not to the production
of formal arguments (and much less to a concern with argumentatio), but only
to coherence and probability in unbroken narrative and description. Although
Kelly believes that the rhetorician's descriptio gives rise to the beles conjointures
of successful narrative ("Logic," pp. 12-13), I would propose that Chretien had
come to accept dialectic as a metarhetoric and that he was himself (and wanted
his readers also to become) aware of principles for inventing and evaluating
fiction that are "topical" in a more abstract dialectical sense of that term.
To illustrate such a claim, however, calls for a discussion of topical theory
that is more detailed and concrete. Accordingly, in the pages that follow, I shall
first take a closer look at topical theory in a dialectical perspective, and then I
shall suggest that there are signs of a nonrhetorical and specifically dialectical
topography underlying the "circumstances" of Chretien's narrative world, and I
shall suggest that logicality is even a precondition of the merveilleux in Yvain,
and perhaps in other romances as well.
In his De topicis differentiis, Boethius makes a distinction between two kinds
of topic, the "maximal propositio
The former topics are self-evident propositions whose irreducible truth forms

TOPOS AND TALE D 47
the basis for cither propositions construed as true arguments. Writing on
Boethius, Eleonore Stump says:
Boethius's maximal propositions seem to be just such self-evident
truths. All true propositions, Boethius seems to be saying, are either
self-evident or not self-evident; those that are not self-evident are
shown to be true by being traced back to self-evident propositions.
Hence, self-evident propositions provide the basis of belief for all ar-
gument. The conclusion of an argument is derived either from a max-
imal proposition or from propositions that are themselves derived,
directly or indirectly, from maximal propositions, (p. 182)
A maximal proposition is the most basic foundation of true inferences, while
differentiae, or "different" topics, are species of maximals and, as such, serve
only to orient us in the process of "finding" an argument, though the argument's
truth ultimately rests on the maximal.
Abelard defines maximal propositions as "those rules which, containing the
sense of multiple consequences, demonstrate a common inference according to
the same force (vis) of a relationship."9 Abelard gives the following and abso-
lutely classical example of a maximal: "when species is predicated of something,
so too is genus" (de quocumque species, et genus, Dialectica. p. 310). Such a
maximal proposition allows us to infer that "if it is a human, it is an animal;"
or that "if it is a pearl, it is a stone;" or that "if it is a rose, it is a flower;" or
that "if there is red, there is a color." In each case, a single relationship (habi-
tudo) is expressed, and the truth of that relationship is independent of its content:
the copula has been, so to speak, de-ontologized. Thus, all arguments "from the
species" may be grouped together as the differential topic "from species."
Moreover, such arguments hold eternally (ab aeterno) because the maximal
proposition by which we infer something is invariably true and irreducibly self-
evident, even if humanity itself has not yet been created, or even if humanity
has been destroyed (Jolivet, pp. 153-54). The condition of being a human being
quite simply cannot "hold" (consistere) without the condition of being an animal
(Jolivet, p. 154). As we shall see shortly, such a logical perception, as well as
the specific example illustrating it ("if it is a human, it is an animal"), is radically
important as a "topical" foundation for Chretien's Yvain: a hero is an animal.
As a dialectical tool, "topic" came to imply the means for finding a missing
term in an imperfect argument or enthymeme.10 As metafiction, topical theory
implies either the production or the perception of conjointure between two (or
more) terms or episodes narrated in a story in such a way that the relationship
between them has not been iterated, yet must be grasped (if only intuitively) for
the story to be understood. Such is the common feature of narrative conjointure
(as Chretien seems to have understood it) and of dialectical topology. Topics,
in short, are those lattent rules of composition which guarantee the possibility

48 D TOPOS AND TALE
of fiction as being formally or logically true without making claims for its being
analogically true, in the same way as topics allow logicians to construct purely
hypothetical syllogisms such as, "if all human beings are wood and all wood is
stone, all human beings are stone." Such a statement is a pure fiction-a con-
struction not of the world, but of the mind. It it is surely no accident that poetic
fiction should be valorized in the same culture as hypothetical truth that need not
be ontologically founded to be true.
Given the dangerous tendency of the Tristan story to construct itself as a tis-
sue of lies to which God himself is alleged to be partisan, the idea that poets
might find in logic a ground for fiction that is not mendacious was surely a relief.
Indeed, is it not possible that poets themselves writing in the twelfth-century pro-
pelled such philosophical advances? Is poetic discourse always the passive dis-
course within a cultural framework? Are poets perhaps not just as provocative
for twelfth-century philosophy as they were for Plato and Aristotle?
If we concede the possibility that Chretien was at least minimally in touch
with and partisan to what were by any standards the major intellectual currents
of his time, including the ise of dialectics, let us now explore more concretely
some possible relations between topical theory and narrative conjointure in the
story of Yvain which summon up in us discriminations of a logical sort: that be-
tween substance and accident, and that between true and false contraries. Each
of these acts of discrimination involves at least one maximal proposition and a
topic, though it was considered above all to be a matter of individual intuition
on the part of the dialectician to find the topic most pertinent to the specific
propositions which are to be conjoined with proper inference. However, as we
see from Boethius's own formation of the topic dealing with contraries, even
thought about topical theory tends, for all its abstractness, to evince examples
already propitious as material for a good narrative performance:
The things which Cicero calls contraries are divided into four sorts:
adverse contraries, such as white and black; privative contraries, such
as justice and injustice; relative contraries, such as master and servant;
or negative contraries, such as living and not living. From adverse
contraries: if health is good, sickness is bad. From privative con-
traries: if we flee injustice, we should pursue justice. From relative
contraries: whoever wants to be a father should have a child. From
negative contraries: you do not accuse me of having done what done
what you defend me for not having done [, do you]? The questions
have to do with accidents. The maximal proposition: contraries cannot
agree with each other when they are adverse, privative, or negative;
when they are relative, they cannot occur without each other. The
topic: from contraries (which might better be called 'opposites'). (Bk.
3, pp. 66-67)

TOPOS AND TALE D 49
Obviously in a narrative whose raw material to be conjoined is principally
erotic love and chivalric combat, the topic of contraries will implicate both the
invention and understanding of most primary human sentiments, as well as of
interpersonal relationships (whether martial or erotic) that are manifested there.
However, a story, formally speaking, is neither a syllogism nor an enthymeme;
therefore, contraries manifested in narrative discourse will tend to be expressed
indirectly, reiterated, and sometimes amplified or extended anaphorically over
long sequences, even though a single relationship of contrariety continues to per-
tain. For instance, multiple actions by a single figure or else multiple attributes
of a single figure may, by a process of metonymy, come to extend or replace
that figure in amplified (yet constant) relationships of contrariety. Moreover,
complex stories can combine contraries into larger bundles in which a term of
one pair of contraries will become associated with, or even equivalent to, terms
of other pairs. Take, for instance, the simple contrary pair animate/inanimate,
which is important to the distinction between animal and vegetable. At one
point, Yvain lies (almost) inanimate in the forest. He is also unloved. In medie-
val romance, as in theology, to be lacking in love is to tend toward the lack of
life itself, as the tragedy of Tristan and Iseut so clearly showed; here too, an
unloved hero has become inanimate. Yvain is suddenly made animate again pre-
cisely when the Dame de Noroison's beautiful young damsels enthusiastically
rub his naked body with a magic unguent entrusted to them by their mistress.
Yvain not only becomes animate (more animate, even, than Roland at Ron-
ceval!) but also becomes loved by a sequence of women leading him back,
finally, to his wife Laudine.
Topical theory accounts very well for such substitutions where simple con-
traries become woven into more complex narrative sequences. Indeed, the fol-
lowing topic, which Boethius calls "incompatibles," may be considered as a use-
ful instrument to account for the amplification of kernel contraries into longer
and more complex narrative sequences:
Incompatibles are consequents of contraries. For example, sleeping and
waking are contraries, and snoring is associated with sleepers. So
snoring and waking are incompatibles. An argument arises from in-
compatibles in this way: Do you say that he who snores is awake? The
question has to do with accident; it is an argument from incompatibles.
The maximal proposition: incompatibles cannot occur together. Again,
the Topic from a contrary and [that] from incompatibles seem to be
similar, but they are different, because contraries are prima facie op-
posed to each other, but incompatibles are shown to be opposed to
each other by their connection with contraries. For example, sleeping
and waking are contrary to each other as they stand; but snoring is in-
compatible with waking because snoring is connected with sleep. (Bk.
3, pp. 68-71)

50 D TOPOS AND TALE
Some scholars may very well wish to challenge the suggestion that Chretien
knew about or exploited topical theory (even though it is practically impossible
that he did not at least know about it if he had ever heard of dialectics) by the
objection that all narrative depends upon some logical premises, just as all peo-
ple use figures of speech without being rhetoricians. My answer is that he not
only exploits the topical foundations of narrative logic, but also tends to trans-
gress probable relationships (such as that of contrariety) in such a way as to call
attention to them and, finally, to restore them. Thus, in Chretien's fictive uni-
verse, the ordinary and probable "relational" contrary of master/servant be-
comes contextually inverted when Lunette becomes Laudine's "master" (rather,
her "mistress") in doctrines of the heart; and the "relational" contrary lord/vassal
relationship becomes contextually inverted when Yvain, precisely as he becomes
Laudine's lordly husband and defender, also becomes her vassal. The "adverse"
contraries of freedom/captivity become contextually inverted as Yvain, shut up
in a little chamber from whose window he can gaze upon Laudine, declares his
reluctance to leave his "prison" even if the doors were wide open (11. 1536-40);
again, the "adverse" contraries aggressor/defender become reversed when Yvain
replaces Esclados in Laudine's household. The "privative" contraries fidel-
ity/infidelity and loved/unloved become temporarily reversed in Yvain's destiny
the moment he breaks his promise to return to his wife Laudine after a year of
jousting. If critics have long been aware of Chretien's tendency to make sport
of rhetoric even as he exploits it, I suggest that the same spirit of autonomy holds
true of his relationship to the discipline of logic.
Perhaps we may generalize and say that in twelfth-century culture, the new
virtuosity of vernacular fiction constitutes itself precisely over and against those
very laws of necessity and probability that the early scholastics were so carefully
asserting in the domain of topical theory, which was the heart of their discipline.
Indeed, despite the seeming abstractness and (for us) the remoteness of topical
theory, even the artisans of such theory readily provided examples whose con-
creteness made them eminently useful to the construction of narrative circum-
stances, both probable and improbable. We have already seen in the case of
"contraries" topical examples that can be considered as a kind of "protonarra-
tive," but there is another, even more suggestively protonarrative topic, "from
associated things," that it is presented by Boethius in such a way that the improb-
able of the marvelous is already anticipated along with the probable of logic:
Associated things are those which have a common boundary \finitimum
locum} so that in time sometimes they go before, as meeting [congres-
sio\ before love, sometimes they go with the thing with which they are
associated, as the noise of footsteps with walking, and sometimes they
follow, as mental agitation follows a horrible crime. These things are
not . . . necessary even though they happen often. For he who has
met [someonej has fallen in love at first sight [with that person]. It is

TOPOS AND TALE D 51
possible that there be no noise of footsteps when someone is walking;
and there can be a noise of footsteps when someone is not walking, if
he remains in the same place and moves his feet. Someone can be agi-
tated who has done nothing horrible; and it can be the case that some-
one who has done something horrible is not agitated.
From these an argument will be drawn when we maintain that
someone loves because he had previously met [the person he loved],
or that someone walked in a place since the noise of footsteps was
heard, or that someone whom we see agitated had committed a horri-
ble crime. In these cases, the questions have to do with accidents. The
Topic: from associated things. The maximal proposition: things which
are associated with other things are judged on the basis of those things
[ex adjunctis adjuncta perpendi]. (Bk. 3, p. 67)
The imaginative wealth of Boethius's illustrations of the topic "from as-
sociated things" strikes the mind, and a poet such as Chretien or Marie de France
(who both belong to the same intellectual universe) seeking to forge a new narra-
tive poetics could surely have found in such a passage the potential for a half
dozen narrative episodes. Both by its examples and by its underlying concept,
the topic of "associated things" is reminiscent of Augustine's notion of natural
(as opposed to conventional) signs:
Those are natural signs which, without any desire or intention of sig-
nifying, make us aware of something beyond themselves, like smoke
which signifies fire. It does this without any will to signify, for even
when smoke appears alone, observation and memory of experience
with things bring a recognition of an underlying fire. The track of a
passing animal belongs to this class, and the face of one who is wrath-
ful or sad signifies his emotion even when he does not wish to show
that he is wrathful or sad.11
However, when Chretien constructs narrative episodes around premises com-
parable to those of "associated things," he does so with deftness and humor, and
not mechanically. It is by metonymic reasoning similar to that of "associated
things" that, when Laudine's servants find the front half of Yvain's horse lying
inside the closed gate of Laudine's castle, they quite properly infer that Yvain
too must be inside. However, "normal" criteria of associative probability are dis-
rupted when Yvain acquires a magic ring which makes him invisible. Thus,
when Esclados's corpse begins spontaneously to bleed, Laudine's servants cor-
rectly infer that the slayer is nearby and begin beating with clubs everywhere
in the room, except on the bed near the corpse where Yvain, Laudine's future
husband, already —and most improbably —lies. Laudine's intense grief over Es-
clados's death hardly excites the probable response of shared grief or sympathy
from his slayer that we would expect in the ordinary world, but rather, her in-

52 D TOPOS AND TALE
tense grief excites equally intense erotic desire in Yvain. In other words, Chre-
tien acknowledges ordinary human assumptions of probability in "associated
things," but, like Boethius already was, Chretien is really more interested in con-
structing scenes where norms of belief are belied by circumstances of the excep-
tional and the marvelous, just as the norms of courtliness are constantly belied
by Keu. As we shall have other occasions to observe, the truth of Chretien's mar-
velous often begins where logic ends; yet it is precisely this pleasurable trans-
gressive privilege of the poet, this adultery in signs, this irreducible otherness
of fiction—and perhaps of human love as well —with respect to ordinary reality
to which the more steadfast necessities of modal logic apply.

Chapter 5
Si est homo, est animal
It is possible to find many correspondences between dialectical topics and the
underlying conjointures of Chretien's narrative syntax —and also, to find con-
spicuous defiances of topically based truths posed at the narrative surface of
Chretien's fictive universe. For a poet to challenge the established authority of
logical discourse is not necessarily to repudiate it, but may be seen as an effec-
tive strategy for valorizing the vernacular poetic as an autonomous mode of ap-
prehending reality. Perhaps I may generalize and suggest that no new discourse,
poetic or otherwise, can establish itself within a preexisting network of other dis-
courses in a community of speech groups without such provocations or trans-
gressions of established conventions of understanding.
However, the search for topics (like that for rhetorical tropes) can quickly
become mechanical and arbitrary; indeed, arbitrariness in the choice of topic to
make this or that inference was already acknowledged as a feature of topical the-
ory itself. Therefore, I shall concentrate upon a single topic that is especially
important to Yvain because it accounts, I believe, for much of the conceptual or-
ganization of its story.
The topic is "from kind," and, according to Boethius, its maximal proposition
is: "the attributes of genera are observed in their kinds" (Bk. 3, p. 66). Abelard's
formulation of this maximal proposition, which we have already encountered in
his illustration of his definition of maximal propositions is, as we will recall,
"when species is predicated of something, so too is genus" (De Dialectica, p.
310), and Abelard gave the following, perfectly classical example of that max-
imal proposition, "if it is a human, it is an animal." The example is so common
53

54 D SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL
in logical treatises all through the Middle Ages that it is a kind of emblem, not
only of a train of ideas, but also of philosophical discourse itself. Thus, it is en-
tirely within the realm of possibility, if not of probability, that a poet who is test-
ing the resources of his new vernacular against the prerogatives of logical dis-
course would start precisely with this commonplace of logical thought.
While a topic such as "from kind" (and its maximal proposition) could aid the
dialectician to "find" or to evaluate properly any number of specific but still im-
perfect arguments, such a topic could also help a narrative poet, first, to invent
in his inherited matiere a kernel story based on the relationship of a human being
to his or her generic animality and, second, to amplify that kernel story into a
much larger fictive narrative in whose "circumstances" there still pertains, no
matter how abundant or various is its content, a coherent structure based on one
topical "truth." That is to say, as a narrative poet, Chretien could find in topical
theory a basic grounding for a narrative "truth" that could not only bring new
order and form to the traditional matiere of Celtic and classical legend, but also
allow him to integrate into his now-fictive truth contemporary "scientific"
thought and ethical values as provided to him by the two other main branches
of philosophy (besides that of dialectics): the natural sciences (physicd) and
ethics (ethica).
Indeed, I shall claim that such is precisely the case with Yvain, ou le chevalier
au lion, whose double title already orients us toward the discussion that shall
ensue. I shall propose that in this romance Chretien takes as the basis of his con-
jointure the "special" relationship between a man and his generic animality, and
that he expands upon that relationship during a broad sequence of events whose
content, for all its diversity, remains conceptually anchored in the topic "from
species" as brought to bear upon Yvain as exemplary homo. It is precisely this
concern for conceptual rigor that marks Chretien as a late twelfth-century poet
whose initiation into grammatica would have led him not only into rhetoric, but
also into the basics of logic, hence, into topical theory. I shall propose, moreo-
ver, that this interpenetration of discourses in Chretien's time and their conden-
sation into a single poetic text gave rise to what is surely one of the most remark-
able statements about humanity and its culture to emerge from twelfth-century
humanism.
Let us return, now, to Calogrenant's unfinished quest for an adventure at the
beginning of Yvain, a quest where success in the contrary (and yet somehow
similar) ordeals of love and combat carries the promise of recognition as a
courteous and honorable knight in Arthur's court. Seven years ago, we are told,
Calogrenant set forth on a quest for an "adventure"("gwera«r avantures,'" 1. 177).
Not only was Calogrenant young and uninitiated, but he departed "alone like a
peasant" ("seus come paisanz"), yet fully armed as a knight ("Armez de totes ar-
meures / Si come chevaliers doit estre," 11. 178-179). The contrast between
Calogrenant's peasant-like solitude and his unproven identity as a knight sub-

SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL D 55
sumes not only the opposition between social marginality and social centrality,
but also an opposition between states or degrees of being in the human soul. An-
dreas Cappelanus tells us in his De amore (1.11) that peasants are capable only
of copulating like mules or horses, and that they merely follow their instinct of
desire, instead of loving as full-fledged humans may. Moreover, the peasants
should not be prodded to acquire the art of loving because their land would
quickly become unproductive. If a noble should desire a peasant, he should not
hesitate to possess her by force. Thus, Calogrenant's "peasantry" of soul is that
of a man at the bottom threshold of humanity, scarcely above his condition as
animal.
Early in his quest in the forest of Broceliande, Calogrenant encounters a hor-
rible peasant ("vilain," 1. 288), a huge monster of a man carrying a club whose
features resemble the parts of many different species of animals (horse, elephant,
owl, cat, wolf, boar), the least apparent of which is the human species itself,
whose principal defining properties are to be rational, capable of speech, and
political, that is, inclined to participate in a social order. Moreover, Chretien
generates a sharp conflict, here, between the specific rhetorical conventions of
the human portrait1 and its subhuman animal content. Matter and form enunci-
ate, explictly and implicitly, two different realities —rather, two levels of the
same reality, since si est homo, est animal. Calogrenant himself is caught in a
dilemma of perception and of definition of this creature's exact class or species
as animal: can he reason? can he speak?
Si m'esgarda et mot ne dist
Ne plus qu'une beste feist;
Et je cuidai que il ne eiist
Reison ne parler ne setist.
(11. 323-26)
Thus he looked at me and did not say a word, any more than might a
beast; and I thought that he possessed no reason, and that he did not
know how to speak.
Calogrenant nevertheless summons up his courage and addresses the monster,
asking him whether he is "a good thing or not," but the monster's answer is per-
fectly equivocal:
"Je suis uns hon."
"Queus hon es tu?" — "Tes con tu voiz.
Je ne sui autre nule foiz."
(11. 330-32)
"I am a man." "What kind of man are you?" "Such as you see: I am
never otherwise."

56 D SI ESTHOMO, EST ANIMAL
Calogrenant's interlocutor is "man" enough to speak, but he remains ethically un-
definable. Were he speaking from his "special" substance as a man, the monster
would be either good or bad, or at least sometimes good and sometimes bad;
but, given that this monster is always ethically neither, the monster is speaking
from his subjacent nature as animal, rather than as human, for animals were con-
sidered to be subethical beings. Indeed, although the monster has the capacity
to speak (and therefore is a man), his portrait, in its aggregate, adds up only to
generic animality and not to specific humanness.
There is a topic called "from the whole" which might help us to understand
how a portrait like this, as an aggregate of many different species, can be consid-
ered as a nonspecific whole, or genus. Boethius says that " 'Whole' generally has
two meanings, either genus or complete thing made up of more than one part"
(Bk. 2, p. 51). Parts, by contrast, "are those things whose coming together
produces the whole. Those things which divide the whole are also called parts,
but these are commonly called species or kinds" (Bk. 3, pp. 64-65). This kind
of generic whole is opposed to what Abelard calls an "integral" whole (Dialec-
tica, p. 547) which, like "Socrates," is unique, and cannot be collective or
universal. Nor, says Abelard, is it thinkable that an integral, single substance
in natura be comprised of the members of different animals (Dialectica, p. 548).
Although the topic "from the whole" ordinarily leads to the finding of a defini-
tion, the monster to whom Calogrenant speaks is a logical fictio, who eludes all
definition, and for good reason: it is precisely Chretien's goal in Yvain to define
human nature as animal , but to do so in narrative, not by logical deduction. Al-
though a man, as animal, may very well embody the attributes of lesser animals
(and vice versa, as taught by the bestiaries), and hence, may be intelligent like
an elephant, diabolical like a wolf, obedient like a horse, and so forth, what is
purposefully lacking in Calogrenant's monstrous interlocutor is precisely that set
of differentiae that would ordinarily mark him distinctly as a full-fledged mem-
ber of the human species. It is surprising, perhaps, yet logical, that no hostility
is exchanged between Calogrenant and the man-as-animal: the human condition
cannot "hold" (consistere) without the condition of animality, even though the
latter can lack the higher perfection "specific" to the former.
The encounter between Calogrenant and the monster, or man-as-animal, is
not, in itself, dialectical in form, since it does not unfold as arguments.2 Still,
this encounter does invite the reader to raise and ponder a hermeneutical ques-
tion as to the fundamental difference between man-as-human and man-as-
animal, and such a question is (whether we are aware of it or not) essentially
topical (hence, dialectical). Here, Jean Jolivet, speaking of Abelard, describes
the hermeneutical reflex of someone who has been confronted by an argument
whose basis of inference is not obvious:

SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL D 57
Quand on ne saisit pas immediatement une inference, on demande
"d'ou est le lieu" — unde locus? La forme de cette question montre que
le lieu n'est pas considere comme substance, mais comme rapport
(habitudo); on ne cherche pas a savoir "quelle chose est le lieu" mais
"d'ou il est", "c'est-a-dire a quel rapport il doit d'etre le nerf de 1'infer-
ence" (ex qua habitudine vim inferentiae teneai): ainsi, a propos de
1'exemple classique si est homo est animal, on ne dit pas que le lieu
est ab homine, mais a specie; or, "espece" est bien le nom d'un rap-
port alors qu1 "homme" est le nom d'une substance, (p. 154)
When one does not immediately grasp an inference, one asks, "whence
the place"—"unde locus?.7' The form of that question shows that the
place is not considered as a substance, but as a relationship (habitudo):
one does not seek to know "what kind of a thing is the place," but
"from where it comes," that is to say, "in what relationship must it be
the force of inference" (ex qua habitudine vim inferentiae teneat).
Thus, regarding the classical example, si est homo est animal, one
does not say that the place is ab homine, but a specie; moreover, "spe-
cies" is the word for a relationship, while "man" is the word for a sub-
stance.
Since Chretien is a narrative poet and not a dialectician, he does not, of
course, ask unde locus?, though Calogrenant's wondering about the monster's
bestial silence and his question to him do reflect a cultural proclivity to perceive
and classify beings in the world by logical criteria that have by now become "nat-
ural," even in the vernacular. Chretien elaborates upon the consequences of the
implied statement underlying this scene, si est homo, est animal, not dialecti-
cally, but rather in an ethical perspective: what exactly is lost, Chretien invites
us to ponder, when a man as a rational, political animal regresses to his generic
bestiality? For his answers, Chretien draws upon material from a broad philo-
sophical and literary tradition whose commonplaces, at least, he obviously
knew. For instance, we observe through Calogrenant's astonished eyes that this
"man" is a keeper of fierce and proud bulls which fight with each other in the
forest, and not a keeper of domestic animals grazing peacefully (as they should)
in an enclosed pasture. Chretien is dramatizing, here, a fundamental antinomy
of wildness and domesticity - and by extension, of nature and culture-that he
has inherited from the classical world (most directly, probably, through Virgil's
Georgics),3 and Calogrenant himself protests that these bulls have never known
the rule of a man:
"Que fes tu ci?" "Je m'i estois,
Si gart cez bestes par cest bois."
"Gardes? Par saint Pere de Rome!

58 D 57 £57" 77OMO, £57- ANIMAL
Ja ne conoissent eles home
Ne cuit qu'an plainne an boschage
Puisse an garder beste sauvage,
N'an autre leu por nule chose,
S'ele n'est liiee ou anclose."
(11. 333-40)
"What are you doing here?" "I stay here and keep these beasts in the
forest." "You keep them? By Saint Peter of Rome, they don't know
what a man is. I don't think that it is possible to keep a wild beast ei-
ther in a field or a wilderness, or anywhere else, unless it is tied up or
enclosed."
Calogrenant's spontaneous indignation at the man-beast's turning his bulls
loose to the wildness of their passions reflects yet deeper ontological assump-
tions about the nature of man as human (as opposed to man as animal). It was
common doctrine among virtually all of the major classical and Christian cur-
rents to which Chretien could possibly have been heir to distinguish between
three levels of soul in living creatures: the vegetative, the animal, and the hu-
man. The vegetative soul is capable of generation and growth, but is without
sense or intelligence. The animal soul, which cannot hold or "consist" without
the vegetative, is capable of generation, growth, and motion, and is sensible, but
is limited to appetition, which is to say that it responds directly to what it per-
ceives passively through the senses. These responses are passions, and they fall
into two basic categories: wrath or fear (ira, or metu), and desire (libido, con-
cupiscentia, cupiditas), though in reality, wrath and fear are really subclasses
of desire: that is, we react in anger or fear because we desire to be happy.4 The
human soul subsumes the lower powers of both the vegetative and the animal,
yet possesses the differential faculty of reason, whose purpose is to govern these
basic passions and to lead humankind to higher wisdom.5 Hugh of St. Victor
summarizes this hierarchy of faculties:
But the third power of the soul appropriates the prior nutritional and
sense-perceiving powers, using them, so to speak, as domestics and
servants. It is rooted entirely in the reason, and it exercises itself ei-
ther in the most unfaltering grasp of things present, or in the under-
standing of things absent, or in the investigation of things unknown.
This power belongs to humankind alone. It not only takes in sense im-
pressions and images which are perfect and well founded, but, by a
complete act of the understanding, it explains and confirms what imag-
ination has only partially suggested. (Didascalicon 1.3)
Hugh also makes it clear that the faculty of reason, which is proper to hu-
mankind alone, is meant to prevail over the animal soul of humans: "For while

SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL D 59
the nature of brute animals, governed by no rational judgment, produces move-
ments guided only by a certain blind inclination of the flesh, it remains true that
the actions of the rational soul are not swept away by blind impulses, but are
always preceded by Wisdom as their guide" (1.4). Hugh's model of mind is as
political as it is psychological, reflecting a strong tendency of classical and medi-
eval (and perhaps modern) cultures to find models of mind and of government
that are homologous, if not identical.6 Tyrants are rulers who, by definition, dis-
pense with law and justice in order to rule by policy and by fear, becoming at
the same time slaves of their own bestial passions. Such Platonic and
Aristotelian doctrines were commonplaces of medieval culture as well, thanks
not only to Cicero, but also to Aristotle himself whose political theories were
once again becoming current in Chretien's time.7 Though he wrote after Chre-
tien, here is how Thomas Aquinas, following both Aristotle and Cicero,
describes tyranny:
Tyrannical government is based exclusively upon fear; and tyrants seek
by every means to make themselves feared by their subjects. But fear
makes a weak foundation. For those who remain subjects through fear
will, when opportunity and the hope of success presents itself, rise up
against those who command them: and the rising up will be the more
violent the more they have been constrained against their will, and
through fear alone.8
If we may see the wild bulls fighting in the forest as unambiguous emblems
of unbridled passion, the man-beast himself is hardly a notch higher in the order
of being, for he "governs" not by reason, but by the "justice" of his own brute
passion. Just as the tyrant makes a law of his or her own personality, so too the
man-beast boasts that
"N'i a celi, qui s'ost movoir,
Des qu'eles me voient venir."
(11. 344-45)
"There's not a one that dares moves as soon as they see me come."
Moreover, fear is the sole basis of the man-beast's "lordship" over his beasts.
At a time when medieval culture was debating actively about the nature and
limits of legitimate political power in a feudal framework, surely the ideological
resonances of Chretien's portrait of the man-beast's tyrannical dominion over his
bulls could not have passed unnoticed:
"Car quand j'en puis une tenir,
Si la dcstraing par les deus corz
As poinz, que j'ai et durs et forz,

60 D 57 EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL
Que les autres de peor tranblent
Einsi sui de mes bestes sire."
(11. 346-55)
"For, when I catch one of them, I grab him by both horns with my
rough, tough hands, and the others tremble with fear. . . . Thus am
I lord of my beasts."
It is, I hope, clear by now that Chretien is "inventing" a story whose narrative
surface is subtended by a deep relational truth bearing upon the generic animal
basis of the human species, and we will hopefully recognize the "topical" basis
of that truth. Moreover, a topical apprehension of the relationship between ge-
nus and species can give rise to multiple descriptions and narrative episodes
whose material is highly eclectic and diverse, yet whose logic of narrative an-
tecedent and consequence remains perfectly coherent and stable. Thus, if a man
as species is reasonable, a man as mere animal is lacking in reason; if a man
as species is naturally social and law abiding, a man as mere animal lives by
tyranny without law, and so forth. Moreover, any of these subjects, in turn, is
susceptible to amplification in accordance with social doctrines and customs fa-
miliar to Chretien and his twelfth-century intellectual milieu. Since philosophy
was hardly a homogeneous corpus or discipline in Chretien's time, it must have
been an intellectual challenge for him as artist to amplify a topically conceived
narrative "argument" with nondialectical substance drawn from the multiple
sources at his disposal. Thus, if a man is by definition a reasonable animal, it
follows that Chretien will tend to express, in his man-beast, a creature deprived
of all those qualities which are associated (by "associated things"?) with hu-
mankind's "special" faculty of reason.
Indeed, by Chretien's time, the province of human reason had come to in-
clude many different modes of action. Thus, if philosophy had always been con-
sidered, since Plato, as the highest manifestation of the human capacity to rea-
son, philosophy in twelfth-century Aristotelianism had been expanded by Hugh
of St. Victor to include all human actions falling into three basic categories, the
"theoretical," the "practical," and the "mechanical." The theoretical includes
logic, mathematics, and physics; the practical is divided into ethics, economics,
and politics; mechanical philosophy includes seven skills: weaving, armament,
commerce, agriculture, hunting, medicine, and "theatrics," or scientia ludorum
(Didascalicon, Bok. 2).
We should not be surprised to observe that, given his status of a man as mere
animal, Calogrenant's savage interlocutor should lack in most of these accoutre-
ments of human reason. Although he can speak, the man-beast is quite obviously
remote from the abstract theoretical arts. (However, since Chretien's noble pa-

SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL D 61
Irons were probably, themselves, quite unversed in these arts as well, Chretien
surely knew that it was not in his interest to play that register too loudly.) In
things practical, we have already seen that the man-beast is cruel, undomesti-
cated, and tyrannical, hence, totally at odds with what is properly ethical, eco-
nomic, and political.
The man-beast's grades in the mechanical arts are also very low. Instead of
wearing artifacts of woven textile, he wears skins that have been torn from
freshly killed animals and then not even cured or tanned. Instead of bearing a
sword, he either fights with his fist like a primitive human, or he wields a club
that, in a chivalric perspective, is the "minimal" weapon and is linked to the
iconographical convention of the wild man.9 Instead of laboring in the agricul-
tural world of field and pasture, the man-beast inhabits the forest. If we may
think of the telling ofavantures in the courtly feast as the closest thing in twelfth-
century secular aristocratic culture to the now defunct tradition of classical "the-
atrics," then we should not expect much of the man-beast on that score either,
since he does not even understand the meaning of the word avanture, from
which heroic stories spring. As for the three remaining skills of commerce,
hunting, and medicine, Chretien will deal with these later in his story when
Yvain himself will regress from his human perfection as a knight and as a lover
to the generic state of wild animal in the forest.
In his dialogue with the man-as-animal in the forest (which is also a dialogue
with himself), Calogrenant opens with a question that remains unresolved dur-
ing their encounter: whether the man-as-animal is a " 'good thing or not' "
(" 'Va, car me di, I Se tu es buene chose ou non!' ", 11. 328-29). Even though
we are shown here many potentially negative aspects of a man's behavior when
he reverts to his generic status as animal (and such negative aspects are borne
out later by Yvain), Calogrenant and the man-beast, as I have noted, are
scarcely hostile to each other: to the contrary, one is curious and the other
obliging. I would suggest that Chretien deliberately leaves Calogranant's ques-
tion open, not only because it is to remain an active one throughout the rest
of the story, but also because it reflects an unresolved ethical question that lies
at the very heart of a new vernacular culture trying to square off with the con-
flicting messages of antiquity: is passion a legitimate motive for truly heroic ac-
tion? Can or should men and women whose honor is rooted in an ideal of action
(whether in chivalric combat or in love) strive to eliminate from their souls
those generic appetites of desire and wrath or fear that humans have in common
with other animals?
Chretien's culture had inherited contradictory classical and Christian attitudes
toward human passion. On the negative side were the teachings of the Stoics,
transmitted to the Middle Ages largely by Cicero, who felt that passion could
never be the motive of proper ethical action.10 Alongside these were the Neopla-
tonic doctrines of Plotinus, who taught that evil in the human soul stems from

62 D SI ESTHOMO, EST ANIMAL
passions that assault it through its corporeality (Enneades 1.8). Both of these
negative traditions converged in the "philosophical" Augustine of the De libero
arbitrio, which was written shortly after his discovery of Neoplatonism and his
conversion and which taught that the fall of the human soul occurs through libido
(which includes all other passions, including anger and fear) caused by the soul's
chosen attachment to matter (1.3.8; 1.5.11; 1.11.21). In the De trinitate 12.11,
Augustine sees bestiality in humans as a punishment for pride:
For the true honour of man is the image and likeness of God, which is
not preserved except be it in relation to Him by whom it is impressed.
The less therefore that one loves what is one's own, the more one
cleaves to God. But through the desire of making trial of his own
power, man by his own bidding falls down to himself as to a sort of
intermediate grade. And so, while he wishes to be as God is, that is,
under no one, he is thrust on, even from his own middle grade, by
way of punishment, to that which is lowest, that is, to those things in
which beasts delight: and thus, while his honour is the likeness of
God, but his dishonour is the likeness of the beast, "Man being in
honour abideth not; he is compared to the beasts 18 that are foolish,
and is made like to them" (Psalm 49).n
On the positive side, there was a tradition affirming human passion that stemmed
from Plato's Phaedrus, in which Socrates describes his love of spiritual things
as a veritable frenzy. The soul, he says, is like a charioteer (reason) borne aloft
by winged horses (the appetites), and though these must be disciplined by the
reins of reason, they must not be annihilated so that we become nonlovers of
divine Truth. This Platonic tradition also reached Augustine, that is, the Au-
gustine marked by Ambrose and the more dynamic and mystical Augustine of
the Confessions who is propelled toward spiritual ascendance by passions of the
most intense and personal sort. As Erich Auerbach has said, it was this pas-
sionate side of the Christian faith, modelled on the passion of Christ himself,
that prevailed during the early Middle Ages and flowered with renewed intensity
in the spiritual life of the twelfth century.12 But there was another positive
tradition, a more rational one stemming mainly from Aristotle, which was now
also making deep inroads into Chretien's culture, even though we cannot specify
exactly which Aristotelian doctrines Chretien himself knew, or how directly he
knew them. Aristotle insisted positively upon the link between appetition (that
is, the soul's susceptiblity to passion) and movement, hence, between emotion
and motion (motus) (De anima 3.10). Humans are animals, and their very
capacity to move is coextensive with the appetitive self; it follows, therefore,
that a deficiency of anger is just as dangerous to the well-being of the soul as
an excess:

SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL D 63
With regard to anger, also, there is an excess, a deficiency, and a
mean. Although they can scarcely be said to have names, yet since we
call the intermediate person good-tempered, let us call the mean good
temper; of the persons at the extremes let the one who exceeds be
called irascible, and his vice irascibility, and the man who falls short
an inirascible sort of person, and the deficiency inirascibility.13
Although Chretien shows himself receptive to each of these currents at differ-
ent moments of his poetic career, in Yvain he valorizes passion beginning at its
most elementary level. As Jean Frappier has noted, Calogrenant first finds the
path to chivalric adventure through the good offices of the man-beast who points
out the way to the magic fountain.14 Chretien thereby confirms the existential
primacy of a man's animal and passional nature as a generic substratum for his
more perfectable, "special" humanity. The manbeast is more a neutral emanation
of Calogrenant's (and every person's) generic animal nature than his enemy;
hence, they do not fight. Since beasts are not properly ethical beings,15 the man-
beast cannot possibly know what is the proper ethical or political end of human
passion, much less the meaning of the word avanture, which implies the carry-
ing of human passion to its highest perfection; however, the man-beast does at
least know something about the inception of passion, for instance, what mar-
velous things happen to young bacheliers in the forest when liquid from the ba-
sin is spilled on the rock beside the fountain. In Yvain, more than in any other
of his romances, Chretien remains very close to human passion as an elementary
force in the material world and seems preoccupied above all with the question,
more ethical than religious, of how primitive human desire may be transmuted
into a broader economy of desire. We may perhaps see two contrasting symbols
in the basin whose liquid a hero spills upon a rock and in the magic fountain
beside it: the first, the basin, stresses the primary, accidental eroticism of youth
that leads through violent disruption back to primeval chaos; the second, or the
fountain, stresses upward movement in stasis, which is the noble man's goal as
a married lover of a woman who, like Enide, is both mistress and spouse. It is
this second idea that best corresponds to twelfth-century doctrines of perfection
of matter in form, of passion in reason, and this is the natural telos of Yvain's
human desires as well.
Chretien's positive recognition of the primacy of human passion as the raw
material of responsible human action is expressed not only in the relationship
between a man and his generic animal substratum, but also in that spatial opposi-
tion between the aristocratic court (understood as the locus of human perfection)
and the forest. The legacy ofRom
sition between the city and the forest as loci, respectively, of law or reason and
of bestial passion: for instance, Dido and Aeneas fornicated in a cave in the for-
est, and their passion subverted the same Carthage that Dido as queen and law-

64 D SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL
giver had been conscientiously building when the Trojans first arrived on her
shore. Moreover Servius, Virgil's second-century commentor, glosses the forest
in Aeneid 6 as "dens of darkness, in which rage and lust hold sway."16 In Chre-
tien, by contrast, the wood is a place where a man's elementary, passional self
is first summoned forth in its fullest range of expression, and this aspect of a
man's nature as potency is indispensable to that ultimate perfection of his being
in the arts of chivalric warfare and courteous love.
Indeed, Chretien's tendency to see the forest as a locus of primeval human
passion which seeks its own perfection in order and form is a fictive restatement
of broader contemporary platonic attitudes toward the forest (silva) as a meta-
phor for matter. In Bernard Sylvester's Cosmographia, Silva as "wood" perso-
nifies the ancient Greek concept of matter as "wood found in the forests" which
lends itself to the constructions of things such as houses. Already in Greek
thought, the concept had become generalized:
The original definite "content" wood, disappears; only the idea of the
function the wood plays in building is maintained and extended to ev-
ery similar or analogous item. Now, if we ask what kind of function is
meant here, the general answer seems to be: the function of being that
(indeterminate) out of which something can be made. In a more ab-
stract way, we could say: the availability, the plasticity, the determina-
bility which is presupposed to every action of making something.
Productive action is conceived as working on a given "material", which
presents a "possibility" of being shaped in a definite way. Here we
seem to have the origin of the conception which sees matter as
potency. Matter appears here primarily as correlative to productive ac-
tion: that out of which something is made. In this context, the relation
between matter and the active principle has a certain priority to the re-
lation between matter and "form".17
In Bernard, Silva or Hyle is matter endowed with a will to perfection achievable
through form: "Silva, intractable, a formless chaos, hostile coalescence, the
motley appearance of being, a mass discordant with itself, longs in her turbu-
lence for a tempering power; in her crudity, for form; in her rankness, for culti-
vation. Yearning to emerge from her ancient confusion, she demands the shap-
ing influence of number and the bonds of harmony."18 However, Silva is also
inclined, through a certain malignitas, to resist the imposition of form and must
be refined by Noys, or the eternal reason of God: "Now Hyle exists in an ambig-
uous state, suspended between good and evil, but because her evil tendency
preponderates, she is more readily inclined to acquiesce in its impulses" (p. 69).
Bernard is emphatic about the primacy of Silva or Hyle to created beings:
Hyle was Nature's most ancient manifestation, the inexhaustible womb
of generation, the primary basis of formal existence, the matter of all

SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL D 65
bodies, the foundation of substance. Her capaciousness, confined by no
boundaries or limitations, extended itself from the beginning to such
vast recesses and such scope for growth as the totality of creatures
would demand. And since diverse and intricate qualities pervaded her,
the matter and foundation of their perpetuity, she could not but be
thrown into confusion, for she was assailed in such manifold ways by
all natural existence, (p. 70)
Given the morally ambigous nature of the man-beast, given his composite iden-
tity made up of multiple species of animal, given his disdain to confine and
pacify his passionate, warring bulls, and given, finally, his own servitude to pas-
sion, we may understand, now, why this generic animal (whose being subtends
our own) should inhabit the silva of Broceliande. Moreover, Bernard Sylvester
himself mentions the very same forest of Broceliande as one of the most promi-
nent and memorable forests of the creation, along with those of Greece and Asia
(Cosmographia 1.3). I shall speak more about historical forests and romance
later. Suffice it for the moment to suggest that Chretien probably saw a connec-
tion between Silva as cosmic matter to be perfected by divine authority through
form and his own historical relationship as author to the pre-existing, but dis-
parate, tangle of ancient matiere to which he, as a litteratus also embued with
the power of reason, will bring sens as the domus of perfected poetic form.19
Although Yvain enlists himself to perfect Calogrenant's confused story, his
initial success only leads to yet graver human failures than those of Calogrenant,
and I would suggest that a specifically topical concern with a representative
man's relationship to his generic animal nature continues to govern both the con-
tent of the episodes in the romance and their conjointure. Yvain's problem (un-
like Calogrenant's) is not one of summoning up sufficient force of body and mind
to bring to conclusion an adventure of love and war, but rather one of maintain-
ing the proper measure or economy of passions in his soul. During the wedding
festivities for Yvain and Laudine, Gauvin admonishes Yvain not to become one
of those knights " 'who are diminished by their wives' " (" 'qui por lor fames va-
lent mains,' " 1. 2486), and he prevails upon Yvain to augment his knightly
honor by questing after new adventures. Yvain must avoid, in other words, the
shame that beset Erec when he neglected his chivalry through overindulgence
in love following his marriage with Enide. Yvain's passion for chivalric honor
is in itself laudable, but only so long as it is kept within measure. Although Chre-
tien recognizes, and even applauds, the transgressive and anarchic nature of hu-
man passion in its initial phases, moderatio is ultimately the key to virtue in the
human disciplines of love and war. Even Laudine herself readily consents to
Yvain's departure on a quest, but only for a specific period, limited to one year's
time.
When Yvain's thirst for chivalric honor becomes so unreasonable that he for-

66 D 57 ESTHOMO, EST ANIMAL
gets his promise to Laudine, this once proud hero begins to regress to the lowest
limits of his animal soul. While Calogrenant's encounter with his generic animal
nature had been a necessary point of departure on a path toward avanture leading
(at least potentially) to human perfection, Yvain's regression from human per-
fection back to generic animality, which begins the instant when Lunette re-
minds him of his truancy, is totally degrading. Moreover, his regression is sys-
tematic, by which I mean that Chretien carefully programs Yvain's divestment
of all his principal traits as "man" as he regresses to his primitive animal state.
In other words, Chretien is now giving new ethical substance to the topic "from
species" stating that "if it is a human, it is an animal."
Since speech is one of the most obvious differentiae of human beings as spe-
cies, it should come as no surprise that the first property that Yvain loses when
Lunette demands the return of the ring that Laudine had given him at their wed-
ding is, precisely, his faculty of speech:
"Yvains, n'a mes cure de toi
Ma dame, ainz te mande par moi
Que ja mes vers li ne revaingnes
Ne son anel plus ne detaingnes.
Par moi, que ci an presant vois,
Te mande que tu li anvois.
Yvains respondre ne li puet,
Que sans et parole li faut."
(11. 2767-76)
"Yvain, my mistress no longer loves you; thus, she orders you through
me that you never return to her and that you keep her ring no longer.
She orders that through me, whom you see here before you, you send
it back to her." . . . Yvain could not answer her, for both thought
and speech failed him.
The second property of his species that Yvain loses is sociability, for humans
are also by definition social or political animals: Yvain is now so ashamed of
himself that he decides to flee all human company into the wilderness:
Mis se voldrait estre a la fuie
Toz seus an si sauvage terre,
Qe 1'an ne le seust ou querre,
N'ome ne fame n'i eiist
Ne nus de lui rien ne seust
Ne plus que s'il fust an abisme.
(11. 2784-89)

SI ESTHOMO, EST ANIMAL D 67
He wished to flee all alone into such a wilderness that they would not
even know where to look for him, so that not a man, woman, nor
anyone at all, would know any more about him even if he fell into an
abyss.
The third property of the human species that Yvain loses is the power of reason,
and as reason departs, Yvain tears up his clothes. Cloth-making, one will recall,
was the first of the mechanical arts in Hugh of St. Victor's Didascalicon.
Et il va tant que il fu loing
Des tantes et des paveillons.
Lors li monta uns torbeillons
El chief si granz que il forsane,
Lors se descire et se depane
Et fuit par chans et par arees.
(11. 2802-7)
And he goes until he was far from the tents and pavillions. Then so
great a whirlpool went to his head that he went insane, and he ripped
and tore off his clothes and fled through the fields and ploughlands.
The next two mechanical arts to fall into decline are those of armament and
commerce (which are second and third in Hugh's order of presentation), for
Yvain substitutes the lowly peasant's bow for the nobler arms of knighthood
when he steals (rather than purchases) a bow and some arrows from a young
peasant boy. At last, Yvain wanders naked through the forest and stalks wild
animals, whose flesh he eats "completely raw," exactly as other predatory
animals do:
au garcon
Est alez tolir son arcon
Et les saietes qu'il tenoit.
For ce mes ne li sovenoit
De nule rien, qu' il eiist feite
Les bestes par le bois agueite,
Si les ocit et si manjue
La veneison trestote crue.
(11. 2819-26)
He went to the boy and snatched his bow and the arrows that he was
holding. He no longer remembered anything more that he had done.
He stalks the beasts in the forest, and kills them and eats their flesh
completely raw.

68 D SI ESTHOMO, EST ANIMAL
Yvain's conduct as primitive hunter eating his food "completely raw," as other
predatory animals do, represents a decline of the fifth mechanical art, venatio,
which includes both the art of hunting and the culinary arts. The culinary arts
contain two principal subdivisions, the baking of bread, which is the most fun-
damental of all nourishment, and the cooking ofobsonium, or that which is eaten
with bread, a term that Jerome Taylor translates as "side dishes." Here is how
Hugh defines venatio:
Hunting is divided into gaming, fowling, and fishing . . . Its name,
however, is taken from only one part of it because in antiquity men
used to eat merely by hunting, as they still do in certain regions where
the use of bread is extremely rare, where flesh is the only food and
water or mead the drink.
Food (cibus) is of two kinds—bread and side dishes. Bread (panis)
takes its name either from the Latin word for one's laying a thing out
(ponis), or from the Greek word for all (pan), because all meals need
bread in order to be well provided . . . Hunting, therefore, includes
all the duties of bakers, butchers, cooks, and tavern keepers, (p. 77)
Divested, now, of reason and of all its attributes, especially mastery of the
mechanical arts, Yvain has regressed so far to his generic animal state that he
is at the zero point of his humanity.
If Chretien has systematically rehearsed all of the main properties of the hu-
man species that have been lost in this portrait of regression, he no less systemat-
ically depicts Yvain's return to humanity, to chivalry, to love, and finally to the
court. Yvain's first renewal of contact with his species occurs when he happens
upon the hut of a hermit who is clearing land in the forest. It is interesting that
Yvain, a "crazed and wild man" ("hon forsenez et sauvage," 1. 2828), should
meet, of all people, a man of God in the forest who is also scarcely "human,"
but in a different way: one is bestial and subrational; the other is spiritual and
suprarational; yet both are penitent. Why should these two apolitical, nonspeak-
ing men meet in the forest? An answer, may perhaps be found, once again, in
Aristotelian political philosophy, which was making its way back into the West
and which held that an apolitical man is either morally inferior or else morally
superior to the normal man.20 Although it is anachronistic with regard to Chre-
tien, the following passage from Aquinas's commentary on Aristotle's Politics
is perhaps pertinent, even as hindsight, to this meeting of Yvain and the hermit:
But if a man is such that he is not political on account of nature, ei-
ther he is bad, as when this happens as a result of the corruption of
human nature, or he is better than man, namely in so far as he has a
nature more perfect than that generally found in other men, in such a
way that by himself he can be self-sufficent without the company of

SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL D 69
men, as was the case with John the Baptist and Blessed Anthony the
hermit.21
This encounter delineates not only the upper and lower thresholds of humanity,
but also a threshold of the economic world as well, for the hermit is clearing
land, that is, reestablishing those very same, fundamental limits between nature
and culture that previously had been effaced by the man-beast keeping his bulls
unenclosed in the primitive forest.
Although it is possible to find learned explanations for what first appears to
be a curious accident in the historical forest of Broceliande, I would suggest that
Chretien's story was also touching, in the encounter between Yvain and the her-
mit, on ideological points whose direct historical pertinence was what could
have motivated such an exploitation of classical source material in the first place.
The twelfth century was a period of considerable demographic expansion which
entailed an ecological rebalancing of the realms of agriculture and the unculti-
vated "desert," and, in more general terms, a new and unRoman perception of
the relationship between nature and culture based on complementarity, rather
than antithesis. According to Georges Duby, the expansion of fields for the culti-
vation of grain and for pastures became intense of the beginning of the twelfth
century, with the initiative of both the peasants and the lords.22 However, the
infringement of agriculture on seigneurial forests demanded a compromise: now
the need for forest reserves necessary to abundance in the art of hunting, so im-
portant to the aristocratic sense of its identity as a class, competed with increased
motive of agricultural profit in a world of expanding markets (p. 148). It is in-
teresting that Chretien has chosen a hermit, and not a profitmotivated peasant,
as an exemplary land-clearer. Duby says that hermits in the twelfth century were
indeed engaged in the process of clearing land, though monks were not (pp.
146-47).
Yvain's first encounter with this other perfectly marginal member of his spe-
cies is at first absolutely minimal, and involves neither speech nor any other
signmaking activity proper to humans as social animals, but merely the taking
of a piece of bread left out for him by the hermit. However, since bread is a
nutrient derived from grain that has been harvested, ground, and cooked by the
industrious hand of a human, and is not something merely gathered by foraging
in the wild, we may say that a threshold back into humanity has been crossed,
though barely: not only is the bread moldy, dry, and sour, but it is made of bar-
ley mixed with chaff.23 Like Chaucer, whose Wife of Bath equates her low so-
cial status with barley bread, and whose Prioresse feeds white bread to her
classy dogs, Chretien probably sees different kinds of bread as emblems of social
and moral states. (Hugh of St. Victor mentions, for his part, eleven different
types of bread in his description of the mechanical art venatio.) That Yvain rel-
ishes this strictly minimal fare of bread and water as if it were a banquet of meats

70 D SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL
and fine sauces is a poignant indication not only of how hungry he is, but also
of how alienated he is from his proper habitat among the knights and noble ladies
of his species:
N'avoit mie cine souz coste
Li sestiers, don fu fez li pains,
Qui plus iert egres que levains,
D'orge pestriz atot la paille,
Et avuec ce iert il sanz faille
Moisiz et ses come une une escorce.
Mes li fains 1'angoisse et esforce
Tant que le pout li sot li pains;
Qu'a toz mangiers est sausse fains
Bien destanpree et bien confite.
Tot manja le pain a Termite
Mes sire Yvains, que buen li sot,
Et but de 1'eve froide au pot.
(11. 2846-58)
The batch of bread did not cost five sous, and was more sour than
yeast. It was made with barley mixed with straw, and was moldy all
over and dry as bark. But hunger distresses him and the bread pleased
him as if it were stew, for hunger is like a sauce to any food and
makes it seem well blended and prepared. My lord Yvain ate all the
bread, which seemed good to him, and drank the cold water from the
bowl.
Because of the contradiction between his antisocial asceticism and his surpris-
ingly deft economic initiative, Chretien's hermit raises fascinating problems,
both historical and methodological, for the modern critic. The hermit stands in
obvious counterpoint with the man-beast at the beginning of the romance. The
latter is a portrait of the generic animality of humans; he dominates his beasts
by tyrannical passion in a thick forest full of brambles and thorns (11. 181-83).
The man-beast is more subethical than he is evil, to the extent that his generic
being is ontologically prior to the human species (understood as the perfection
of animate creatures) exactly as the forest is prior to the ethical perfection of
the court, or even as the matiere is to the sens of the tale. I am using the term
"perfection" here in an etymological, and more medieval, sense: perficio means,
among other things, to "achieve," "dispatch," "finish," or "complete." For in-
stance, Augustine, in his De Genesi ad litteram, describes the creation of the
cosmos through the Trinity as a process of "perfection" which occurred with the
turning or the "conversion" of matter to God, at which time the different species
became distinct (ita et in conuersione at perfections creaturae, utrerum species

SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL Q 71
digerantur, 1.6.12). Because humans are both corporeal and spiritual, and be-
cause they are also endowed with free will, humans have the potential to sink
lower than any other being, or, as Aristotle says, to become the worst of all
animals24-as does Yvain when he sins against his love for Laudine. Yvain be-
comes ethically worse than the man-beast because he has denied (as the man-
beast has not) the good that is in him.
The hermit, by contrast, represents the "special" perfection of humans as
spiritual creatures. He has rejected ordinary human society as his standard of
perfection in order to assume, in a gesture of supreme penitence, the guilt of
the cosmos from its most rudimentary forms. He tests his own individual good-
ness by centering his charity wholly upon the love of God, rather than by squan-
dering it on humans. The man-beast is asocial and subrational; the hermit is aso-
cial and suprarational, to the extent that he has rejected even the religious
community of the monastery and a life of learning for solitary meditation of the
most immediate and passionate sort. Together, then, the man-beast and the her-
mit represent the lower and upper limits of a human hierarchy.
Chretien's hermit is more, however, than a pure man of God in the forest:
to our surprise, he also turns out to be quite a man of the world. When Yvain
begins to lay game at the hermit's door, thereby reciprocating quid pro quo, as
even animals can, the material charity of the hermit, an interesting recovery
from bottom-line depression (both spiritual and economic), begins. From this
primitive barter system a more complex system of exchange now spontaneously
arises, one that supposes a division of labor, the accumulation of surplus, the
mobility of commodities, the intervention of middlemen, and the monetarization
of the exchange value of things to be exchanged.25 Thus, the hermit skins the
game that Yvain brings him (suggesting, perhaps that the hermit has known the
noble art of venatio first hand), he cooks the meat, he takes the hides to market
in town where he sells them, he buys barley and oats, he bakes bread in more
abundance (unleavened though it still is), and he shares this bread with a hungry,
yet productive Yvain.
This fascinating little vignette about the "origins" of commerce in the elemen-
tary charity of a forest hermitage calls for closer attention. What conceivable set
of assumptions, we may ask, could have led Chretien to link nascent commercial
initiative with a hermit? There is an obvious answer to this question, which is
that the hermit's motive of charity in the process of exchange set him up as an
ideal model for commercial exchange that is not built on cupidity. In this sense,
the hermit's motives stand diametrically opposed to the profit motive of the mer-
chant, at least as that figure is caricatured by Chretien himself in Guillaume
d'Angleterre. In this romance, according to Emanuel J. Mickel,
Throughout the text the merchant class is made to represent the mate-
rial life, a bestial existence focused only on material gain . . . The

72 D SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL
merchant sets as his goal the acquisition of wealth, and everything he
does is calculated to further him along the path to riches and independ-
ence. He is the epitome of the man who wishes to be the master of his
own condition, and has no other values than profit, and never even
considers values which take no account of gain. Thus, the father of
Lovel gives the son the best advice he knows in sending him into the
world: "Ja n'arestes / En liu, ce vos los et enseng,/ Se vos n'i vees vo
gaeng." ["Don't stop anywhere, I advise and instruct you, if you see
no gain there."]26
Although much has been made by modern historians of the caricatural antimer-
cantilism of the church throughout the Middle Ages, this official policy, which
Chretien himself sometimes echoes (as Mickel has shown), must not be allowed
to blind us to important countercurrents, both pragmatic and ideological, in the
very same culture, especially in Chretien's Champagne, and even in Chretien's
own writing as well. As I mentioned earlier, Hugh of St. Victor positively valo-
rizes commerce as one of the seven mechanical arts. Hugh's description of the
art of commerce gives us some interesting clues, moreover, about the logic be-
hind the meeting in Yvain between a ruined and depraved aristocratic knight and
a hermit in the forest from which new prosperity, spiritual as well as material,
arises.
First of all, Hugh's description of commerce confers a quasi-heroic and al-
most noble status on the figure of the merchant. Furthermore, the merchant's
wanderings in the mysterious hinterlands are strikingly similar to the chivalric
aventure into the marvels of the wilderness:
Commerce contains every sort of dealing in the purchase, sale and ex-
change of foreign goods. This art is beyond all doubt a peculiar sort
of rhetoric — strictly of its own kind — for eloquence is in the highest
degree necessary to it. Thus the man who excels others in fluency of
speech is called a Mercurius, or Mercury, as being a mercatorum kir-
rius (= kyrios)-a very lord among merchants. Commerce penetrates
the secret places of the world, approaches shores unseen, explores
fearful wildnernesses, and in tongues unknown and with barbaric peo-
ples carries on the trade of mankind. The pursuit of commerce recon-
ciles nations, calms wars, strengthens peace, and commutes the private
good of individuals into common benefit of all. (Didascalicon 2.23)
Hugh is an early spokesman for a movement that grew to considerable propor-
tions during the twelfth century, especially as Chretien's pations Henri-le-liberal
and Marie de Champagne became energetic patrons of a burgeoning interna-
tional commerce. It is well known that by their carefully policed and regulated
commercial fairs they managed to make of Champagne the trade center of West-
ern Europe during the second half of the twelfth century.27 Therefore, one can

SI ESTHOMO, EST ANIMAL D 73
imagine that Chretien's patrons must have enjoyed this cheery little story about
the origins, in Broceliande, of their own marvelous economy. All that Yvain's
meat lacks is spices from the Orient, and they are on the way.
Despite the apparent simplicity of this allegorical "origin" of commerce in the
encounter between an insane knight and a hermit in the woods, more needs to
be said both about the historical implications of Chretien's gesture and about our
own way of describing it. In a recent article, whose concerns with the economic
substratum of courtly discourse overlap with previous studies of my own, Peter
Haidu has made the following remarks about the hermit episode—remarks with
which, for the most part, I agree:
The text makes a number of assumptions here. It assumes the hermit's
differentiation of Yvains's kills into the edible and the inedible, the
meat and the leather. It assumes that the hermit skins the animals and
puts aside the skins as a primitive accumulation of capital. It assumes
a trip to another place, then, in which the leather is exchanged —in an-
other exchange pattern, a commercial one now-for another object that
is desired, namely, a better grade of bread than is appropriate to a re-
ligious solitary. It assumes, then, a social differentiation by the hermit
between his own status and that of the knight, recognized, inspite of
his madness and nakedness, as belonging to another social class. It as-
sumes, finally, the existence of a nearby place of commercial
exchange—a town or village —settled by a group of men living in soci-
ety, as opposed to the solitary's eremitical life, and the possibility, ap-
parently ever-present, of plugging into its economic system.28
Haidu continues his argument by proposing that the hermit episode depicts a
"closed" economy" whose "functioning" is "metaphorical," and that the juxtaposi-
tion, by metonymy, of this closed economy with the "open economy" of the town
amounts to the "deconstruction" of the former by the latter:
The social system of Yvain and the hermit represents a small, local,
independent unit of production continguous to the social system func-
tioning at its edges. The principle of contiguity is the necessary
presupposition of the text's juxtaposition of two fictional worlds. It is
only thanks to this metonymic contiguity that both the metaphoric,
closed system of the hermit's world and the open commercial world of
generalized exchange can be presented diegetically. As contiguity, its
functioning is metonymical, in opposition to the metaphorical function-
ing of the hermit diegesis proper. This lateral, associative textual move
is the opposite pole of textual functioning from the substitutive
metaphorical structure preceding. As such, it represents the decon-
struction of the former, (p. 135)

74 D SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL
Although I find a curious disjunction of level in Haidu's argument, it does
draw critical attention to questions concerning both the purely internal dynamics
of Chretien's textual performance and the interplay of social codes that are impli-
cated in the diegetic world Chretien's narrative. I would suggest, though, that
Haidu's argument, for all its subtlety and its claim for historical validity, calls
for certain modifications based precisely upon a yet more historical understand-
ing of the hermit's peculiar pattern of conduct. As a historical type, the twelfth-
century hermit was an extremely ambiguous figure. On the one hand, traditional
Benedictine monasticism allowed for hermitism as a legitimate spiritual state,29
amd monastic orders still actively remembered their origins in Christ's sojourn
in the desert and in the exemplary hermitism of later figures such as Saints An-
thony and Jerome.30 Thus, hermitages were commonly authorized to form in the
lands surrounding established monasteries, and their figures were accepted as
the pure among the pure.
In one sense, then, the figure of the hermit might seem like a good emblem
for extreme "closedness" of all sorts, including those of the economy (as Haidu
argues) and of the cloister itself. Indeed, hermitism could lead right back into
monastic reform. To give two important examples, Bruno of Cologne founded
the Carthusian order in 1084,31 and Robert D'Arbrissel founded the famous Ab-
bey of Fontrevaux in 1099.32 Moreover, hermits were hardly social rejects,
since the majority of them were noble (despite Haidu's contrary claims for the
hermit in Yvain) and litterati,33 as is, for example, the hermit who serves as
Tristan's scribe when Tristan writes to Mark for clemency.
On the other hand, the heremetic return to the origins of the monastic spirit
involved revolution, in both the root and the loose senses of that term: a return
to and the overthrow of an origin. During his break with orthodox monasticism,
Robert D'Arbrissel accused religious men of all ecclesiastical states (doctores,
episcopi et abbates et sacerdotes) of being blunderers, liars, adulterers, slan-
derers, practitioners of incest, and of being ignorant and without charity. Yet
such revolutions quickly led to even more radical subversion. The independence
of hermits allowed them to wander, to preach, and to gather alms —above all in
the city from which they were supposedly refugees (Genicot, p. 60). As opposed
to their cloistered brothers, wandering hermits were also free to exchange ideas,
inciting even charges of heresy. (It is no accident that the Franciscan order
would be summoned into existence by a Vatican eager to purify and control the
radical thrust of hermitism as it was affecting urban intellectuals.) Moreover, the
image of the true hermit engendered the image (or the reality) of false hermitage
as well, as evidenced by the poem of Payen Bolotin, written in the 1130s, which
claims to excoriate a new social pestilence composed of radicals dressing as her-
mits, begging for alms, and living as vagagonds, parasites, lechers, hypocrites,
and so on.34 The hermit is therefore also an image, in twelfth century culture,
of both radical withdrawal into an extreme monastic isolation and radical open-

SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL D 75
ness which tends toward subversion of the most scandalous sort, one that
threatens not only the institution of monasticism, but also the metaphysical dis-
course which is its foundation.
We find in the historical case of Abelard an example that illustrates the con-
tradictory resonances, both ideological and metaphysical, surrounding the ere-
mitical impulse, and an example that, for Chretien, was surely very close to
home. In 1122, following his demystification of the supposed origins of the Ab-
bey of St. Denis, Abelard escaped to Champagne, where Suger and the bishop
allowed him to build a hermitage with a mud-and-straw oratory on some land
outside of Troyes given to him by Thibaud de Champagne.35 Abelard was fol-
lowed there by a band of students of logic, who tilled the ground and rebuilt the
oratory, which they named the "Paraclete," to the scandal of religious custom.
Not surprisingly, it was St. Bernard, Abbot of Clairvaux, who apparently led
the ensuing campaign against Abelard, successfully forcing his departure to an-
other monastery (St. Gildas de Ruys) where Abelard became, himself, abbot
during a short but stormy period.
Thus, Chretien's hermit illustrates, by his apparently contradictory life styles,
contrary perspectives upon the hermitage movement as it was seen in Chretien's
own time. There are other cultural questions, as well, raised by Chretien's
depicting the spontaneous rise (or regeneration) of commerce in a sylvan her-
mitage. If the church, until Chretien's time, had been the principal custodian of
literacy (many have supposed that Chretien himself was at least in minor
orders), the hermit, seen as a prototype of the ideal, charitable merchant, may
also be seen as the emblem of a new kind of literacy, one that was doctrinally
independent, open, errant, and polemical. Moreover, surely the mercantile class
of Chretien's own milieu was now arrogating for itself the power of literacy as
an instrument indispensable to the new and more sophisticated techniques of in-
ternational commerce. I have already underscored a basic homology between the
chivalric hero and the litteratus, and I would suggest that Chretien is now ex-
tending his model-making in order to expand with the hermit what we may call,
using Brian Stock's term, a new "textual community" whose members include
merchants, their aristocratic patrons, and certain revolutionary ecclesiastical
figures emblematized by the hermit. We recall that Hugh of St. Victor says that
the god of merchants is Mercury, god of rhetoric, who was also for the Greeks,
Hermes, and for the Egyptians, Toth, inventor of writing (Didascalicon 2.24).
The idea that the hermit would enlist his intellectual powers not only in the ser-
vice of the spiritual commerce of souls in the economy of salvation, but also in
the horizontal transactions of a more mercantile sort implies a both a new combi-
nation of values and a new kind of eloquence that reflects profound mutations
in the discursive configurations of twelfth-century culture. For if Hugh of St.
Victor can say of commerce, "This art is beyond all doubt a peculiar sort of
rhetoric —strictly of its own kind —for eloquence is in the highest degree neces-

76 D SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL
sary to it," then it is not difficult to see how the model of commercial eloquence,
which is by definition competitive and polemical (though not polemical in the
manner of knights) might be linked with the movement of radical hermitage in
a single "textual community." For it was precisely as itinerant, begging
preachers began to circulate among urban crowds that many traditional doctrines
began to be challenged in the free exchange of ideas. Did Chretien see his own
literacy, which was obviously in some sense up for hire to such wealthy patrons
of commerce as Henri-le-liberal and Philippe de Flandres, as "Mercurial," that
is, as both spiritual and mercantile?36
Since we do not know who Chretien was, we cannot answer such a question.
However, it would seem that medieval romance called from within for a more
ample figure to emblematize the ambivalence of its own textuality, and that
figure was Merlin. Indeed, Merlin is an amazing accretion of contradictory func-
tions, many of which are anticipated here in Chretien's rather cautious fiction
of Yvain's meeting with the hermit in Broceliande. Howard Bloch has recently
explored Merlin's functions as an emblem of writing:
In classical mythology the invention of writing is variously ascribed to
the Phoenician Cadmus, the Greek Hermes, or the Egyptian Thoth.
The medieval figures are Odin, the inventor of runes, and Merlin-
magician, enchanter and prophet. Merlin is said to have introduced
writing to the Arthurian world and to have formulated plans for two
books, each possessing its own discourse, logic, and epistemological
mode.37
These two books, as Bloch characterizes them, implicate, first, a model built on
the claim of origins, even though this book of the past is the "Devil's terrain";
and second, a book without origins that is "a spontaneously generated, autono-
mous discourse cut off from discernible origins. The book without origins is an
original book: nonrepresentational, beholden to nothing, always true because
consistently self-referential. Since it lies beyond any system of meaning outside
of itself, its self-generating and self-determining language is situated beyond the
limits of truth and falsehood" (p. 128). Although Bloch does not say so, we may
see in these two opposed functions of writing an interesting analogy with the
poetics of the chanson de geste (as exemplified by the first part of the Roland)
as opposed to the poetics of romance (as exemplifed by Yvain). In other words,
it is possible to find in the overlapping textuality of dissident hermits and of mer-
chants manifestations of a new cultural ambivalence toward the power of writing
expressed by romance authors diegetically in the figure of Merlin, if we may
accept Bloch's account of him:
The medieval Merlin is a polysemous figure. Representative of Satan,
recuperated by God, he retains the knowledge imparted by both. A
fatherless being without discernible origin, his conception having oc-

SI ESTHOMO, EST ANIMAL D 77
curred without his mother's awareness, he is at the same time the
guardian of paternity. Merlin's function is bound to the discovery and
relation of false and elusive family bonds, illegitimacy and incest as
well as the genealogy of generations to come. A medieval Hermes,
Merlin is the inhabitant of the forest, the Wild Man who is simultane-
ously the bringer of culture, the master of arts and of science. In
Geoffrey of Monmouth's Vita Merlini he is, like Hermes, the practi-
tioner of music, astronomy, mathematics, and calculation; he is partic-
ularly adept at keeping the written records of gestation which afford
this fatherless guardian of letters a perfect perception of lineal rela-
tions. Also like Hermes-the god of clever speech, the wise child, the
flatterer and liar, Merlin repesents the skillful rhetorician and master
of juridical discourse, (p. 129)
It is no doubt pertinent to recall here that Yvain was written precisely at the time
when, according to Jacques Le Goff, a new theology of Purgatory was constitut-
ing itself in European culture and specifically in intellectual milieux in which
Chretien himself was versed, namely, those of Citeaux and Paris.38 This new
doctrine involved the belief that the purgation of sins after death occurred in a
specific place beyond the material world where the souls of sinners spent limited
periods of time until, once purified by torture and hardship, they were pardoned
for their sins arid saved in Heaven. It was a place of just prices where time had
quantity and value and where distances to be traversed by penitent souls were
precise (Le Goff, pp. 310-11). If it is safe to say that courtly erotic discourse
drew heavily for its matiere upon conventions of mystical discourse, it is likely
that there was also feedback and that an economy of wordly desire conceptually
perfected in a vernacular poetics worked major mutations in mystical and
metaphysical discourse: such intercontamination of codes, I would suggest, was
one consequence of vernacularizing grammatica in a culture where commerce
was on the rise. In other words, courtly erotic discourse did not deconstruct the
metaphysical, but altered it from below.
Given that the forest, in Chretien's system of values is a locus of openness,
Haidu's modern concept of the hermitage as a rural "closed" economy is dis-
sonant. Also dissonant is his idea that the economy of the city is "open" and that
it "deconstructs" the "closed" any more than human deconstructs animal, reason
deconstructs passion, or city deconstructs forest. Rather, we should consider
Chretien's textual poesis as integral to a much broader ideological enterprise,
one in which the closure of systems (textual, monetary, logical, judicial) is seen
as the possibility of bringing the multiple into the corporate, the confused into
the distinct, and the stochastic into the regular and of making the warrior into
the domesticated spouse and breeder. It is through closures of form, measure,
and economy that desiring Nature succeeds herself without dying, and it is
through form that God and poets alike "exornate" the materia of raw nature

78 D SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL
(vegetable, animal, human) in order to bring to it the perfection or complete-
ness, both cosmic and esthetic, that it craves. Such is Chretien's mandate as a
litteratus: to construct, out of the multiple codes competing with each other to
determine reality within his culture, a significant and sumptuous edifice in which
men and women could hope to live, if only in their imaginations.
Grammatica^ in this sense, is not the Derridean ecriture as many people, in-
cluding Haidu, construe it. It is important for medievalists to understand that
ecriture and "deconstruction" presuppose positive gestures that Derrida himself
considers as constructive. Asked recently whether critics should not be as recep-
tive to texts attempting to posit closed significant structures, as they are to texts
that fail, contest, or betray the hidden metaphysics subtending most textual oper-
ations, beginning with the writing even of a complete sentence (oratio perfecta),
Derrida quickly answered that already in Heidegger, the terms Destruktion and
Abbau are not to be understood simply as "destruction," but rather as the attempt
to "defaire une edification pour voir comment elle est constitute ou deconstituee"
("to take apart an edifice to see how it is constituted or unconstituted"). As for
a "schema de la deconstruction qui serait celui d'une operation technique s'appli-
quant a demonter des systemes, personnellement je ne souscris pas a ce modele
de la deconstruction" ("schema of deconstruction which might be that of a techni-
cal operation applied to taking apart systems, I personally do not subscribe to
that model of deconstruction"), Derrida says that the true object of deconstruc-
tion is not "structure" in the sense that structuralists of the sixties gave to that
term, but rather, classical ontology in a philosophical tradition:
"Quand d'autres s'y sont interesses, j'ai essaye de le determiner, ce
concept, a ma maniere; enfin selon ce que je croyais etre la bonne
maniere, c'est-a-dire en insistant sur le fait qu'il ne s'agissait pas d'une
operation negative. Je ne me sens pas en situation de choisir entre une
operation disons negative, nihiliste, qui viendrait s'acharner pour
demonter des systemes et Fautre operation. J'aime beaucoup tout ce
que je deconstruis a ma maniere."39
When others became interested in it, I tried to determine this concept
in my own way —finally, in what I thought to be the correct way —that
is, by insisting on the fact that it was not a negative operation. I do
not feel that I am in a situation to choose between an operation that
we might call negative or nihilistic, bent upon taking apart systems, or
the other operation. I very much love what I deconstruct in my own
way.
For Chretien, the city and the economics of the city are not openings of what
was rurally closed, but rather the opposite, and like his patrons, he saw such
closures as postive and life-giving, not alienating. The vocabulary of a Marxist
semiotic reading of Yvain may very well convey meaning to a critic previously

SI EST HOMO, EST ANIMAL D 79
aligned to a certain historical schema that sees early capitalism and nascent ur-
banism as alienating, however such a schema seems facile to me, at least to the
extent that it ignores the massive and irreversible regrouping in twelfth-century
urban life of human energies and allegiances in ways that were also liberating,
by any scale of values. We shall return to the notion of closure as both an ethical
and an artistic value at the end of the following chapter.

Chapter 6
From Man-Beast to Lion-Knight:
Difference, Kind, and Emblem
Chretien's understanding of conjointure as the potential-not merely to drama-
tize unstated relationships between objects, circumstances, or episodes in his
narrative, but to conceive his matiere topically — meant that he could understand
narrative relationships abstractly: as "places" that are "empty" because they can
subsist in the intellect independently of the specific content that can "fill" them.
The abstractness of topical conjointure, understood as the primary condition of
truth in narrative, made it possible for Chretien to refract the single, topically
conceived relationship between a "special" man and his generic animality
through many different circumstantial perspectives, and also to invoke multiple
types of signs and discursive strategies in order to convey this relationship.
Thus, the progress of Yvain from bestiality in the forest to his restored mar-
riage with Laudine and to the social world as a rehabilitated, courteous knight
is articulated by Chretien with the aid of a remarkable variety of narrative
resources, thanks to which we are brought to understand the relationship of a
man to his animal nature with as fully amplified a vision as possible. The last
half of Yvain may be understood as a transition from a man as pure, undifferen-
tiated animal to the "different" perfection of animality in a loving and courteous
knight.
In other words, the stable topical armature of Chretien's narrative makes pos-
sible a striking dynamism in his poetic invention: symbols become movable, act-
ing as "shifters" between different systems and discourses (the psychic, the so-
cial, the religious), and symbols are artfully substituted for each other in the
narrative chain without a loss of sens, or coherence. This dynamism in Chre-
80

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 81
tien's construing of narrative content presupposed a new sense of freedom, nur-
tured by logic, of his art from the claims of ontological truth (though not from
those of formal truth), and hastened a mature understanding of narrative as
fiction that is about reality yet distinct from it because such art is both a product
and an object of the intellect. Chretien's success in exploiting the polyvalence
of narrative substance in order to inculcate in his stories an internal life of their
own may be seen as a positive poetic response to the tragic slippage and vitiation
of signs that marked the internal process of the Roland. Let us now explore these
propositions in more detail.
One day as Yvain sleeps "poor and naked" ("povre et nu," 1. 2912) in the for-
est, that is, hovering on a very fine line between the animal and vegetable states1
(he can sink no lower), some noble maidens happen to pass by and recognize
Yvain, even in his degraded state, by a scar on his face. To the extent that this
scar is, quite literally, the inscription of previous feats of arms on his flesh,
hence, of a certain heroic value, this inscription determines and signifies, within
the discourse of a specific social group, his original noble and chivalric "charac-
ter," in the original Greek sense of that term. A character, Mark Shell reminds
us, is "the upper die used by the coinmaker or impressed mark upon the coin."2
Yvain's pale and naked body is a kind of hieroglyphic text, a caroglyph pitifully
inferior to the heroic text of Roland's body fixed in its monumental posture of
defiance even in death: is not Charlemagne, in this sense, the first reader of the
Chanson de Roland? Diligent readers of scars on chivalric flesh that they are,
the noble maidens read Yvain's story by a different, less epic heroic code and
rush back to their unmarried mistress, the Dame de Noroison, to tell their story
of having seen the "most proven and the best furnished knight in the world" ("Le
chevalier miauz esprove I Del monde et le maiuz antechie," 11. 2922-23). Sinc
Yvain is naked, the nature of his "furnishings" is hardly ambiguous. The new
code of romance is working well. The Dame de Noroison promptly orders the
maidens to return to annoint the naked hero with a magic unguent. In Hugh of
St. Victor's scheme of the seven mechanical arts, Yvain will now benefit from
the sixth, which is medicine. So enthusiastic are the maidens with their task,
however, that, instead of rubbing only Yvain's temples, as their mistress had
commanded, they rub Yvain's body from head to toe, whereupon Yvain is sud-
denly resurrected from near vegetativeness to his elementary, but proper
(though still naked), state of homo erectus. The damsels will be rewarded, and
not punished, for their demesure in applying five full cestiers of the marvelous
unguent to his body—that is, about ten gallons by the old Parisian measurement
of liquid setters. First, though, the maidens give Yvain clothes (the fruit of hu-
manity's first mechanical skill, weaving), and then they bring him to the Dame
de Noroison's castle. Here Yvain is thoroughly redomesticated by being bathed,
coiffed, and shaven, hence, by being shorn of the uncouth iconography of the
traditional wild man of medieval legend that he had previously displayed.

82 a FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
Yvain's good fortune here reflects the earlier laundering of his unsavory past un-
dertaken by Lunette (another just measurer of the exchange value of knights)
when she first presented Yvain to the widow of the man he had just slain. Chre-
tien clearly expects us to weigh Yvain's forthcoming merits in serving the Dame
de Noroison not only contextually with regard to what he owes her for rescuing
him, but also more abstractly, with regard to Laudine, in whose eyes Yvain's
credit has vanished. Thus, when Yvain is at last armed with fine weapons and
a horse (signalling once again his ascension to the arts of weaponry and knight-
hood), the damsels' earlier demesure with the ointment is now repaid by equiva-
lent exploits on the battlefield as Yvain protects the Dame de Noroison from the
assault of hostile neighbors, just as, earlier, he had protected Laudine.
However, we of the audience witness the carnage that Yvain inflicts upon his
enemy not through the eyes of the narrator, but through those of the unmarried
Dame and her maidens: not only do they exclaim that Roland himself could
never have achieved with his sword Durendal what Yvain is achieving now, but
also they make it clear that the violence of this hero's sword in battle summons
to their minds the contrary gestes of that other, less bellicose skirmish in which
Enide proved her sweet prowess on her wedding night:
Et dient que buer seroit nee
Cui il avroit s'amor donee
Que si est as armes puissanz.
(11. 3243-45)
And they say that she to whom he might give his love-he who is so
powerful at arms —she would be born to a happy fate.
Here is a crucial moment where Chretien refracts hyperbolic male heroism (and
male narrativity) through female eyes, allowing us to glimpse, through these
lovely prisms, the polysemy of epic heroic motivation. The Dame de Noroison's
hyperbole not only eroticizes the chivalric battlefield, but also proclaims a su-
periority of Yvain over Roland that is both qualitative and quantitative: the new
hero of romance is stronger than the best hero of epic; he also manifests a new
and radical dynamism of soul that the hero of the older code could never have
honorably displayed.3 The Roland poet never tells us when or if Roland ever
changes his clothes: armor alone maketh the man. Yvain, by contrast, like
Calogrenant and other heroes of Chretien's romances, bathes and changes from
armor to luxurious robes whenever—and well before —the prospect of female
companionship presents itself. To put it more bluntly, Yvain's value as marrying
and breeding stock now matches and even subsumes his valor of the sword, even
though good knights (as Laudine has learned) are not so easily domesticated.
Admirable though Yvain's rehabiliation is, both as a potential lover and as
a knight, his spectacular protection of the Dame de Noroison's domain is clearly

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 83
only the first step in a rigorous economy of redemption which demands, on the
part of the poem's audience, an active perception of equivalences, and this en-
tails special alertness to Chretien's own symbol-making process. Thus, precisely
as Yvain takes up his quest for redeemed (and redeemable) honor, Chretien
"finds" in his story a new emblem for Yvain's animal nature: this lion, whom
Yvain "loves like his own body" ("I'aime come man cors," 1. 3798) also happens
to be the king of beasts, a symbol of the resurrected Christ, and a creature vari-
ously celebrated by the bestiaries not just for its ferocity, but also for its compas-
sion, temperance, watchfulness, tameability, loyalty, and monogamy as well.
Topically speaking, if Yvain is a human, he is an animal; now, ethically speak-
ing, he is no longer just any animal: by metonymy he is now associated with
leoninity, a positive association that will be amplified by the story.
Such a comparison had been partially prepared by various similes appearing
earlier in Chretien's own tale. Esclados, Yvain's predecessor in marriage with
Laudine, had been compared to a raging lion when he attacked Calogrenant (1.
488), and Yvain himself had seemed lionlike during his ferocious defense of the
Dame de Noroison:
Tot autressi antr'aus se fieri
Con li lions antre les dains,
Quant 1'angoisse et chace la fains.
(11. 3202-4)
He rages among them like a lion among deer, when he is driven by
the anguish of hunger.
This earlier image has cultural resonances that are already complex. On the one
hand, it brings descriptive vividness to a battle scene in which the explicit com-
parison of Yvain to Roland is reinforced by a metaphor common to both poems:
Quant Rolland veil que la bataille serat,
Plus se fait fiers que leon ne leupart.
(11. 1110-11)
When Roland sees that battle will occur, he becomes fiercer than a
lion or a leopard.
On the other hand, the details of Chretien's image are much closer to those
of Virgil's Aeneid, where the pejorative bestiality of warriors transported by un-
heroic rage reaches a terrifying crescendo in the second half of that poem. Here
is Virgil's more expansive simile describing Mezzentius, king of the Etruscans:
Impastus stabula alta leo ceu saepe peragrans
(suadet enim vesana fames), si forte fugacem
conspexit capream aut surgcntem in cornua cervum,

84 a FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
gaudet hians immane comasque arrexit et haeret
visceribus super accumbens — lavit improba
taeter ora cruor—
sic ruit in densos alacer Mezentius hostis.
(10. 723-29)
Just as a ravenous lion who often goes ranging
through deep forest coverts, while
Hunger makes him more fierce, perhaps sights a bounding
she-goat
Or a stag towering to his antlers, rejoices and opens
Wide his huge mouth, his mane bristling up as he crouches,
Clinging upon the beast's entrails as hideous gore
Bathes his cruel jaws,
Thus eager Mezzentius attacked his close-ranked opponents.4
Given that metaphors are speech acts that always signify discursively, and not
in isolation, Chretien has "found" in the lion a symbol whose polyvalence will
mark his text as a shifter between multiple discourses (Biblical, classical,
folkoric, "scientific"),5 all of which he entertains, yet controls, as he distributes
them within the economy of his own story, thereby asserting the preeminence
of his own poetic voice as a vernacular litteratus over the tangled legacy of dis-
courses inherent in his matiere.
Animalities and Models of Perception
From our very first perception of the lion as he struggles in the forest with the
serpent, it is clear that we are invited, along with Yvain, to "think" the lion's
animality not only as an isolated symbol, but also in a differential system con-
stituted by multiple animalities pertinent to Yvain's own, as a man. Moreover,
to "think" animality in the context of twelfth-century culture involved distinctly
different hermeneutical alternatives: the moral or allegorical, the rational or
"scientific," and what I shall later call the "heraldic" or "totemic." I shall propose,
first, that Chretien's poem entertains, at different moments, all of these alterna-
tives, and second, that the interplay between these different cognitive procedures
evinced by Chretien's Yvain constitutes a basic intellectual game that is still pos-
sible for us to play today to the extent that, even now, we still tend to perceive
animals in our culture with analogous, if not always identical, teleologies in
mind.
When Yvain sees the lion and the serpent deadlocked in mortal combat, with
the serpent clinging to the lion's tale, a choice based on judgment becomes neces-
sary: which of the animals —the lion, the serpent, or even Yvain himself—

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 85
deserves the most consideration in Yvain's course of action? The process of
judgment defines the moral state of Yvain himself in his role as judge: to choose
lioninity over serpentinity is a moral choice of good over evil. To save the lion
at the subsequent risk of his own well-being is to indicate, further, that Yvain
is motivated by the passion of charity rather than by cupidity, as he apparently
was before.
The moral or allegorical classification of animals had of course been domi-
nant in neoplatonic and Augustinian exegetical traditions of medieval culture,
and these criteria certainly still pertain to our perception of both the lion and the
serpent. However, in Chretien's culture, such tendencies to construe mythical
archetypes in vernacular poetry were nourished not only by Scripture, but also
by classical letters, and even by folklore, and such hybridized symbols were al-
ready current in the bestiaries of Chretien's own time. That Chretien drew heav-
ily upon the classical and Scriptural traditions (whether directly or through bes-
tiaries) is obvious, and it is possible (as Julian Harris did so well in 1948) to
construct a cogent reading of the lion's symbolic functions in Yvain based above
all on the multiple, but concordant, virtues of the lion as an allegorical and fabu-
lous beast. Thus, the lion embodies, in Chretien's story, not only the congenial
features celebrated in him by the bestiaries or by the story of Androcles, but also
a theological dimension of divine grace which is shown in this story to be at
work even in the remotest corners of the world.6
However, there was another classical and medieval tradition of classifying
animals which was not fabulous or allegorical, but rational and "scientific," at
least in the medieval sense of that term. Such rationalism was once again gaining
prominence in Chretien's culture with the rise of Aristotelianism, known both
directly (as in the case of texts such as the Categories and the Topics, which
were known in the twelfth century) and indirectly (as in Porphyry's and
Boethius's readings of such Aristotelian texts). In this tradition, criteria of classi-
fication were not moral, but ontological, and they led to the systematic constru-
ing of differences (differentiae)
genera properly into their various species and to define what features constitute
this or that species.
In logical terms, a species is defined by medieval logicians as a genus plus
a differentia:e genus "animal" plu
"rational." Some differentiae 
are separable from a given species (e.g., two-
footedness), and some are /^separable (e.g., to be capable of laughing, or
risibilis). Porphyry the Phoenician, whose Isagoge (translated into Latin by
Boethius) became one of the most important resources of twelfth-century logic,
speaks thus of the relationships possible between species and
There are separable and inseparable differences. Moving, resting, be-
ing healthy, being ill, and characteristics similar to those are separ-

86 D FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
able, but being hook-nosed, snub-nosed, rational, or irrational are in-
separable. Some inseparable differences exist per se, some acciden-
tally. Rational, mortal, and being capable of knowledge belong to man
per se, but hooknoosed or snub-nosed belong accidentally and not per
se. Differences present per se, then, are comprehended in the defini-
tion of the substance and make another essence, but accidental differ-
ences are not comprehended in the definition of the substance and do
not make another essence but only a difference in quality.7
In her excellent discussion of differentiae 
in Porphyry, Eleonore Stump
writes:
Differentiae can be thought of in two different ways: either they divide
a genus, in which case they are divisive differentiae; or they constitute
a species, in which case they are constitutive differentiae. The same
differentia is both divisive and constitutive, but it is divisive of one
thing and constitutive of another. For example, the differentia rational
is divisive of the genus animal and constitutive of the species man. A
genus that cannot itself be subsumed as a species under some higher ge-
nus is called a highest genus-Aristotle's ten categories are the ten high-
est genera of everything; and a species that can have no species sub-
sumed under it for which it serves as a genus is called a lowest species.
Except for lowest species and highest genera, all genera are subaltern
genera—that is, they can be described also as species; and all species
are subaltern species —that is, they can all be described as genera.8
Such epistemic operations tend to give rise to a characteristic cognitive para-
digm, which is a tree, and the "Porphyrian tree" became, through Abelard, a
constitutive model of twelfth-century scholastic thought. For example, if we
may think of substance as a genus that is not a species of anything and hence
is a highest genus, let us see how the Porphyrian tree of differences "works"
when we think "human" as —opposed, for example, to "God" (see schema, page
87).
We should be reassured, however, that the both Porphyry and the scholastics
knew that their cognitive processes were not really as formally determined by
treeness as it might appear. Umberto Eco has recently shown how, from Por-
phyry on, the model of the tree always turns into an epistemological hindrance
when it is discovered that
(a) the same differentia can encompass many species, (b) the same
couple of differentiae can occur under more than one genus, (c) differ-
ent couples of genera can be represented under many genera by using
the same names (equivocally of analogically), and (d) it is an open
question how high in the tree the common genus can be in respect to
which many subordinate genera can host the same differentiae.9

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 87
substance
corporeal substance 
incorporeal substance
animate corporeal substance 
inanimate corporeal substance
I 
I
senstive animate corporeal 
insensitive animate corporeal
substance (animal) 
substance (plant)
r 
' 
i
rational animal 
irrational animal
mortal rational 
immortal rational
animal (man) 
animal (god)
Reprinted from Boethius's "De topicis differentiis," 
translated by Eleanore Stump.
Copyright ® 1978 by Eleanore Stump. Used by permission of the publisher, Cornell
University Press.
Commenting upon Porphyry's comparison between the tree as a metaphor to de-
scribe relationships between individual, genus, and species and the family
"tree," Abelard concedes that the former teaches us to ascend from one clas-
sificatory step to another; but it is also a hindrance, he says, because in logic
we do not ascend (as we always do in the case of families) to a single origin (ad
unumprincipium).10 The Porphyrean tree is not, in other words, a fixed or stable
model of being, but only a heuristic schema of cognition which allows us to con-
strue terms and reason properly. Eco shows how the epistemic model of the tree
tends to collapse, when its heuristic limits have been reached, into the model of
the labyrinth: "The Utopia of a Porphyrean tree represented the most influential
attempt to reduce the labyrinth into a bidimensional tree. But the tree again
generated the labyrinth" (p. 80).
Twelfth-century thought oscillated, however, between more than two her-
meneutical paradigms. Indeed, there was an important third one that Eco (speak-
ing not of of the twelfth century, but of Vico) calls the "heap." The "heap" is
characteristic of mystical human understanding of divine discourse: "The lan-
guage of the gods is a heap of unrelated synechdoches and metonymies: thirty
thousand gods as identified by Varro, as many as the Greeks counted, including
stones, fountains, reefs, brooks, minute objects, signifiers of forces, causes,
connections" (p. 108). Perhaps I could suggest that in twelfth- and thirteenth-
century romance, a scientific tree of rational thought competes with the labyrinth
embodied in the experience of the quest, while the allegorical mode of romance
tends toward the heap, that is, toward the accumulation of multiple and disparate
significations where no perceptible criterion of combination exists. In romance,
the labyrinth and the heap tend to generate effects of the marvelous, understood
as the transgression of "treeness." In the avanture of romance, we are not al-

88 D FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
lowed to see the tree for the forest. With regard to Yvain, the bestiary serves
as an important heap of notions combined into a whimsical and eclectic amalgam
where differentiae of human and animal are construed in a tangle of anthropo-
morphic bestalities. Yvain's lion, whom the knight chances upon in the middle
of the forest, is a case in point: here is a creature whose impossible polysemy
is a ragbag of differentiae drawn from the core of the bestiary tradition. Differen-
tiae are conspicuously misplaced as this massively humanized lion au chevalier
becomes a symbol of Yvain's redeemed and noble animal nature as the chevalier
au lion. Thus, if we are told by the bestiary that the lion is faithful, forbearing,
compassionate, watchful, and abstemious, all of these positive ethical virtues are
illustrated by the lion's conduct in such a way as to stress his function as an in-
alienable symbol of Yvain's own animal nature, now properly domesticated by
reason.11 As Chretien says of the lion, "Forever more he will always accompany
him; he wishes to serve and protect him" ("Tozjors mes ne s'an partira: I Que
servir et garder le viaut." 11. 3413-15). When the lion smells game in the forest,
he awaits his master's command before killing the game; then, despite his hun-
ger, the lion stoically lies motionless until he is at last permitted to devour the
remains of the deer's carcass in proper lionlike fashion, bones and all. This epi-
sode stands in clear contrast with the simile of the lion beserk with hunger with
which Chretien had earlier described Yvain himself. Yvain, for his part, care-
fully skins and cuts up the quarry, showing his mastery of the mechanical and
very human art of venatio, once again in contrast, first, with the impulsive man-
beast at the beginning of the romance, who wore skins freshly torn from his
animals and, second, in contrast with his own conduct when he hunted and ate
raw game during his period of insanity in the forest before meeting the hermit.
This humble culinary moment in the forest joins reasonable human to passionate
beast in a duly harmonious relationship, even though Chretien maintains a care-
ful distinction between this still primitive meal in the forest and a truly civilized
meal of the court, since it does not yet include bread, wine, salt, or any of the
accoutrements or other "side dishes" of the courtly feast;
Et met an une broche an rost
Son larde cuire au feu mout tost,
S'el rosti tant que toz fu cuiz.
Mais del mangier fu nus deduiz;
Qu'il n'i out pain ne vin ne sel,
Ne nape ne coutel ne el.
(11. 3465-70)
And he quickly puts his meat on a roasting spit and cooks it until it is
done; but he took no delight in the meal, since there was neither bread
nor wine, nor salt, nor tablecloth, nor knife, nor anything else.

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 89
Not being a banquet or feast, this silvan meal shared by a man and a lion obvi-
ously does not belong to the mechanical art called the "science of entertainments"
(scientia ludorum): this is the last of the seven that Hugh of St. Victor mentions,
and it includes banquets with songs, instrumental music, and chants.
Chretien selects features of the bestiary lion which stress the restored subser-
vience of animal to human, of passion to reason, virtues which of course reflect
victories within his master's own soul. However, Chretien is also careful to set
natural limits to such subservience. Even in the bestiary we are told that "so far
as their relations with men are concerned, the nature of lions is that they do not
get angry unless they are wounded" (p. 9). In conformity with this limit, Chre-
tien constructs a sequence of three scenes (the fight with Harpin de la Montagne,
the defense of Lunette, and the liberation of the enslaved maidens in the Chateau
de Pesme Avanture in which the lion is thoughtlessly ordered by his master to
stay by the sidelines while Yvain fights. Yvain's error here recalls that of Erec
when he commands Enide to follow him in silence, no matter what happens.
Like faithful Enide, each time the lion sees that his master is certain to be
wounded or even slain, the lion spontaneously violates Yvain's orders and leaps
to his rescue. Chretien is warning us, in an unstoic (and unPauline) way, not
to allow reason foolishly to legislate all passion from our being and to over-
domesticate our animal will: a man must not deny, to the point of self-
destruction, his generic nature as animal.
The lion's relationship to Yvain is both personal and symbolic, then, in that
he not only adores his master but symbolizes his master's redeemed animal na-
ture: si homo bonus est, bonus animalis est. Moreover, the lion's nature is per-
fected in that of his master, just as human nature as animal and human is per-
fected in the incarnate Christ, the immortal god who took the form—both
spiritual and animal —of a mortal man in order to erase the tragic difference
(both ontological and moral) between fallen man and fallen woman and their
original created forms as they must have been beside the tree of knowledge.
An erasure of differential relationships between human and animal in Yvain,
ou le chevalier au lion invites pathos when Yvain himself regresses into his
generic animality in the forest. However, an uncanny humor arises the more
Yvain's lion is humanized. What male reader does not wince when Yvain smites
off the end of the lion's tale as he delivers him from the evil serpent? What
reader, male or female, would not start if Yvain and his lion walked through
the door into his home? Although the lion cannot speak, he is eloquent with con-
ventional body signs: he kneels before Yain with his paws joined, like a good
vassal during rites of hommage; he weeps abundant tears in gratitude for his res-
cue. The lion is courteous at supper, and he even shares the same bedroom with
his master in the Castle of Noire Espine. It is also here that two maidens skilled
in medicine treat the lion's wounds, exactly as maidens do, by convention, for
a wounded knight. So embued is the lion with a classical sense of loyalty that

90 n FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
when Yvain appears to have died during a faint, the lion sets his master's sword
against a tree and prepares himself, like a good Roman, to run upon it. The lion
is also clever, almost to the point of being rational: when Yvain shuts the lion
in a room as he fights with the three sons of the demon in the Chateau de Pesme
Avanture, the lion seeks a way of escape until he finds a rotten section of the
doorsill, which he scratches until he can pass under the door and rescue his mas-
ter, just in the nick of time.
However, such humor is perhaps "uncanny" in a special sense of that word,
that is, as the English term to translate Freud's notion of the Unheimliche.
Thanks to the rich lexical ambiguities of the German, the Unheimliche expresses
that ambivalence provoked in the mind by things perceived as uncanny: such
things, Freud says, threaten to reactivate experiences in our unconscious which
have been repressed because they are dangerous to our being as social animals:
If psychoanalytic theory is concrete in maintaining that every emo-
tional affect, whatever its quality, is transformed by repression into
morbid anxiety, then among such cases of anxiety there must be a
class in which the anxiety can be shown to come from something re-
pressed which recurs. This class of morbid anxiety would then be no
other than what is uncanny, irrespective of whether it originally
aroused dread or some other affect . . . if this is indeed the secret
nature of the uncanny, we can understand why the usage of speech has
extended das Heimliche into its opposite das Unheimliche', for this un-
canny is in reality nothing new or foreign, but something familiar and
old-established in the mind that has been estranged only by the process
of repression.12
Si est homo, est animal: the lion is uncanny because we see in him the domestica-
tion of our own savage animality, and in this romance, such domestication in-
volved a symbolic sacrifice similar to that of circumcision, hence, similar (like
circumcision) to castration. Indeed, since Yvain has, in a sense, fornicated
against Laudine by indulging his passion for chivalric glory, the loss of his
animal's tale expresses a justice similar to that of Oedipus's blinding himself. As
Freud writes, "In blinding himself, Oedipus, that mythical law-breaker, was
simply carrying out a mitigated form of the punishment of castration —the only
punishment that according to the lex talionis was fitted for him" ). 383).
On the other hand, Chretien is neither a Freudian, nor a Stoic, nor Augustin-
ian neoplatonist. Nor is he a fanatic about repressing animal appetition in hu-
mans, whether anger or desire. Thus despite the heap-like aspect of its cognitive
processes as expressed in the mode of the avanture in romance teems with multi-
ple animalities (including, of course, those of lion and human whose web of rela-
tionships do finally express an "arboreal" architecture that is natural and true (in

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 91
Aristotelian terms), and is therefore in opposition with the denaturing figural tra-
dition proper to Augustinian neoplatonism.
In other words, Yvain, ou le chevalier au lion makes more than one cognitive
demand of its audience. On the one hand, it expresses many different animalities
woven into its matiere, whether through simile, through narrative event, or by
"association" of function (for instance, as in the provision of fur, feathers, hides
or food) into Chretien's narrative text, and they include the following species:
peacock, bull, horse, elephant, owl, cat, human, deer, chamois, stag, boar,
bird, eagle dog, sparhawk, crane, chicken (as capon), ermine, lion, serpent,
bear, and otter. On the other hand, this tapestry of animalities does finally ex-
press a network of different features and functions that corresponds to a a physi-
cal universe which is coherently structured and hierarchal, and not, therefore,
inherently evil.
To the contrary, the lion serves as a corrective, not of human animal nature
per se, but only of perversions of humans, whether as an animal who has been
made foolishly weak by misguided reason, or as an animal who has turned its
animal nature to unnatural, improper ends. Thus, the first adversary of Yvain's
animal is the tyrannical and sexually perverse giant, Harpin de la Montagne,
who has threatened to kill the four remaining sons of an aged knight unless he
delivers his daughter to him, whom he will in turn give over to his vilest varlets
as a prostitute (a putage, 1. 4125). Although giants were not considered to be-
long to a different species of animal from humans (but as an anomaly of that spe-
cies), giants were treated exactly like other monsters in medieval sermons and
bestiaries and were moralized according to the same procedures. John Bloch
Friedman writes:
The medieval propensity for moralizing or drawing spiritual instruction
from all aspects of the natural world is especially marked in homiletic
treatments of the monstrous races. Certain medieval bestiaries interpo-
lated among their animals a section of the Plinian races, and moralized
them much as they moralized the pelican or the unicorn. Collections of
exempla drew moralitates from the races, making them into figures for
unattractive human qualities and vices.13
A connection between the giant Harpin's divergence from the norms of a man
as a properly social species and his unnatural sexuality is not difficult to see. In
contrast with the man-beast at the beginning of the romance, who symbolized
the human appetitive self as seen by Calogrenant in a neutral perspective, Harpin
is a symbol of monstrously unnatural appetition at work in society and is there-
fore the natural (and social) human's unnatural adversary. When Yvain begins
to fight Harpin, he strikes Harpin in the chest, piercing the bearskin that the giant
wears ("bear" is another emblem of wildness, according to the bestiaries), yet
Yvain is not powerful enough to overcome the giant by himself. Perceiving his

92 D FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
master's dilemma, the lion leaps unsolicited into the fray, and first tears the
hairy skin ("pel velue" 1. 4223) off the giant's flanks, and then tears a great hunk
of flesh from his thighs, whereupon the giant roars and cries out like a mad bull.
Given the motif of sexual perversion in this episode, it would be difficult not to
see this mutilation as another well-merited symbolic castration. However, it is
not a man's animal nature per se that is being punished here, but rather, willful
perversions of a man's animality. In short, the lion is acting in this episode as
a positive force of nature which must defy denaturing repression. If the giant
is to be understood as an extreme figuration of Yvain's own erring disposition,
may we not, with hindsight, see his excessive tourneying as another form of
"gigantic" putage?
In the Chateau de Pesme Avanture episode we find an even more penetrating
revindication of man's and woman's animal nature as a force that must not be
unduly repressed at the expense of his or her vital needs. This time the force
of repression to be overcome is that fetishizing impulse where the love of money
and of fine objects (including even romances) subverts proper bonds of
reciprocity (among them, courtesy and the custom of aristocratic hospitality)
within the feudal structure and which, in Chretien's eyes, is therefore unnatural.
As international trade began to transform social and economic relationships in
his world, Chretien remained eager to expose the social abuses that it en-
couraged, though to do so in a way that was congruous with the social values
and idiom of his aristocratic patrons. In this scene, Yvain's triumph will be to
deliver three hundred maidens who weave silk (and not wool, as do less
aristocratic workers in Flanders, just to the west of Champagne) in an atelier
which exploits them ruthlessly: we are being clearly told that the profit motive
can incite humans to drive their fellow humans into bestiality. Since the produc-
tion of silk was not indigenous to Northern France, the Chateau de Pesme Avan-
ture perhaps connotes social practices of a marvelous "realism" which, Chretien
is telling us, must not be allowed to flourish in Champagne. Imprisoned as
slaves, and even as animals, the maidens produce exquisite silk fabric, we are
told, but they do so at the expense of their own physical well-being, including,
of course, their natural beauty:
"Toz jours dras de sole tistrons,
Ne ja n'an serons miauz vestues.
Toz jors serons povres et nues
Et toz jors fain et soif avrons;
Ja tant gaeignier ne savrons,
Que miauz an aliiens a mangier.
Del pain avons a grant dangier,
Au main petit et au soir mains
Quc ja de 1'uevre de noz mains

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 93
N'avra chascune por son vivre
Que quatre deniers de la livre."
(11. 5298-5308)
"All of our days we shall weave silk, yet we shall never be better
clothed because of it. All our days we shall be poor and naked, and
all of our days we shall be hungry and thirsty. Nor will we earn
enough to eat any better. We are very short of bread: we have little in
the morning, and less in the evening. For the work of our hands each
of us will earn but four pence of a pound."
The adversaries whom Yvain must fight in order to deliver these maidens are
not ordinary members of the human species, but are born of a woman and a
devil. Moreover, they are not a single, noble adversary, but doubles of each
other, basely born of an unnatural copulation. As unnatural doubles, they are
perhaps symbols of profit begotten usuriously: usury, it was argued, is money
begotten unnaturally of money, nothing of nothing, at the expense of both logic
and of natural laws. It is in the character of art composed for a twelfth-century
aristocratic patron, whose status was now based on the privilege of lineage, to
portray social abuses as consequences of genealogical errors, especially incest.
Indeed, the family "tree" became, in Chretien's world, an important foundation
for the "truth" of aristocratic authority. As R. Howard Bloch writes:
With the fixation of the noble family on its own soil came a certain
narrowing of its peripheral limits and a reorientation of its conceptual
base-from the spatialized "horizontal" clan to the more vertically and
temporally conceived lineage. This process represented more than an a
mere institutional shift; it implied, in fact, an important "prise de con-
science" on the part of the aristocratic kin group of the necessity for
biopolitical management of its own resources, both human and mate-
rial. More precisely, it involved: restriction and control of marriage in
consonance with social, military, and economic interests; adoption of a
system of succession that assured the integral transmission of family
holdings; abd certain awareness of a specifically aristocratic mode of
wealth, real property (proprietas), which is connatural—both histori-
cally and ideologically — with the primogenital articulation of lineage
itself.14
In the Chateau de Pesme Avanture, we witness not only the unjust repression
of humans' physical well-being for the sake of profit, but the decline or abuse
of many of the seven mechanical arts: weaving, weaponry (the devil's sons fight
with clubs against Yvain's chivalric arms), medicine, commerce, "venery," and
even theatrics, the scientia ludorum, if we may sec the bad hospitality and the
scene in the garden as perversions of the natural end of the courtly social world,

94 D FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
which is the feast where adventures are told before an assembly of knights and
ladies. We will recall that in this garden a very beautiful sixteen-year-old maiden
reads an anonymous romance ("ne sai de CM/," 1. 5366) to her father and the rest
of the family, who recline on a rug of silk ("qui se gisoit I Sor un drap de sole,"
11. 5363-64) presumably produced by the enslaved young maidens of the same
household. Chretien is apparently introducing, here, a thinly coded complaint
against those in power (perhaps, even, the Counts of Champagne) who now
patronized the exploitive production not only of textiles, but also of texts as well:
that is, the production of romances as consumer items by underpaid, writing
workers of the vernacular chancery (presumably such as Chretien) who could
well have viewed the reading of their anonymous romances by ravishing
maidens in gardens as a kind of castration. It is perhaps worth noting that Chre-
tien wrote Le conte del graal in the Court of Flanders, where he praised
Philippe's generosity with special emphasis.
Just as certain leaders of feudal society tolerate the unjust claustration of
workers, so too Yvain unwisely consents to shut his lion in a room before under-
taking his combat with the devil's sons. Since Yvain is unequivocally foolish for
agreeing to such terms, clearly the lion is wise in breaking out of his sequestra-
tion, despite Yvain's wishes, in order to save his master —and, by extension, to
rescue the enthralled workers. If Yvain and his lion, together, serve in this epi-
sode as a messianic symbol, as some have argued, then the same topical truth
"from species" pertains here as elsewhere: if Christ is a man, he is an animal.
Nor is such a proposition degrading: to the contrary, the inconography of Christ
underwent an interesting transformation in Chretien's time: the stern, resur-
rected Christ sitting in judgment now tended to give way to the crucified, suffer-
ing, human Christ with whom natural, "passional" man and woman could readily
identify without declaring war on their own worldly, animal nature.
From Social Differences to the Totemic Text
Earlier in this chapter, I mentioned, among the various modes of "thinking" ani-
mality, what I called the "heraldic," or, in more modern terms, the "totemic,"
and I shall close with some brief remarks about heraldic or totemic emblems and
cognitive function in Yvain, ou le chevalier au lion as a socially engaged text.
We may begin recalling some provocative points made by Peter Haidu in his
book Lion-queue-coupee: I'ecart symbolique chez Chretien de Troyes (Geneva:
Droz, 1972), which bears specifically upon the semiotic status of the lion in this
romance.
Haidu's Lion-queue-coupee has in common with his article "The Hermit's Pot-
tage" this virtue: it calls attention less to specific symbols themselves than to the
very symbol-making process in Chretien's art. In the earlier work, Haidu is less
concerned than in the later with the power of Chretien's art to refer to, or to act

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 95
upon, the real things (or their meanings) of the poet's social world. Along with
previous readers of Yvain, Haidu recognizes the various symbolic investments
in the lion, but especially calls attention to Chretien's tendency to exploit the mo-
bility and polyvalence of this symbol in a spirit of play that seems to elude even
the burden of the sacred elements of his matiere. Haidu equates this play
with the "literary" function of the text
En effet, le champ semiologique de la religion y est traite comme une
source parmi d'autres, egalement generatrices de sens, une source en
competition avec d'autres champs egalement accessibles et valables. Et,
comme pour les autres valeurs symboliques, le sens produit par
1'allegorie exegetique peut etre refuse. Car Chretien, apres son renvoi
a cette tradition iconographique et mystique, s'amuse de son lion et
nous amuse avec son lion. L'animal, un moment entoure d'autres
signes iconographiques (le serpent, son geste d'humilite, etc.) un mo-
ment rehausse comme vehicule d'allegorie christologique, redevient,
dans 1'episode suivant, non pas un simple et banal lion, il est vrai,
mais un pur lion litteraire, feroce et tendre, symbole de fidelite et de
ferocite, de sentimentalite, d'ironie, et de farce, symbole de tout sauf
du Christ ou de n'importe quelle valeur religieuse prise avec gravite.
(p. 72)
Indeed, the semantic field of religion is treated there merely as one
source among others which also generate meanings; hence, it is a
source competing with other fields that are equally accessible and
valid. And, like the other symbolic values, the meaning produced by
exegetical allegory can be denied. For, after evoking the iconographi-
cal and mystical tradition, Chretien amuses both himself and his au-
dience with his lion. At one moment accompanied by other icono-
graphical signs (the serpent, his gesture of humility, and so forth), and
at another moment exalted as the vehicle of a Christological allegory,
this animal once again becomes, in the following episode, not a simple
and banal lion, to be sure, but a purely literary lion —ferocious and
tender, a symbol of fidelity and ferocity, of sentimentality and of irony
and farce, a symbol of anything but Christ or any other religious value
that must be taken seriously.
Like most readers of Yvain, I am grateful for Haidu's remarks about the semiotic
status of Chretien's lion, and I would add that this lion may be called a "metasta-
ble" sign, in the sense that Claude Gandelman has given to that term: a metasta-
ble sign is one whose status and nature fluctuate as we perceive it, and such fluc-
tuation constitues its primary poetic function. Gandelman writes:
Although metastable patterns do not constitute a system in the sense
that language and sub-languages like traffic signs or pathological sym-
ptoms constitute systems of signs, . . . metastable visual figures may

96 D FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
well have their equivalents or parallels in the realm of language
proper. In fact . . . there seem to exist a category of words and per-
haps even sentences which present a semantic reversibility and which,
therefore, can be termed 'metastable'.15
Gandelman extends his notion of metastability to the very notion of conventional
sign, composed of signifier and signified:
Metastable patterns, though they form an exceptional subgroup within
the larger category of the verbal or visual sign, may exhibit a signi-
ficant feature shared by all signs. Indeed, is not the internal relation
which defines the sign 
Signifie 
(if one adopts the Saussurian
Signifiant
scheme) a metastable relation? Though linguists speak of the 'interac-
tion' between signifie and signifiant, would not 'metastability' be a more
proper term? (p. 83)
Perhaps we may follow Gandelman's lead and suggest that as a metastable sign,
the lion is a condensation of several distinct referents, each belonging to a differ-
ent discourse, and in that sense Chretien's lion may be indeed be taken, as Haidu
suggests, as an instance of the play of "literary" discourse that puts other dis-
courses into play as well.
However, the notion of literature (whether serious or playful) is always prob-
lematical for readers of medieval texts, where no discursive concept is to be
found which corresponds to the modern and essentially romantic meaning of that
word. If the term "medieval literature" invites, by its very incongruousness,
reflection of a somewhat more historical sort, Haidu's book indicates one direc-
tion that such reflection might take (though Haidu himself does not take it):
S'il y a une meditation serieuse sur la nature humaine et sur les rap-
ports de 1'individu et des valeurs sociales qui le regissent—hypothese
que je ne pretends pas avoir traitee dans ce travail, mais que je crois
profondement vraie pour Chretien de Troyes —elle n'a rien du didac-
tisme religieux si frequent au moyen-age. Elle ressemble bien plus au
jeu gratuit qu'est toute litterature avant d'etre contemplation metaphy-
sique ou affirmation morale, (p. 72)
If there is here a serious meditation on human nature and on the rela-
tionship between the individual and the social values that govern him
or her—this is a hypothesis that I do not claim to have treated in the
present work, but one that I believe profoundly true for Chretien de
Troyes —this meditation has nothing of the religious didacticism that is
so common in the Middle Ages. It resembles much more that gratui-
tous play that literature is before it is metaphysical contemplation or
moral affirmation.

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 97
I have already tried to show how Chretien inscribes into Yvain, along with
the "heap" of didactic religious values associated with the lion, a more "tree-like"
set of classifications based upon differentiae 
of natural laws which are not in
themselves moral, though they are the very preconditions of moral action in the
world. As for Haidu's claim for Yvain and for "all literature" as "gratuitous
play," let us not dismiss it out of hand, but hold it in suspension in order to draw
attention to certain cultural tendencies in late twelfth century France called "her-
aldry" or "blazon" which are intimately connected with vernacular poetry (and
with the rise romance in particular) and which will perhaps furnish some hints
as to the changing nature and cultural function of "literary" signs in Chretien's
context.
Let us begin by recalling an episode that holds something in common with
the scene where the maidens recognize Yvain by his scar: in Erec et Enide, Gau-
vain and Guenevere debate about the consequences that may be drawn from the
dents in Yder's shield. These dents may be considered as a kind of equivocal
text, rather, as a kind of "indexical"16 pre-text for a story that remains to be told
(and written). Like hieroglyphs, petroglyphs, or caroglyphs, these dents predi-
cate, though incompletely, certain events that have transpired: given that swords
have dented metal, we may infer for certain that a combat has taken place, and
we can even imagine what that combat must have been like. However, the truth
itself of "what happened" is disclosed to these fictive readers not through induc-
tion, but through "what happens" in subsequent (fictive) history.
But not all shields in Chretien's romances convey the same message, nor do
they all signify by the same indexical mode. Other shields, for example, produce
meaning because of designs or figures of animals painted upon them and no
longer because of physical accidents altering their form. These painted designs
and figures are no more determined, in their selection, by either the form or the
function of the shield itself than is the writer's selection of words materially de-
termined by parchment or paper. Sometimes a shield is painted with a kind of
protonarrative emblem recalling a tale about its bearer, in which case it serves
its reader as an aide-memoire. Such is the case with Yder himself, when he reap-
pears in Chretien's Chevalier de la charrette. Here, Yder's shield is "blazoned"
as follows by some knights who are watching a joust:
"Et veez vos celui qui porte
An son escu pointe une porte?
Si sanble qu'il s'an isse uns cers.
Par foi, ce est li rois Yders."
(11. 5799-5802)
"And do you see the one who carries a shield with a gate painted on
it? A stag seems to be emerging from it. In faith, that is King Yder."

98 D FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
This shield not only identifies its bearer, whose identity is otherwise con-
cealed by armor, but also begins to tell a story that is anaphorically related to
that earlier episode in Erec et Enide, where, during the customary hunt for the
White Stag, Yder affronts Guenevere and summons, thereby, his future defeat
by Erec during a quest that finally leads to Erec's marriage with Enide. In other
words, this shield has several semiotic functions: first, it conveys an image; sec-
ond, it evokes a set of narrative circumstances that serve to identify its bearer;
third, by recalling a story in which Yder was implicated, it serves as an intertex-
tual sign anaphorically linking the present instance of narrative discourse with
a corpus of other romances. In their aggregate, these functions constitute a code.
There is yet another kind of shield, which neither signifies materially (as does
the dented shield of Yder interpreted by Gauvain and Guenevere) nor refers nar-
ratively or metaphorically to its bearer. Rather, such a shield identifies its bearer
by a totally arbitrary, nonnarrative or nongenetic bond between image as sig-
nifier and bearer as signified, which is to say that their conventional designs or
figures bave no metaphorical, nor any other apparent relationship to the in-
dividual that they serve to identify. This is a kind of semiosis that Peirce calls
the "symbolic." Such is apparently the case, for example, when Erec recognizes
Kay in the forest by his arms, though Kay does not recognize Erec, because his
arms, lent to him by Enide's impoverished father, are not marked but plain. In
this case, the disclosure of identity by one heraldic "text" and the impenetrable
blankness of the other are important details to the characters themselves, since
Erec actually declines to declare his identity to Kay by naming himself (11.
3949-71). In the Charrette, we encounter a whole series of shields whose heral-
dic emblems, though perfectly arbitrary, still serve to identify their bearers,
though only to those initiated into the art of "reading" such emblems, as is the
case with these knights watching a tournament:
Antr'ax d'ient: "Veez vos or
Celui a cele bande d'or
Par mi eel escu de bernic?
C'est Governauz de Roberdic.
Et veez vos celui apres,
Qui an son escu pres a pres
A mise une aigle et un dragon?
C'est li fils le roi d'Arragon
Qui venuz est an ceste terre
Por pris et por enor conquerre."
(11. 5773-82)
They say to each other, "Do you see the one with the stripe of gold on
a burnished shield? That is Governauz de Roberdic. And do you see
the one following him, who has side by side on his shield an eagle and

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 99
a dragon? That is the son of the King of Arragon, who has come to
this land for esteem and to win honor."
That such heraldic designs and emblems have no intrinsic personal or sym-
bolic relationship to their bearer is implicit in what Gerard J. Brault says of this
shield in the Charrette : "The King of Aragon, whose son's arms are blazoned
here, is a stock character in Arthurian romance and was doubtless associated
with Spain only in the vaguest sort of way in Chretien's mind. At any rate, the
eagle preying on (?) the dragon in this shield has nothing whatsoever to do with
the Royal Arms of Aragon (or, four pales gules) attested on the seal of Ramon
Berengar IV of Aragon in 1157."17
If we may consider different kinds of emblems in Chretien's texts as kinds
of texts in their own right, each calling for a different hermeneutical response,
let us step back somewhat and make some brief comparisons of these textual
modes, not only within Chretien, but starting with the Roland as well. Roland
himself, as I have said elsewhere, is a hero fully identifiable to his peers by both
his actions and his words, and his story exemplifies a basic transparency and
eternal presence of truth in a heroic world where Christians are always right and
pagans are wrong. Roland's myth is also a myth of iconic significations: he
wields a sword given to him by God, and his conquests translate God's will into
historical realities of time and space whose significations are sanctified, neces-
sary, and self-evident. Charlemagne, by contrast, is caught in a world where
both words and things have suddenly become equivocal, yet where signification
still remains possible when a proper interpretive effort is made, as occurs when
Charlemagne "reads" Roland's pre-grammatical petroglyphs at Ronceval and
construes their meaning into a true heroic story. Charlemagne is the first, in-
deed, the primeval reader of the chanson de geste. However, since the meanings
of words and things are equivocal and transient, Charlemagne also expresses a
cultural need to determine and to fix the meaning of the catastrophe at Ronceval,
and this need is exemplified in his gesture of removing the hearts from the bodies
of Roland and the twelve peers in order to place them in a white marble tomb,
which presumably will bear written inscriptions. The myth of Charlemagne in
the Roland carries us from a culture where iconic signs are the privileged
bearers of truth to a culture of written symbols, in the sense that Peirce gives
to that term: that is, of signs which signify purely arbitrarily, and by no material
necessity.18 The myth of Charlemagne therefore carries us up to, but not fully
into, a poetics of grammatica.
In Chretien, we find emblems which signify both iconically and indexically,
as in the Roland, but in addition we encounter heroes bearing emblems on their
shields whose relationship to their personal identities is purely arbitrary, or sym-
bolic, in Pcircc's sense of the term. Inner identity and outer emblem are distinct
from each other and arc related in the same way that letters are arbitrarily related

100 Q FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
to vocal sounds, and that sounds as signifying words, in turn, are only arbitrarily
related to the intellections they signify. Moreover, the relationship between ar-
morial signifier and the identity that it signifies cannot be merely witnessed or
remembered, it must be read by a reader initiated into the code of the noble ar-
morial text. Chretien's mythical world of knights and ladies now includes a hid-
den myth of grammatica. Such a system exploits differences in a special cogni-
tive way. In grammatica, differences between letters arbitrarily correspond to
differences between vocal sounds; these, in turn, become the arbitrary founda-
tion for semantic differences, though all three orders are distinct and are in a
relationship of hierarchy favoring the semantic. Without necessarily considering
him as a "source," let us nevertheless see how Augustine ponders the "infancy"
(infans means "nonspeaking" in Latin) of grammatica and its subsequent inaugu-
ration as the repository of past human culture:
When reason had gone further, it noticed that of those oral sounds
which we used in speaking and which it had already designated by let-
ters, there were some which by a varied modulation of the parted lips
flowed clear and pure from the throat without any friction; that others
acquired a certain kind of sound form the diversified pressure of the
lips; and that there were still other sounds, which could not issue forth
unless they were conjoined with these. Accordingly, it denominated the
letters in the order of their exposition: vowels, semivowels, and mutes.
In the next place, it took account of syllables. Then words were
grouped into eight classes and forms; and their entire evolvement, pu-
rity and articulation were skillfully and minutely differentiated . . .
The science of grammar could now have been complete. But since by
its very name it proclaims that it knows letters —indeed on this account
it is called "literature" in Latin —it came to pass that whatever was
committed to letters as worth remembering, necessarily pertained to
it.19
The point I wish to make here is that Chretien's romances lead us far beyond
the semiotic realm of the Roland, where the presence of signifiers to their sig-
nifieds could mediate the presence of humans in the creation to their creator;
Chretien's romances lead us to a system of heraldic emblems whose power to
signify the presence of human to human within the social group is a priori purely
conventional and arbitrary. As we go from the bundle or "heap" of religious and
moral interpretations of animality to the Porphyrean "tree" of differentiae 
by
which we are invited to think logically about animals as signs, and finally to a
system of purely arbitrary differences constituting the code of heraldic emblems,
we move closer and closer to a social universe whose ontological landscape rests
upon a properly textual or grammatical foundation. In such a realm, animality
becomes implicated as signs in a "grammar" not of letters, but of emblems which
serve to identify differences 
within a social order: first, differences between

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 101
noble between families and clans, and, later, differences between other social
groups within a hierarchy of classes. This is another way of suggesting, with
John F. Benton, that "writing put the -ism in feudalism."20 If humans are
animals, they are social animals. And if they are social animals, their sociability
is determined by writing. I have already stressed in chapter one how the archival
movement of Philippe-Auguste inscribed knights, through their seals, into a tex-
tually defined set of social obligations. The development of seals and armorials
in medieval culture was practically synonymous. As Michel Pastoureau puts it,
"pour la periode medievale, il ne peut y avoir heraldique sans sigillographie"21
("for the medieval period, there could be no heraldry without a sigillography").
Indeed, though it is customary for historians to explain the rise of heraldry from
the simple necessity of identifying combatants, it seems clear that the use of seals
both preceded armorials and nourished their elaboration. A seal, moreover, did
not need a shield to be displayed, and for that reason could even be assigned
to women: "Les premieres armoiries feminines apparaissent des la seconde
moitie du Xlle siecle" (p. 29) ("The first feminine armorials appeared already
in the second half of the twelfth century"). Later came the other social groups:
"Le developpement de 1'usage du sceau a eu pour principale conse-
quence 1'adoption d'armories non seulement par les femmes et les
clercs, mais surtout par les roturiers. Les plus anciennes armoiries de
bourgeois et gens des metiers voient le jour un peu avant le milieu du
XHIe siecle en France et dans les pays rhenans et flamands . . . Elles
proliferent au siecle suivant, au point que sur 1'ensemble des armoiries
medievales actuellement recensees, deux sur trois sont bourgeoises."
(p. 30)
The development of the use of the seal had as its principal conse-
quence the adoption of armorials not only by women and by the
clergy, but especially by the non-nobles. The oldest armorials of bour-
geois and tradesmen came to light shortly before the middle of the
thirteenth century in France and in Flanders and the Rhineland. They
proliferated in the following century, to the point where in the totality
of these medieval armorials that we know of now, two out of three are
bourgeois.
Clearly, heraldic emblems were divorced very early from their semiotic function
within the chivalric combat or joust and functioned as emblems whose "differ-
ences" no longer articulated species and genera in the natural world, but rather
designated social groups within the social world. These new signs expressed the
economic status of their bearers as well, for, during the age of "classic" blazon
in the thirteenth century, heraldic emblems were compiled into systematic
codices called "rolls of arms," which served to define social groups and their
possessions, rigorously classified according to conventional (as opposed to natu-

102 D FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
ral) differentiae between emblems. Constituted as a strictly conventional visual
language, these rolls of arms expressed the totality of the social order in the form
of a book. This book also contained another strictly conventional verbal lan-
guage called "blazon." Blazon is the technical language employed to describe,
for judicial purposes, heraldic emblems.
Paradoxically, the more social identity and political power became
nominal-that is, based on a person's name-the more those who held or ac-
quired power dialectically sought to invest their names with an authority which
was not arbitrary, but based upon a myth of archaic origins expressed as agnatic
lineage.22 Hence, the rise of heraldry, in which a system of differences func-
tioned completely arbitrarily that is, with no genetic or even narrative connec-
tion between the heraldic emblem and the individual it now designated, sum-
moned forth genealogical texts which might restore to names an "etymological"
power, in the medieval sense of that term. In other words, genealogies and rolls
of arms may be understood as contrary semiotic systems within the same cul-
ture, the one summoned forth dialectically by the other.
I suggest that there was yet another contrapuntal semiotic movement, this one
instigated by the clergy, whose purpose was somehow to master or "reclaim" the
errant social and literary symbolism within twelfth-century culture by reinvest-
ing its emblems with religious signification, and the tension between these two
cultural motives in the Grail literature has recently been studied by Alexandre
Leupin.23 Twelfth-century society tended more and more to exploit the system
of natural differentia rhetorically, and not just logically. Writing about the rela-
tionship between etymology (in the medieval sense) and heraldry, R. Howard
Bloch says of the heraldic emblem that "here the logician's concept of physical
property as that which distinguishes an object from all others in its class along
with the rhetorician's notion of correct imposition are both pertinent to the par-
ticularized relation between the prince, his family, and its singular sign" (p. 77).
Precisely because such signification is understood to be arbitrarily imposed on
the heraldic emblem, heraldry is a textual system which is like that of gramma-
tica itself, since grammarians too were very clear in their understanding that
meanings are always "imposed" upon vocal sounds and, by extension, upon writ-
ten letters signifying those sounds. However, the criteria for construing and
manipulating such impositions were, as Chretien understood, finally rhetorical,
and not logical.
We perhaps recognize in the preceding discussion a problem that Claude
Levi-Strauss formulated in his theory of totemism. The relationship, according
to Levi-Strauss, between the true totemic animal or plant and the social group
that it signifies is not one of common origin or shared identity of substance; nor
is the totemic emblem a sacred manifestation of some divine presence because
"le contacte direct . . . c'est-a-dire, la relation de contiguite, est contraire a
1'csprit de 1'institution: le totem ne devient tel qu'a condition d'etre d'abord

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 103
eloigne"24 ("direct contact, that is to say, the relationship of contiguity, is con-
trary to the spirit of the institution. The totem does not become such unless it
is distanced"). The totemic object is a priori an arbitrary sign, and Levi-Strauss
seems to follow Durkheim's suggestion that recourse by a society to plants and
animals as totemic objects is only secondary to the system itself, which is en-
tirely predetermined from within culture:
Mais pourquoi le totemisme fait-il appel a des animaux ou a des
plantes? Durkheim a donne de ce phenomene une explication contin-
gente: la permanence et la continuite du clan requierent seulement un
embleme, qui peut etre —et qui doit etre a 1'origine —un signe ar-
bitraire, assez simple pour que n'importe quelle societe puisse en con-
cevoir 1'idee, meme a defaut de moyens d'expression artistique. Si 1'on
a ulterieurement "reconnu" dans ces signes la representation d'animaux
ou de plantes, c'est que les animaux et les plantes sont presents, acces-
sibles, faciles a signifier. Pour Durkheim, par consequent, la place que
fait le totemisme aux animaux et aux vegetaux constitue une sorte de
phenomene a retardement. (p. 87)
But why does totemism draw upon animals or plants? Durkheim gave
a contingent explanation of this phenomenon: the permanence and the
continuity of the clan require only an emblem, which may be—and
which must originally be —an arbitrary sign that is simple enough so
that any society may conceive the idea, even in the absence of means
of artistic expression. If afterward some have "recognized" in these
signs the representation of animals or plants, it is because the animals
and plants are present, accessible, and easy to signify. For Durkheim,
consequently, the place given to animals and plants in totemism is a
delayed phenomenon.
In such a perspective, the totemic object may be said to function "grammati-
cally," as words do, which is simply to resituate Levi-Strauss's totemic theory
in its original site of development, which was structural linguistics—this, despite
Levi-Strauss's claim that "le totemisme est une unite artificielle, qui existe seule-
ment dans la pensee de 1'ethnologue, et a quoi rien de specifique ne correspond
au dehors" (p. 14) ("totemism is an artificial entity, which exists only in the
thought of the ethnologist, and something to which nothing specific outside cor-
responds"). Perhaps we may say that all totemic systems may be considered as
a kind of grammatica, imagined as the nursery of culture, as John of Salisbury
portrayed that institution. Perhaps too, common heraldic emblems such as lion,
dragon, angel, crane, bull, dog, devil, wild man, stag, chicken, and dolphin are
articulated on the shields of men and in rolls of arms in such a way that all sym-
bolic, ontological, and ethical investments are banished, precisely so that their
bearers may be integrated as empty but repeatable (and inheritable) grammatical
signs into the roll of arms as a social text.

104 D FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
Moreover, it follows that in order to enter as a grammatical sign into a cul-
tural text—or a textual culture—that is constituted by other heraldic signs, the
heraldic sign must be capable of being inflected. Such indeed is the case. For
instance, a heraldic lion can appear running (courani) or charging (rampant):
he can wear a collar or a crown; he can have a single or forked tale (lion a la
coue fourchiee); the lion may appear single or in multiples (e.g., a siz lionceus);
such lions may be distributed in numerous distinct locations within the space of
the shield. Presumably, if aristocrats really bore such emblems on their shields,
it was because they now recognized (as Roland, Ganelon, and Pinabel did not)
that the conduct of warfare must remain subject to laws expressed in and by the
social text: the shield's signifying function within an armorial and archival sys-
tem tended, therefore, to subsume its military function within the social order.
The idea that individuals become significant-even to themselves —by their
expression within the group, and by extension that groups themselves become
significant in their combinations with other groups, seems to be central to later
twelfth-century literate culture, and such a semiotic notion is amplified and
refined in the new emphasis, among theoreticians of language in the same
period, upon syntax as a determinant of signification. Not only does a conven-
tional word represent itself (as in the statement, " 'horse' ends in 'e' "), it also
"stands for" a concept; but the concept becomes significant only when it is ut-
tered in a sentence. To quote an anonymous twelfth-century commentator on
Priscian, "If a word (nomeri) is part of a sentence, therefore it is a part existing
in a sentence. Therefore, if it is not a part existing in a sentence, it is not a word.
Therefore, unless there is a sentence, there is not a word."25 As Yvain himself
illustrates by his own destiny, if a man regresses from his social status, he loses
all sens, in every sense.
Thus, the heraldic emblem is a very peculiar kind of text. On the one hand,
it identifies a knight not by his individual nature or by his feats, but within an
a priori cultural "syntax;" that is to say, it is a text that embodies nothing of the
intrinsic substance of its bearer. It is a social outside of an identity which has
willingly concealed itself inside a coat of armor and has become, thereby, pri-
vate and inscrutable. This ambivalent function of the heraldic text both to en-
close and to disclose a human identity is expressed, moreover, by an interesting
lexical ambivalence in certain terms in blazon vocabulary. According to Brault,
the term conoissance in blazon means "arms or distinctive device on a heraldic
shield" (p. 148). It also means "difference." Conoistre means "to recognize a coat
of arms" or to "recognize a person by his coat of arms" ("Qui por les armes nel
conoissent" Cliges, 1. 3488) Yet these terms are synonymous, according to
Brault, with the set desconoissance and desconoistre, which not only mean
"arms or distinctive device on a heraldic shield," and difference," and "to
differentiate," but also "disguise," or "to disgise one's arms" (p. 168). Here the
notion of "difference" implies not differentiae constituting a natural system, but

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 105
rather that more radical alterity of the heraldic text to the individual subject that
by convention it is enlisted to signify. In other words, the discourse of natural
science is being preempted by a new and very powerful kind of social discourse
instituted to assert a new class structure within the social group.
That heraldry and blazon are systems of culture which were constituted dur-
ing the second half of the twelfth century is a matter of common agreement
among historians of the phenomenon. That is to say, seals, money (coins also
bear heraldic seals), and romances all tend to instigate a new kind of "general"
textuality by which the social order is signified and by which power is mediated.
There is no doubt but that Chretien's own oeuvre was one of the instigating
powers behind this semiological revolution, though in such complex historical
processes it is difficult to distinguish clearly between cause and effect.
Although much remains to be understood about the relationship between ro-
mance and heraldry, it is probably safe to say that they belong to, and express,
a single "textual community," in the sense that Brian Stock gives to that term.26
This textual community is the high aristocracy of twelfth-century France, and
we may assume that the discursive practices peculiar to this aristocracy were
perceived even by those who practised them as being a part of a larger mosaic.
As Stock writes:
An important consequence of literacy in any human community arises
from the area of social organization. Relationships between the in-
dividual and the family, the group, or the wider community are all in-
fluenced by the degree to which society acknowledges written princi-
ples of operation. Literacy also affects the way people conceptualize
such relations, and these patterns of thought inevitably feed back into
the network of real interdependencies. (p. 88)
We should not infer, however, that a given text merely defines or represents
a given textual community within its context; indeed, the textual performance
instigates change or reform within a community as well. As Stock says, "What
was essential to a textual community was not a written version of a text, although
that was sometimes present, but an individual, who having mastered it, then uti-
lized it for reforming a group's thought and action" (p. 90). For this reason,
twelfth-century culture was a mosaic of many textual communities, but a mosaic
whose elements and forms were dynamic, rather than static. We may assume
that Chretien's patrons sponsored his writings in order to inculcate, perhaps
above all by a new sense of play and by deliberate pleasure in the arbitrariness
of verbal signs —even of privileged cultural signs such as "lion" —a new set of
ideological values within the social group as a whole.
The sign "lion" functions in Chretien's Yvain as a remarkable shifter between
several discourses: that of an allegorical moral system, that of a natural or "phys-
ical" system, and that of a new and purely social system that we may call heraldic

106 D FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
or totemic. Early heraldic emblems tend to exploit animals for their
"differences"—Pastoureau estimates their frequency at sixty percent (p. 29) —and
among these the lion and the eagle are supreme. As Rodney Dennys writes:
An analysis of French seals and enamels between 1127 and 1300 shows
the Lion as by far the most popular charge in heraldry after the ordi-
naries, with two hundred and twenty different examples of the Lion
rampant and forty of the Lion passant (although many of these may
have been meant to be Leopards). The earliest example is the blue
shield with six little gold Lions rampant which Henry I gave to
Geoffrey of Anjou in 1127, and there is reason to think that Henry him-
self used one or more lions as his emblem.27
The lion had already become, by Chretien's time, the emblem of the em-
blematic, and Chretien takes great pleasure in "shifting" the lion's discursive sta-
tus before our very eyes. If, at first, the lion in the woods signifies Yvain's
redeemed animal nature, as soon as Yvain disguises his identity during his quest
in the social world for renewed honor and becomes an unnamed chevalier au
lion, the lion becomes inescapably a heraldic emblem, even though he his not
yet painted on Yvain's shield. However, Chretien holds his audience on the
boundary between cognitive systems as long as he can, refusing to let the lion
become a passive bearer of significations. Each time he leaps into the fray, the
lion is both a real causal force in the world and a perfectly conventional lion
rampant of heraldic armorials. Elsewhere, a maiden seeks Yvain as her cham-
pion in a legal dispute with her sister although this maiden knows of the knight
only by hearsay. She arrives at a castle where Yvain has just slept, she explains
that she is looking for " 'the one whom I have never seen, I believe, nor known.
But he has a lion with him, and I am told that I can place great trust in him' "
(11. 4902-6). Lunette directs her to yet another castle, where once once again
she asks for "the one who will never be without his lion, as I have heard" (11.
5020-21). The host advises the maiden her to follow their tracks through the
woods. Is there not something comical about a maiden in distress tracking down
a knight and his heraldic lion in the woods? Perhaps the best semiotic trick that
Chretien plays occurs when le chevalier au lion arrives at a castle bearing a
shield which does not have the image of a lion painted on it, but bearing, rather,
the real lion, which has been wounded in combat. The lord of the castle and his
men have no trouble recognizing this chevalier au lion! In Yvain's afterlife in
later romances he will bear a shield on which the lion has assumed his proper
status as a conventional heraldic emblem, though one which also hearkens back
to this founding relationship. As Brault writes:
In Chretien de Troyes, Yvain is, of course, known as Le Chevalier au
Lion in the romance of the same name. Nowhere in the latter work,
however, does the hero bear a shield decorated with a lion device.

FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT D 107
Nevertheless, the fact that Yvain rescued a lion from a fiery serpent
and that the grateful animal became the hero's companion and protec-
tor in this story resulted in traditional arms featuring a lion. In Dur-
man le Galois, for example, Yvain and all his retinue bear arms allud-
ing to this event, (p. 49)
I would suggest, then, that the sense of play that Haidu equates with Chre-
tien's litterarite is a reflection of his careful experimentation with the semiotics
of aristocratic power in twelfth-century northern France. Chretien writes for a
new textual community seeking after new kinds of poetic (and social) signs. The
semiotic metastability of Yvain's lion expresses a cultivated dynamism which
characterizes Chretien's manipulation of inherited sources throughout his career.
That the lion should now express scriptural or classical symbolic meanings, now
signify lioninity as a species among other species, and now serve as a heraldic
emblem—by such mutations in the lion's semiotic status, we may see that Chre-
tien has taken a sign privileged by those in power in his culture in order under-
score the arbitrary and social basis of all conventional paradigms of human un-
derstanding. Chretien's playful endorsement of relativism in socially determined
signs and his artistic pleasure in such arbitrariness were surely welcome in a cul-
ture whose leaders were actively seeking ways to limit the ravages of chivalric
warfare and to bring together merchants from "different" lands in commercial
foires where all value was relative and where bargaining, arbitration, and ex-
change, within this relativity, could bring profit to all.
To conclude, we may find in Yvain's relationship to his lion rich cultural
resonances which define, I would propose, Chretien's own relationship to
literature-not "literature" in the modern sense of that term, but to litteratura as
grammatica and as culture. Thus, the more progress Yvain makes toward his
redemption as a member of the social order and as a spouse in the marriage that
he had transgressed, the more the lion's utility as an emblem expressing Yvain's
noble animal nature is supplanted by the lion as a purely conventional heraldic
emblem. Indeed, Chretien quite simply drops the lion as a protagonist in the ro-
mance when Yvain becomes the social animal that he once was as a courteous,
loving knight. Henceforth, the lion survives in the human world only as an en-
during emblem of that yet more splendid animal: Yvain as a fighting, loving,
loyal, and married man.
The closure of Yvain, ou le chevalier au lion is the fulfillment of a social con-
tract that includes many ethical dimensions: that of an economy of just values
and prices, that of a restricted aristocracy living up to its new mandate to be
fruitful and multiply, and that of an individual to his own identity as that identity
must be mediated by and perfected in the social group. Given that the conclusion
of this story points to fulfillment of heroic identity within the social group and
not to fulfillment in transcendence, Chretien's Yvain is also the fulfillment of ver-

108 n FROM MAN-BEAST TO LION-KNIGHT
nacular poetic language now serving as as the living vehicle of a perfected social
consciousness. This fictive victory of a knight over flaws in his own animal na-
ture is a true victory over the confusion, among inherited sources, of a poetic
vision whose ends are at once ideal and immanent to the social order. In this
sense Chretien's Yvain may be considered as the very centerpiece of twelfth-
century French humanism.

Notes

This page intentionally left blank 

Notes
Introduction
1. Paul Zumthor, Langue ettechniques poetiques a lepoque romane (Paris: Klincksieck, 1963).
2. See Eugene Vance, "Roland, Charlemagne, and the Poetics of Memory," in Textual
Strategies, ed. Josue Harrari (Ithaca: Cornell Univ. Press, 1978), pp. 374-403.
3. Robert-Henri Bautier, "Le regne de Philippe Auguste dans 1'histoire de France," in La France
de Philippe Auguste: Le temps des mutations, ed. Robert-Henri Bautier (Paris: Editions du C. N.
R. S., 1982), p. 17. See also Eugene Vance, "Medievalisms and Models of Textuality," Diacritics
13, (1985), pp. 55-64.
4. For a recent study of the book in medieval culture, not only as a material object but also
as a determinant of thought and of semiosis, see Jesse M. Gellrich, The Idea of the Book in the Mid-
dle Ages: Language Theory, Mythology, and Fiction (Ithaca: Cornell Univ. Press, 1985).
5. Hans W. Frei, The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative: A Study in Eighteenth and Nineteenth Cen-
tury Hermeneutics (New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1972), pp. 243-44.
6. Wilhelm Dilthey, "The Rise of Hermeneutics," trans. Fredric Jameson, New Literary History
3 (1972), p. 233.
7. Augustine, De doctrina Christiana (2.1.1,) trans. D. W. Robertson, Jr. (Indianapolis and
New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1958), p. 34.
8. Tzvetan Todorov, La grammaire du Decameron (The Hauge: Mouton, 1969); Todorov, "La
quete du recit," Critique 262 (1969), pp. 195-214; Julia Kristeva, Le texte du roman (The Hague:
Mouton, 1970); Roland Barthes, "L'ancienne rhetorique," Communications 16 (1970), pp. 172-229;
Eugene Vance, "The Modernity of the Middle Ages in the Future: Remarks on a Recent Book,"
Romanic Review 64 (1973), pp. 140-51.
9. Bernard Cerquiglini, "Eloge de la variante," Langages 69 (1983), pp. 25-35. I summarize
this article closely in the lines that follow.
10. Emile Benveniste, Problemes de linguistique generate (Paris: Gallimard, 1966), pp. 225-85;
Bernard Cerquiglini, La parole medievale (Paris: Minuit, 1981); Marie-Louise Oilier, "Le present
111

112 D NOTES TO INTRODUCTION-CHAPTER 1
du recit: temporalite et roman en vers," Langue franyaise 40 (1978), pp. 99-112; C. Marchello-
Nizia, "Ponctuation et 'unite de lecture' dans les manuscrits medievaux, ou: je ponctue, tu lis, il
theorise," Langue franyaise 40 (1978), pp. 32-44.
11. Peter Haidu, "Text and History: The Semiosis of Twelfth-Century Lyric as Sociohistorical
Phenomenon (Chretien de Troyes: 'D'Amor m'a tolu')," Semiotica 33 (1981), pp. 1-62; see also
Haidu, "The Hermit's Pottage: Deconstruction and History in Yvain," in The Sower and His Seed:
Essays on Chretien de Troyes, ed. Rupert J. Pickens (Lexington: French Forum, Publishers, 1983),
pp. 127-45; E. Jane Burns, Arthurian Fiction: Reading the Grail Cycle (Columbus: Ohio State
Univ. Press, 1985).
12. Hans Robert Jauss, Literaturgeschichte als Provokation (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1973); Jauss,
Alteritat und Modernitdt der mittelalterlichen Literatur (Munich: Fink Verlag, 1977), pp. 11-66.
13. Erich Kohler, "De Rolle des niederen Rittertums bei der Entstehung der Trobadorlyrik," in
Esprit und arkadische Freiheit. Aufsdtze aus de Welt der Romania (Frankfurt and Bonn: Atheneum,
1966), pp. 9-27.
14. Denis de Rougemont, Love in the Western World, trans. Mongomery Belgion, revised and
augmented edition (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1983); see also de Rougement, Love
Declared: Essays on the Myth of Love, trans Richard Howard (Boston: Beacon Press, 1964).
15. Jacques Lacan, Ecrits (Paris: Le Seuil, 1966). Among Sigmund Freud's writings, an
especially provocative text for medievalists is his Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious, trans.
James Strachey (New York: Norton, 1963). See, for example, R. Howard Bloch, "The Fabliaux,
Fetishism and Freud's Jewish Jokes," Representations 4 (1983), pp. 1-26; and Eugene Vance,
"Greimas, Freud and the Story of Trouvere Lyric," in Lyric Poetry: Beyond the New Criticism
(Ithaca: Cornell Univ. Press, 1985), pp. 92-105.
16. Giorgio Agamben, Stanze. La parola e il fantasma nella cultura occidentale (Turino:
Einaudi, 1977); Roger Dragonetti, Le gai savoir dans la rhetorique courtoise (Paris: Le Seuil,
1982). See also Jean-Charles Huchet, "Norn de la femme et ecriture feminine au moyen-age," Poeti-
que 48 (1981), pp. 407-30; Huchet, "Les femmes troubadours ou la voix critique," Litterature 51
(1983), pp. 59-90.
17. See Charles Mela, " 'La lettre tue': cryptographic du Graal," Cahiers de civilisation
medievale 26 (1983), 209-22.
18. Alexandre Leupin, "Ecriture naturelle et ecriture hermaphrodite: le 'De planctu naturae', un
art poetique du Xlle siecle," Digraphe 9 (1976), pp. 118-41; Leupin, "Qui parle? Narrateurs et
scripteurs dans la 'vulgate arthurienne,' " Digraphe 20 (1979), 89-109; Leupin, "La faille et
Fecriture dans les 'Continuations du Perceval,' " Le Moyen-Age 92 (1982), pp. 237-69; Leupin, "Le
ressassement: sur le Meu de la Feuillee' d'Adam de la Halle," Le Moyen-Age 93 (1983), pp. 240-70.
Chapter 1. From Grammatica to a Poetics of the Text
1. Jean Frappier, Chretien de Troyes: L'homme et I'oeuvre (Paris: Hatier, 1957), p. 8. For
a discussion of the impact of writing on vernacular poetics, see Zumthor, Lanque et techniques
poetiques a I'epoque romane, pp. 27-69; Zumthor, Essai de poetique medievale (Paris: Le Seuil,
1972), pp. 64-106; Zumthor, Lanque, texte, enigme (Paris: Le Seuil, 1975), pp. 25-88. For a re-
cent study of Chretien with regard to the prestige of classical literature, see Michelle Freeman,
The Poetics of Translatio Studii and Conjointure: Chretien de Troyes' "Cliges" (Lexington, Ky.:
French Forum, Publishers, 1979). See also Michel Foucault, "What is an Author?" in Textual
Strategies: Perspectives in Post-Structural Criticism, ed. Josue Harari (Ithaca: Cornell Univ. Press,
1979), pp. 141-60.
2. John of Salisbury, Metalogicon 1.13, ed. Clement C. J. Webb (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1929); trans. G. McGarry (Berkeley and Los Angeles: Univ. of California Press, 1955) pp. 37-38.
3. William of Conches, Glossae super Macrobius, trans. Peter Dronke. in Fabula: Explorations

NOTES TO CHAPTER 1 a 113
into the Uses of Myth in Medieval Plalonism, Mittellateinsche Studien und Texte, vol. 9 (Leiden and
Cologne: E. I. Brill, 1974), pp. 17, 68.
4. John of Salisbury, Policraticus, ed. Clement C. J. Webb (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1929);
trans. Joseph B. Pike, under the title Frivolities of Courtiers and Footprints of Philosophers (Min-
neapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press, 1938), p. 6.
5. Le roman de Thebes, ed. Guy Raynaud de Lage (Paris: Champion, 1969), vol. 1, 11.
9213-18.
6. Hugonis de Sancto Victore, Didascalicon: De studio legendi: A Critical TVjtt 2.8, ed. Charles
Henry Buttimer (Washington, D.C.: Catholic Univ. Press, 1939); trans. Jerome Taylor, under the
title The Didascalicon of Hugh of St. Victor (New York and London: Columbia Univ. Press, 1961),
pp. 91-92. See also Pierre Riche, Ecoles et enseignement dans le Haul moyen-age (Paris: Aubier,
1979), pp. 247-48,
7. Douglas Kelly, "La specialite dans 1'invention des topiques," in Archeologie du signs, ed.
Lucie Brind' Amour and Eugene Vance (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies, 1982),
pp. 102-3.
8. According to Frederick Goldin, "Le temps de la chronique dans la Chanson de Roland," VIII
Congreso de la Societe Rencesvals (Navarra: Institucion Principe de Viana, 1981), pp. 173-83, the
use of the preterit in the Roland does correspond to an assertion of truth and authority bound up
with written sources. However, Goldin shows that the dramatic exploitation of the preterit docs not
produce a rigorous diachronism. Rather, the preterit is employed in function of the dynamism of
what Goldin calls the situation de performance of the audience listening to a poet. For this reason,
the preterit alternates with other tenses in accordance with the dramatic movement of the laisse itself,
and the preterit marks not only a past truth, but a future necessity as well. The preterit also functions
in opposition to the present in such a way as to distinguish between external and internal or emotional
states. Though Goldin does not say so, the preterit functions more like a mode (or a modal) than
like a temporal marker. See also Minnette Grunmann-Gaudet, "The Representation of Time in the
Chanson de Roland," in The Nature of Medieval Narrative, ed. Minnette Grunmann-Gaudet and
Robin F. Jones (Lexington, Ky: French Forum, Publishers, 1980), pp. 77-98; and Eugene Vance,
Reading the Song of Roland (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1970), pp. 17, 71.
9. Cf. Emile Benveniste, "Les relations de temps dans le verbe francais," in Problemes de
linguistique generale, vol. 1 (Paris: Gallimard, 1966), pp. 237-50.
10. It was a commonplace of medieval rhetorical theory to consider writing as a supplement to
the voice. For example, St. Augustine writes that "since men could not be most firmly associated
unless they conversed and thus poured, so to speak, their minds and thoughts back and forth to one
another —saw that names, or meaningful sounds, had to be assigned to things, so that men might
use the sense almost as an interpreter to link them together, in as much as they could not perceive
one another's minds. But they could not hear the words of those not present. Therefore, reason, hav-
ing carefully noted and discriminated all the sounds of the mouth and tongue, invented letters." De
ordine 2.12.36, trans. Robert P. Russell, O.S.A., under the title Divine Providence and the Problem
of Evil (New York: Cosmopolitan Science and Art Service, 1942), pp. 139-41. See also Thomas
Aquinas, Aristotle: On Interpretation. Commentary by St. Thomas and Cajetan, trans. Jean T.
Oesterle (Milwaukee: Marquette Univ. Press, 1962), 1.2.2, p. 24. Thomas writes, "If man had only
sensitive cognition, which is of the here and now, such significant vocal sounds as the other animals
use would be sufficient for him to live with others. But man also has the advantage of intellectual
cognition, which abstracts from the here and now, and as a consequence, is concerned with things
distant in place and future in time as well as things present according to time and place. Hence the
use of writing was necessary so that he might manifest his conceptions to those who are distant accor-
ding to place and to those who will come in future time."
11. In classical and medieval hermeneutics, the present tense is understood as privileged over
other tenses in the disclosure of truth. Aristotle, for example, in his Peri hermeneias says that the

114 D NOTES TO CHAPTERS 1-2
past and future tenses are not even verbs, but "cases" of verb. The verb in the present tense is the
strongest assertion of immutable truth. See also Abelard, Glossae super Peri ermenias, ed. Bernhard
Geyer, in Beitrage zur Geschichte der Philosophic des Mittelalters (Munster: Verlag der Aschen-
dorffschen Verlagbuchhandlung, 1927), vol. 21, pt 3, p. 345. In other words, there are two
"presents" in Chretien's narrative discourse: the "present" of the voice of the temporal past and the
atemporal "present" of truth being disclosed by the interpreting voice of the narrator.
12. Chretien de Troyes, Yvain, ou le chevalier au lion, ed. Wendelin Foerster (Halle: Max
Niemeyer, 1906), 11. 29-30. All translations in this study, unless otherwise indicated, are my own.
13. Marie-Louise Oilier, "Le present du recit: temporalite et roman en vers," Langue franyaise
40 (1978), p. 105.
14. Rupert T. Pickens, "Historical Consciousness in Old French Narrative," French Forum 4
(1979), p. 177.
15. Douglas Kelly, "Matiere and genera dicendi in Medieval Romance," Yale French Studies 51
(1974), pp. 147-48.
16. Eugene Vance, "Roland, Charlemagne, and the Poetics of Memory," in Textual Strategies:
Essays in Post-Structural Criticism, ed. Josue Harari (Ithaca: Cornell Univ. Press, 1979), pp.
401-3.
17. Chretien de Troyes, Le chevalier de la charrette, ed. Mario Roques (Paris: Champion,
1958), 11. 1884-91.
18. Matilda T. Bruckner, in a forthcoming essay on the Charrette in The Romances of Chretien
de Troyes, ed. Douglas Kelly (Lexington, Ky.: French Forum, Publishers), sees Lancelot's refusal
to disclose his name as a dramatization of Chretien's own "strategy of concealment" in his narrative.
See also Eugene Vance, "Love's Concordance: The Poetics of Desire and the Joy of the Text,"
Diacritics 5 (1975), especially pp. 40-41.
19. Rupert T. Pickens, The Welsh Knight: Paradoxicality in Chretien's Conte del Graal (Lex-
ington, Ky.: French Forum, Publishers, 1977), p. 138.
20. Quintilian, Institutio oratoria 10.3.26, ed. and trans. H. E. Butler (Cambridge: Harvard
Univ. Press; London: Heinemann, 1936). Quintilian was eloquent about the struggles of writing
well. The writer, he tells us, must labor in complete solitude, must bang his desk, bite his nails,
and thrash his way through his text, reading and rewriting it many times over before presenting it
before the public.
21. Eugene Vance, "Freud, Greimas and the Story of Trouvere lyric: Gace Brule," in Lyric Po-
etry: Beyond the New Criticism, ed. Patricia Parker and Chaviva Hosek (Ithaca: Cornell Univ.
Press, 1985), pp. 93-105.
22. Chretien de Troyes, Erec et Enide, ed. Mario Roques (Paris: Champion, 1955), 11. 23-26
23. Abelard, Glossae secundum Petrum Abaelardum super Porphyrium, ed. Bernhard Geyer,
Beitrage zur Geschichte der Philosophic des Mittelalters (Munster: Verlag der Aschendorffschen
Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1919), vol. 21, pt. 1, p. 20.
Chapter 2. De voir dire mot le conjure:
Dialectics and Fictive Truth
1. Chretien de Troyes, Le roman de Perceval ou ce conte du graal, ed. William Roach (Geneva
and Paris: Droz, 1959), 11. 6409-14.
2. Many critics have detected a "dialectical" tendency in Chretien's narrative art, but few have
tried to deal with the relationship between logic or dialectics in romance in a substantial way. The
most serious attempt to date that I know of is the article by Tony Hunt, "Aristotle, Dialectic, and
Courtly Literature," Viator 10(1979), pp. 95-129. See also Hunt's "The Dialectic of Yvain," Modern
Language Review 72 (1977). pp. 285-99. The more recent article is useful for its summary of the
development of logic in the twelfth century. Despite its rehearsal of the external data concerning

NOTES TO CHAPTER 2 D 115
logic in the period, this article deals with the relationship between logic and poetics only super-
ficially. For Hunt, the influence of dialectics is noticeable above all as the construing of dialogue
in the form of argument—"the trend away from the form as a rhetorical method of presenting the
truth to that of a dialectical method for stimulating inquiry into the truth," (p. 106) —and as the ex-
ploitation of paradox and oppositions. Yet few of the examples that Hunt mentions in his article are
specifically dialectical, as opposed to being merely rhetorical.
3. Peter Abelard, "Glosses on the Peri hermeneias," trans. Hans Arens, in Aristotle's Theory
of Language and its Tradition: Texts from 500 to 1750 (Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins,
1984), pp. 239-40.
4. J. Isaac, Le Peri hermeneias en Occident de Boece a Saint Thomas: Histoire litteraire d'un
traite d'Aristote (Paris: Vrin, 1953), p. 65.
5. R. W. Hunt, The History of Grammar in the Middle Ages, ed. G. L. Bursill-Hall (Amster-
dam: Benjamins, 1980), p. 21.
6. G. L. Bursill-Hall, Speculative Grammars of the Middle Ages: The Doctrine of the partes
orationis of the Modistae (The Hauge and Paris: Mouton, 1971), p. 29.
7. For an account of the relationship between grammatica and poetics in the Middle Ages, see
Paul Salmon, "Uber den Beitrag des grammatischen Unterrichts zur Poetik des Mittelalters," Archiv
fur das Studium der neueren Sprachen und Literaturen 199 (1963), pp. 65-84.
8. Abelard, Logica ingredientibus, in Philosophische Schriften, ed. B. Geyer, Beitrage zur
Geschichte der Philosophic des Mittelalters 21 (1919), p. 2.
9. The following discussion of Abelard and logic is indebted to the magnificent study by Jean
Jolivet, Arts du langage et theologie chez Abelard (Paris: Vrin, 1969), pp. 29-62.
10. Gabriel Nuchelmans, Theories of the Proposition: Ancient and Medieval Conceptions of the
Bearers of Truth and Falsity (Amsterdam and London: North Holland, 1973), pp. 26-27.
11. Given the nineteenth-century tendency to equate "modern" or romantic literature (that is, me-
dieval and renaissance literature) with the discovery of the subjective nature of humans, there is a
danger that critics of our own century will continue to conflate medieval theories of the individual
and of understanding with romantic notions of subjectivity and selfhood. Two recent books ex-
emplify this tendency. The first is by Colin Morris, The Discovery of the Individual, 1050-1200
(London: SPCK, 1972). Like the romantics, who attributed simplicity and externality to premedieval
theories of human understanding, Morris sees twelfth-century individualism as a Christian rejection
of a "simpler" past in favor of a "more complex" structure of self-consciousness: "The simpler rules
of the immediate past were no longer adequate, and the more distant culture of the ancients provided
inspiration indeed, but not solutions which could be readily applied to the new society of Christen-
dom. The situation produced, as such situations have done in other ages, a new self-consciousness,
a capacity for individual evaluation and criticism, and in general a demand for individual initiative"
(p. 160).
The other book is by Robert W. Hanning, The Individual in Twelfth Century Romance (New Ha-
ven: Yale Univ. Press, 1977). Hanning proposes that there is a dialectical relationship between the
exterior, social role of the knight as an "unreflective" warrior and the "interior" sentiment of love
which is moral and discriminating. This dialectic "unfolds through three clearly defined phases,
functioning somewhat like thesis, antithesis, and synthesis" (p. 62), and as "the outer world of prow-
ess affects and is affected by the inner world of love and awareness" (p. 62), the synthesis that occurs
takes the form of an individual who is socially responsible. Hanning supposes that a dialectical
Selbstbewusstsein (Hanning does not use the term himself, but the concept is clearly there) is also
the telos of the knight as hero of the poetic imagination: "The romance plot lacks any context larger
than the lives of its protagonists; it permits the simultaneous presentation of external, heroic adven-
tures and of an inner world in which the self-awareness born of love permits the control of martial
impulses. . . . The imagined world of chivalric romance probes the condition and needs of its pro-

116 D NOTES TO CHAPTERS 2-3
tagonists and their quest for full individuality with conviction and irony, hope and cynicism,
earnestness and comedy" (p. 60).
12. Daniel Poirion, Le merveilleux dans la litterature franqaise du moyen-dge (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1982).
13. Matilda T. Bruckner, "The Folie Tristan d'Oxford: Speaking Voice, Written Text," Tristania
1 (1981-1982), pp. 47-59; see also Bruckner, "Truth in Disguise: The Voice of Renarration in the
Folie Tristan d'Oxford," forthcoming.
14. In her recent book, The Merveilleux in Chretien de Troyes'Romances (Geneva: Droz, 1976),
Lucienne Carasso-Bulow says that Chretien's merveilleux is an effect of juxtaposing contraries of
"realistic and fantastic elements" (p. 137). I would not disagree with such claims, but suggest that
what the author means by "realism" is a world constructed according to logical principles that
became second nature to poets after Chretien —and to their readers.
15. John of Garland, The Parisiana Poetria, ed. and trans. Traugott Lawler (New Haven and
London: Yale Univ. Press, 1974), p. 101.
16. Douglas Kelly, "The Scope and Treatment of Composition in the Twelfth and Thirteenth
Century Arts of Poetry," Speculum 41 (1966), p. 261. See also Kelly, Sens and Conjointure in the
Chevalier de la Charrette (The Hauge and Paris: Mouton, 1966), pp. 88-94; and Kelly, "Theory
of Composition in Medieval Narrative Poetry and Geoffrey of Vinsauf s Poetria Nova," Medieval
Studies 31 (1969), pp. 117-48.
17. Peter Haidu, Aesthetic Distance in Chretien de Troyes: Irony and Comedy in Cliges and
Perceval (Geneva: Droz, 1968).
18. See Aristotle, on "Substance." in The Categories, trans. Harold P. Cook, Loeb Classical Li-
brary (1973), pp. 19-35. Boethius writes, "It can happen that something is brought into contention
by comparison, as when there is doubt whether courage is better than justice. But this question must
be put among questions involving accidents, because nothing but accident comes into play in com-
parisons, for only accident admits of more and less" (Boethius, De topicis dijf'erentiis 1.1178c, p.
36. See also Jolivet, pp. 109-11.
19. Chretien's argument "from the whole" is a dialectical topic. See Boethius, De topicis 
differen-
tiis, 2.1188a, p. 51.
Chapter 3. Selfhood and Substance in Erec et Enide
1. Eugene Vance, Reading the Song of Roland (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1970), pp.
11, 65.
2. Eugene Vance, "Chretien's Yvain and the Ideology of Change and Exchange," in Mervelous
Signals: Poetics and Sign Theory in the Middle Ages (Lincoln: Univ. of Nebraska Press, 1986).
3. Abelard, Glossae super Porphyrium, ed. Geyer, in Behrdge zur Geschichte der Philosophic
des Mittelalters, vol. 21, pt. 1, p. 13.
4. Aristotle, Categories, p. 33. See Jolivet, p. 110, concerning the Latin expression of "change
within itself:" secundum sui mutationem.
5. Kent Kraft, "Modernism in the Twelfth Century," Comparative Literature Studies 3 (1981),
p. 289; Brian Stock, The Implications of Literacy: Written Language and Models of Interpretation
in the Eleventh and Twelfth Centuries (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1983), pp. 517-21.
6. Georges Lavis, L'expression de I'affectivite dans la poesie lyrique franyaise du moyen age
(XIIe~XllIe s.) (Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1972).
7. For a discussion of the relationship between the rhetoric of romance, the passions of the soul,
and the social activities of love and war, see Eugene Vance, "Le combat erotique chez Chretien de
Troyes: de la figure a la forme," Poelique 12 (1972), pp. 544-71; See also Vance, "Signs of the
City: Medieval Poetry as Detour," New Literary History 4 (1973), pp. 163-77.

NOTES TO CHAPTERS 3-4 n 117
8. Donald Maddox, Structure and Sacring: The Systematic Kingdom in Chretien's Erec et Enide
(Lexington, Ky.: French Forum, Publishers, 1978), pp. 116-19, 155-63.
9. Winthrop Wetherbee, Platonism and Poetry in the Twelfth Century: The Literary Influence
of the School of Chartres (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1972), p. 190.
10. Karl-Heinz Bender, "L'essor des motifs du plus beau chevalier et de la plus belle dame dans
le premier roman courtois," in Lebenbendige Romania: Festschrift fur Hans-Wilhelm Klein (n.p.,
1977), pp. 35-46.
11. Although any story coheres by logic of one kind or another, the Roland illustrates the
breakdown of one logic and the inability of the poet, his characters, and his language, to pass to
another. Recently, several critics have invoked the Greimassian "semiotic square" to illustrate the
logical crisis in the Chanson de Roland: Pierre van Nuffel, "Problemes de semiotique interpretative:
1'epopee," Lettres Romanes 27 (1973), pp. 150-62; Larry S. Crist, "Deep Structures in the Chansons
de Geste," Olifant 3 (1975), pp. 3-35; Alison Goddard Elliott, "The Power of Discourse: Martyr's
Passion and Old French Epic," Medievalia et Humanistica 11 (1982), pp. 39-60. Such descriptive
methods are valid, but the historical dimension of this intellectual crisis is also important. As all of
these critics know, the Greimassian semiotic square is a recasting of the Apuleian square of
Aristotelian logic, specifically, of On Interpretation, ch. 10. See Alain de Libera, "La semiotique
d' Aristote," in Structures elementaires de la signification, ed. Frederic Nef (Brussels: Editions Com-
plexe, 1976), pp. 28-48. Given that Aristotelian logic, and most specifically, the On Interpretation
had by now made important inroads into all aspects of intellectual life of the twelfth century, one
difference between Chretien and the Roland poet (and between the knights of romance and the barons
of epic) is that the later heroes can and must, themselves, reason (intuitively, of course) according
to patterns subtended by the Aristotelian logical square.
12. For an account of the important shifts in the conception of marriage that occurred in the
twelfth century, see Dictionnaire de theologie catholique, s.v. "Mariage;" JohnT. Noonan, Jr., "The
Power to Choose," Viator 4 (1973), pp. 419-34; Marie-Odile Metral, Le manage. Les hesitations
de ['Occident (Paris: Aubier, 1977); Georges Duby, Le chevalier, lafemme et le pretre. Le marriage
dans la France feodale (Paris: Hachette, 1981).
13. Wetherbee, Platonism and Poetry in the Twelfth Century, p. 238-39. Wetherbee's remarks
about Erec merit further quotation: "With the introduction of the quadrivium, all worldly activity
is set in a new perspective, and he becomes a philosopher-king, for whom earthly dominion is only
a stage in the realization of a higher objective . . . . The stress on transcendence is con-
firmed . . . by the description of Erec's scepter, made of a single emerald and carved with the im-
ages of all creatures . . . . The scepter represents an Edenic vision in which things are seen in their
true natures and as a unity, as they were once beheld before the fall" (p. 239).
14. Reto Bezzola, Le sens de I'amour et de I'aventure (Chretien de Troyes) (Paris: La jeune par-
que, 1947), p. 246.
Chapter 4. Topos and Tale
1. The following writings on topical theory have been useful to the present study: Otto Bird,
"The Formalizing of the Topics in Medieval Logic," Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 1 (1960),
pp. 138-49; Otto Bird, "The Tradition of the Logical Topics: Aristotle to Ockham," Journal of the
History of Ideas 23 (1967), pp. 307-23. Certain of Bird's conclusions have been corrected by N.
J. Pedersen, "Walter Burley, De consequentiis and the Origin of the Theory of Consequence," in
English Logic and Semantics From the End of the Twelfth Century to the Time of Ockham and
Burleigh, Acts of the 4th European Symposium on Medieval Logic and Semantics, Leiden-
Nijmegen. 23-27 April 1979, ed. H. A. G. Braakhuis, C. H. Kneepkens, and I. M. de Rijk, in
Aristarium, Supplementa I (Nijmegen: Ingenium Publishers), pp. 279-304). See Peter Jchn, ed.,
Toposforschung: 
eine Dokumentation (Frankfurt: 
Athenaum, 1972); Max 
L. 
Baeumer,

118 Q NOTES TO CHAPTER 4
Toposforschung, Wegeder Forschung, 395 (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1973).
See also Eleonore Stump, Boethius's De topicis differentiis. 
Translated, with Notes and Essays on
the Text (Ithaca: Cornell Univ. Press, 1978); Stump, "Dialectic in the Eleventh and Twelfth Cen-
turies: Garlandus Compotista," History and Philosophy of Logic 1 (1980), pp. 1-18; Stump,
"Topics: Their Development and Absorption into Consequences," in The Cambridge History of Later
Medieval Philosophy, ed. Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan Pinborg (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, 1982); Stump, "Topics, Consequences, and Obligations in Ockham's Sutntna
logicae" forthcoming; Stump "Abelard on the Topics," forthcoming; and Stump, "Logic in the Early
Twelfth Century," forthcoming. Stump's writings are the most systematic attempts to deal with both
the theory and place of topics in the history of logic. Her book contains a valuable bibliography on
the subject. For an interesting study of the relationship between logical and rhetorical topics, see
Michael C. Left', "Boethius's De differentiis topicis, Book 4," in Medieval Eloquence: Studies in the
Theory and Practice of Medieval Rhetoric, ed. James J. Murphy (Berkeley and Los Angeles: Univ.
of California Press, 1978), pp. 3-24. I am grateful to Norman Kretzmann for helping me to get
started in these difficult questions.
2. See also Eugene Vance, "The Modernity of the Middle Ages in the Future: Remarks on a
Recent Book," Romanic Review 64 (1973), pp. 140-51; and Vance, "A Coda: Modern Medievalism
and the Understanding of Understanding," New Literary History 10 (1978-1979), pp. 377-83.
3. Richard McKeon, "The Organization of Sciences and the Relations of Cultures in the Twelfth
and Thirteenth Centuries," in The Cultural Context of Medieval Learning, ed. John Murdoch and
Edith Sylla (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1975), p. 191.
4. Boethius, De topicis differentiis, 
Bk. 4, p. 80. References to Boethius are to Eleonore
Stump's translation and are henceforth included in my text.
5. Petrus Abelardus, De Dialectica, ed. L. M. De Rijk (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1956), pp.
462-63: "Non est autem idem argumentum quod argumentatio. Id enim solum quod probat,
argumentum dicimus. Totam vero complexionem probantis et probati argumentationem dicimus, ut
totum syllogismum vel totum enthymema, ita scilicet ut in argumentatione argumentum quasi pars
in toto contineatur."
6. Peter Haidu, Aesthetic Distance in Chretien de Troyes: Irony and Comedy in Cliges and
Perceval (Geneva: Droz, 1968).
7. Douglas Kelly, "La specialite dans finvention des topiques," in Archeologie du signe, ed.
Lucie Brind'Amour and Eugene Vance (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1982),
pp. 101-26; Kelly, "The Logic of the Imagination in Chretien de Troyes," in The Sower and His
Seed, ed. Pickens, pp. 9-30. In the latter article, Kelly evokes the need for a thorough study of
topical theory with regard to rhetorical theory (p. 12). As I hope to demonstrate by this study, it
is not in rhetoric itself, but in dialectics, that the most lucid and thorough articulation of topical
theory may be found. I am convinced, moreover, that Chretien was sufficiently familiar with the
rudiments of dialectics (hence, of topical theory) to have transcended the very limited boundaries
of topical theory as they are manifested in rhetorical theory of his time.
8. Matthieu de Vendome, Ars Versificatoria, in Les Arts poetiques du Xlle et du Xllle siecle,
ed. Edmond Faral (Paris: Champion, 1924, reprint 1962), p. 143.
9. "Maximae propositiones iliac dicuntur (regulae) quae, multarum consequentiarum sensus
contenentes, communem inferentiae modum secundum vim eiusdem habltudinis demonstrant"
(Dialectica, p. 310).
10. Boethius defines the enthymeme as "an imperfect syllogism, that is, discourse in which the
precipitous conclusion is derived without all the propositions having been laid down beforehand, as
when someone says 'man is an animal; therefore he is a substance,' he omits the other proposition,
'Every animal is a substance' " (De topicis differentiis, 
Bk. 4, p. 80).
11. St. Augustine, De doclrina Christiana 2.1.1, trans. D. W. Robertson, Jr., under the title On
Christian Doctrine (New York: Liberal Arts Press, 1950), p. 34.

NOTES TO CHAPTER 5 D 119
Chapter 5. Si est homo, est animal
1. Alice M. Colby, The Portrait in Twelfth-Century French Literature: An Example of the
Stylistic Originality of Chretien de Troyes (Geneva: Droz, 1965).
2. While Boethius and Abelard considered dialectic to be essentially a process of question and
answer, it is clear that the pragmatic history of medieval logic may in fact be described as the
elaboration of a properly textual logic that is distinct from the context of the dialectical disputatio.
See Alain de Libera, "Textualite logique et forme summuliste," and Thomas Maloney, "The Sum-
mulae dialectices of Roger Bacon and the Summulist Form," in Archeologie du signs, ed. Lucie
Brind'Amour and Eugene Vance (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1980), pp.
213-34, 235-50.
3. Virgil, Georgicon 3. 215-23, in P. Vergili Maronis, Opera, ed. F. A. Hirtzel, (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1900). See also Michael C. J. Putnam, Virgil's Poem of the Earth: Studies in the
Georgics (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1979); and Eugene Vance, "Sylvia's Pet Stag: Wildness
and Domesticity in Virgil's Aeneid," Arethusa 14 (1981), pp. 127-38.
4. The theme of the tripartition of the soul is amply expressed in Plato's Phaedrus, which was
a major source of medieval platonism; see also Aristotle, De anima 3.10. 820-25; St. Augustine,
De libero arbitrio 1.4.9. See Thomas on Aristotle, in Aristotle's De anima in the Version of William
ofMoerbeke and the Commentary of St. Thomas, trans. Foster and Humphries (New Haven: Yale
Univ. Press, 1954), pp. 463-64.
5. St. Augustine expresses this hierarchy well in On Free Will: Human beings, he says, have
much in common not only with lower animals, but also with plants and fortify themselves. Like
animals, humans are also sensible: they see, hear, feel, touch, and have a sense of smell. "By our
genus," Augustine writes, "we have much in common with brutes (belluis)', moreover, to seek (ap-
petere) the pleasures of the body and to avoid harm are the whole activity of bestial life" (1.8.18).
Yet humans have in addition certain traits that are proper only to their species, such as being capable
of laughter, as loving praise and glory, and as being rational. Reason alone, however, is the unique
source of human superiority over all other species of the genus animal, though by "reason" Augustine
means far more than the government of brute passion (emblematized in 1.9.19 by the figure of the
wild animal tamer): it is wisdom (sapientia), or the love of spiritual things. (De libero arbitrio,
Patrologiae Latinae 32. col. 1221-1303. I have used the text and French translation by F. J. Thon-
nard, Oeuvres de Saint Augustin, Bibliotheque Augustinienne, lere serie, vol. 6 (Paris: Desclee de
Brouwer, 1941). The English translation is my own.)
6. Aristotle, Politics 3.4, trans. Benjamin Jowett, in Introduction to Aristotle, ed. Richard
McKeon (New York: Random House, 1947), pp. 583-86. See also Cicero, who following both Plato
and Aristotle, writes, "But we must distinguish between different kinds of domination and subjection
[imperandi et serviendi]. For the mind is said to rule over the body, and also over lust; but it rules
over the body as a king governs his subjects, or a father his children, whereas it rules over lust as
a master [dominus] rules his slaves, restraining it and breaking its power. So kings, commanders,
magistrates, senators and popular assemblies govern citizens as the mind governs the body; but the
master's restraint of his slaves is like the restraint exercised by the best part of the mind, the reason,
over its own evil and weak elements, such as the lustful desires, anger, and the other disquieting
emotions" (De Republica 3.25.37, trans., Clinton Walker Keyes (London: Heinemann; New York:
Putnam's, 1928), pp. 213-15.
7. Alfarabi's The Enumeration of the Sciences, which contains ideas of political science drawn
from Aristotle's politics, was heavily exploited by Dominicus Gundisalvi in his De scientiis in the
middle of the twelfth century; Alfarabi was translated from the Arabic into Latin in Toledo about
1175. (Medieval Political Philosophy: A Sourcebook, cd. Ralph Lerner and Muhsin Mahdi fGIen-
coe, 111.: The Free Press, 1963], p. 23)

120 D NOTES TO CHAPTER 5
8. St. Thomas, De regimine principium, ch. 10, in Aquinas: Selected Political Writings, ed.
A. P. D'Entreves, trans. J. G. Dawson (Oxford: Blackwell, 1959), p. 59.
9. Richard Bernheimer, Wild Men in the Middle Ages (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ.
Press, 1952), pp. 41-48; see also John Block Friedman, The Monstrous Races in Medieval An and
Thought (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1981).
10. For example, in De Republica 1.38.60, Cicero relishes the example of the statesman Ar-
chytas of Tarentum who refused to flog a certain slave to death, hardly because the slave did not
deserve it, but because he would have flogged the slave in anger. In another work, his De 
officiis
1.25.89, Cicero censures all anger in the administration of justice: "In administering punishment it
is above all necessary to allow no trace of anger. For if anyone proceeds in a passion to inflict punish-
ment, he will never observe that happy mean which lies between excess and defect. This doctrine
of the mean is approved by the Peripatetics — and wisely approved, if only they did not speak in
praise of anger and tell us that it is a gift bestowed on us by Nature for a good purpose. But, in
reality, anger is in every circumstances to be eradicated" (trans. Walter Miller. Loeb Classical Li-
brary, 1961, p. 91).
11. St. Augustine, On the Trinity 12.11, trans. A. W. Haddan, in The Basic Writings of St.
Augustine, ed. Whitney Dates (New York: Random House, 1948), vol. 2, p. 818.
12. Erich Auerbach, Literary Language and Its Public in Late Latin Antiquity and in the Middle
Ages (New York: Pantheon Books, 1965), pp. 66-81.
13. Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics 2.7, trans. W. D. Ross, in Introduction to Aristotle, ed.
Richard McKeon (New York: Random House, 1947), p. 343.
14. Jean Frappier, Chretien de Troyes (Paris: Hatier, 1957), 150.
15. Aristotle, Politics 1.2, p. 556.
16. Michael C. J. Putnam, trans., The Poetry of the Aeneid (Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press,
1965), p. 59.
17. Norbert Luyten, O.P., "Matter as Potency," in The Concept of Matter in Greek and Medieval
Philosophy, ed. Ernan McMullin (South Bend: Univ. of Notre Dame Press, 1963), p. 102.
18. Bernard Sylvester, Cosmographia, trans. Winthrop Wetherbee, in The Cosmographia of
Bernardus Sylvestris (New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1973), p. 67. Wetherbee believes that the
Latin Silva and the Greek Hyle are used interchangeably in Bernard's poem, but Brian Stock, Myth
and Science in the Twelfth Century (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1972) believes that there are
semantic differences between the terms: "Silva is much more involved than hyle in the moral allegory
through which a new and better universe is to be formed. In this descriptions, Bernard points out
that silva is to be refined into a more cultivated visage for the world while hyle represents the eternal
source of matter which reproduces itself. In 1.1, it is silva, not hyle, which is associated with the
image of a better form for mundus; it is she who is cut off from her own perfection and who longs
to be reborn; it is she whom the infant cosmos thanks for being no worse off than it is. In 1.2, a
slightly different, though no less allegorical portrait of matter is found. Hyle, at least to some extent,
is said to be more stable than silva. She rests motionless, though surrounded by motion, and pas-
sionless, neither good nor evil in herself (pp. 100-101). If Stock is right, perhaps the dialogue be-
tween the unchangeable man-beast and the more perfectable Calogrenant corresponds, at least in
part, with what Stock calls Bernard's portrayal, in Silva and Hyle of "resonating, interdependant
forms of the same reality" (p. 101).
19. On the implicit comparison between the poet's creative power and God's see Stock, pp.
119-37; see also Wetherbee, Platonism and Poetry for many good insights into poetic and divine
creative power as imagined in the twelfth century.
20. Aristotle, Politics 1.2: "But he who is unable to live in society or has no need to because
he is sufficient for himself, must be either a beast or a god: he is no part of a state. A social instinct
is implanted in all men by nature, and yet he who first founded the state was the greatest of bencf'ac-

NOTES TO CHAPTER 5 a 121
tors. For man, when perfected, is the best of animals, but, when separated from law and justice,
he is the worst of all."
21. Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on the Politics 1.1.35, trans. Ernest L. Fortin and Peter D.
O'Neill, in Medieval Political Philosophy (Glencoe, 111.: The Free Press, 1963), p. 310.
22. Georges Duby, L'Economie rurale et la vie des campagnes dans I'Occident medieval, vol.
1 (Paris: Aubier, 1962), p. 146.
23. On the primacy of bread in the alimentary system of the Middle Ages, see Duby, L'Economie
rurale, vol. 1, pp. 140-41.
24. Aristotle, Politics 1.2, p. 557: "A social instinct is planted in all men by nature, and yet he
who first founded the state was the greatest of benefactors. For man, when perfected, is the best
of animals, but, when separated from law and justice, he is the worst of all; since armed injustice
is the more dangerous, and he is equipped at birth with arms, meant to be used by intelligence and
virtue, which he may use for the worst ends. Wherefore if he have no virtue, he is the most unholy
and the most savage of animals, and the most full of lust and gluttony."
25. Chretien's narrative reflects, here, major developments in the economy of his century that
implicated not only the secular community, but also the eccelesiastical and monastic communities.
See Georges Duby, "Le budget de 1'abbaye de Cluny entre 1080 et 1155: Economie domaniale et
economic monetaire," Annales: Economies Societes, Civilisations 1 (1952), pp. 155-71; reprinted
in Hommes et structures du moyen-age (The Hauge and Paris: Mouton, 1973), pp. 61-82; see also
Duby, Guerriers et paysans (Paris: Gallimard, 1973), pp. 280-300.
26. Emanuel J. Mickel, Jr., "Theme and Narrative Structure in Guillaume d'Angleterre," in The
Sower and His Seed, ed. Pickens, p. 58.
27. Elizabeth Chapin, Les Villes de foires de Champagne des origines au debut du XlVe siecle
(Paris: Champion, 1937); R. Bautier, "Les foires de Champagne. Recherches sur une evolution
historique," in Lafoire, Receuils de la Societe Jean Bodin, vol. 5 (Brussels: Editions de la librairie
encyclopedique 1953), pp. 97-147; Duby, Guerriers et paysans, p. 280; Henri Dubois, "Le com-
merce et les foires au temps de Philippe Auguste," in La France de Philippe auguste. Le temps des
mutations, ed. Robert-Henri Bautier (Paris: Editions du C. N. R. S., 1982), pp. 689-709.
28. Peter Haidu, "The Hermit's Pottage: Deconstruction and History in Yvain," in The Sower
and His Seed, ed. Pickens, p. 134.
29. Jean Becquet, "Eremistime et heresie au moyen-age, in Heresies et societes dans 1'Europe
pre-industrielle, Xie-XVlIle siecles (Paris: Ecole pratique des hautes etudes, 1964), pp. 139-45.
30. Jean Leclercq, "L'eremitisme en Occident jusqu'a Fan mille," in L'eremitismo in occidente net
secoil Xle XII, ed. Cinzio Violante and Cosimo Damiano Fonseca, Pubblicazioni dell'Universita cat-
tolica del sacro cuore, Serie terza, varia 4 (Milan: Societa editrice vita e pensiero, 1965), pp. 27-44.
31. Bernard Bligny, "L'eremitisme et les chartreux," in L'eremitismo in occidente, pp. 248-70.
32. Jean Leclercq, "Le poeme de Payen Bolotin contre les faux ermites," Revue benedictine 67
(1957), pp. 52-86, especially p. 68.
33. Leopold Genicot, "L'eremitisme du Xle 5. dans son contexte economique et social,"
L'eremetismo in occidente, pp. 57, 61; Jean Becquet, "L'eremitisme clerical et lai'c dans 1'ouest de
la France," in L'eremitismo in occidente, pp. 187-88.
34. Leclercq, "L'eremitisme en Occident," p. 27-44.
35. J. G. Sikes. Peter Abailard (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1932), p. 20; Jean Jolivet,
Abelard (Paris: Seghers, 1969), pp. 30-31.
36. Duby, Guerriers et paysans, p. 280.
37. R. Howard Bloch, "Merlin and the Modes of Medieval Legal Meaning," in Archeologie du
signe, p. 127.
38. Jacques Le Goff, La Naissance du Purgatoire (Paris: Gallimard, 1981), p. 227.
39. Claude Levesque and Christie V. McDonald, cds., L'Oreille de I'autre: textes et debuts avec
Jacques Derrida (Montreal: VLB Editcur, 1982), p. 118.

122 D NOTES TO CHAPTER 6
Chapter 6. From Man-Beast to Lion-Knight:
Difference, Kind, and Emblem
1. Aristotle, speaking of the vegetative basis of all animate beings says, "Now excellence of
this seems to be common to all species and not specifically human; for this part of faculty seems
to function most in sleep, while goodness and badness are least manifest in sleep (whence comes
the saying that the happy arc no better off than the wretched for half of their lives; and this happens
naturally enough, since sleep is an inactivity of the soul in that respect in which it is called good
or bad)" (Nichomachean Ethics 1.13, trans. W. D. E. Ross, in Introduction to Aristotle, ed. Richard
McKeon (New York; Random House, 1947), p. 309.
2. Mark Shell, The Economy of Literature (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1978), p. 64.
3. Cf. Eugene Vance, "Le combat erotique chez Chretien de Troyes," Poetique 12 (1972), pp.
544-71; also Vance, "Signs of the City; Medieval Poetry as Detour," New Literary History 4
(1972-73), pp. 557-74.
4. Virgil, Aeneid 10.723-29; in P. Vergili Maronis Opera, ed. F. A. Hirtzel (Oxford: Claren-
don Press, 1900); trans. L. R. Lind, Virgil's Aenid (Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press, 1962).
5. Cf. Jean Charles Payen, "L'enracinement folklorique du roman arthurien," Travaux de
linguistique et de litterature 16 (1978), pp. 427-37.
6. Julian Harris, "The Role of the Lion in Chretien de Troyes' Yvain," PMLA 64 (1949), pp.
1143-63.
7. Porphyry, Isagoge, trans. Edward W. Warren (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Medieval
Studies, 1975), p. 43.
8. Eleonore Stump, "Differentia and the Porphyrian Tree," in Boethius's De topicis 
differentiis,
p. 239.
9. Uberto Eco, Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language (Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press,
1984), p. 64.
10. Abelard, Super Porphyrium, ed. Mario Dal Pra, in Scritti filosofici (Milan: Fratelli Bocca,
1954), p. 17.
11. T. H. White, trans. The Bestiary: A Book of Beasts (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1954),
pp. 7-11.
12. Sigmund Freud, "The Uncanny," in Collected Papers, vol. 4, trans. Joan Rivers (London:
The Hogarth Press, 1957), p. 394.
13. John Bloch Freidman, The Monstrous Races in Medieval Art and Thought (Cambridge: Har-
vard Univ. Press, 1981), p. 122.
14. R. Howard Bloch, Etymologies and Genealogies: A Literary Anthropology of the French
Middle Ages (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1983), pp. 91-92.
15. Claude Gandelman, "The Metastability of Signs / Metastability as Sign," Semiotica 28
(1979), p. 83.
16. Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, ed. Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1931-1935), vol. 2, par. 2.
17. Gerard J. Brault, Early Blazon: Heraldic Terminology in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Cen-
turies With Special Reference to Arthurian Literature (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972), p. 28. See
also Michel Pastoreau, Traite d'heraldique, (Paris: Picard, 1979), pp. 21-65.
18. Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vol. 2, par. 249: "A Symbol is a sign that refers
to the Object that it denotes by virtue of a law, usually an association of general ideas, which operates
to cause the symbol to be interpreted by referring to that Object." Peirce's use of the word "symbol"
is very different and opposed to the traditional romantic sense of that term, as conveyed by Coleridge
and C. S. Lewis.
19. St. Augustine, De ordine 2.12.36, trans. Robert P. Russell, under the title Divine Providence

NOTES TO CHAPTER 6 D 123
and the Problem of Evil: A Translation of St. Augustine's De Ordine (New York: Cosmopolitain
Science and Art Service, Co., 1942), p. 141.
20. John F. Benton, "Written Records and the Development of Systematic Feudal Relations" (Pa-
per presented at the conference, "Language and History in the Middle Ages," Centre for Medieval
Studies, University of Toronto, November 6-7, 1981).
21. Michel Pastoureau, Les armoiries, Typologie des sources due moyen-age occidental, fasc.
20 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1976), p. 46.
22. For a recent study of the relationship between genealogy, romance, and heraldry, see R.
Howard Bloch, Etymologies and Genealogies: A Literary Anthropology of the French Middle Ages
(Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1983), especially pp. 64-91. See also L. Genicot, Les
Genealogies, Typologie des sources ou moyen-age occidental, fasc. 15 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1975).
23. Alexandre Leupin, Le Graal et la litterature (Lausanne: L'Age de 1'homme, 1982). Leupin's
book addresses many questions raised by Bloch concerning the relationship between kinship and nar-
rative, but he stresses, rather, principles of false lineage and incest as hidden motors of romance
narrative.
24. Claude Levi-Strauss, Le totemisme aujourd'hui (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
1962), p. 37.
25. "Si nomen est pars orationis, ergo est pars existens in oracione. Ergo si non est pars existens
in oracione, non est nomen. Ergo nisi sit oratio non est nomen." in L. M. De Rijk, Logica Moder-
norum: A Contribution to the History of Early Terminist Logic (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1967), vol.
2, pt. 1, p. 245.
26. Brian Stock, T\ie Implications of Literacy: Written Language and Models of Interpretation
in the Eleventh and Twelfth Centuries (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1983), pp. 88-240.
27. Rodney Dennys, The Heraldic Imagination (London: Barrie and Jenkins, 1975), p. 133.

This page intentionally left blank 

Index

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
Abelard, Peter, 18, 19, 20, 23, 29, 35, 45, 
Auerbach, Erich, 62
47, 56, 75, 86, 87; De dialectica, 29, 45, 
Augustine of Hippo, St., xxiv, 13, 18, 51,
53 
62, 70, 85, 90, 100; Confessions, 62; De
Abstraction, 38, 39 
libero arbitrio, 62; De (rinitate, 62
Accident, 17, 20, 25, 28-38 passim, 51 
Avanture, 20, 30, 61, 66, 87, 90
Agamben, Giorgio, xxix
Alain de Lille, 32 
Babel, 8
Alcuin, 18 
Baldwin, Charles Sears, xxx
Allegory, 87 
Barthes, Roland, xxv
Ambrose of Milan, St., 62 
Bautier, Robert-Henri, xxii
Amplification, 46 
Beauty, 32, 33
Analogy, 27 
Bedier, Joseph, xxvii
Animal, 49, 54, 55, 57, 58, 62, 71, 83, 94; 
Benson, Robert L., xxxi
animacy, 49; soul, 58, 66, 81 
Benton, John F. 101
Anselm of Laon, St., 18 
Benveniste, Emile, xxviii
Appetition, 30, 61, 62, 91 
Bernard of Clairvaux, St., 75
Aquinas, Thomas, St., 59, 68 
Bernard Sylvester, 32, 63, 64, 65
Argument, 19, 22, 27, 35, 46, 56, 59; "from 
Bestiaries, 56, 83, 85, 89, 91
the whole," 56 
Bezzola, Reto, 39
Argumentatio, 20, 23, 42, 45, 46 
Blazon, 97, 99, 101, 102, 105
Aristotle, 16, 18, 19, 20, 29, 40, 43, 48, 59, 
Bloch, R. Howard, 76, 93, 102
62, 71, 85, 86; Analytica, 19; Categories, 
Boethius, 18, 19, 43, 44, 46, 51, 52, 53, 85
16, 18, 29, 85; De anima, 62; Organon, 
Bolotin, Payen, 74
18; Peri hermeneias, 16, 18, 35 
Brault, Gerard J., 99, 106
Arthur, King, 12, 23, 31, 32, 39 
Brinkmann, Hennig, xxxi
Auctores, 3, 5, 7, 31 
Broceliande, Forest of, 12, 65, 69
Auctoritas, 12 
Bruckner, Matilda, 21
127

128 D INDEX
Bruyne, Edgar de, xxxi 
Donatus, 4
Burns, Jane, xxviii 
Dragonetti, Roger, xxix, 20
Bursill-Hall, G. L., xxxi, 17 
Duby, Georges, 69
Dynamism, 38
Calogrenant, 9, 10
Caroglyph, 81, 97 
Eco, Umberto, 86
Castration, 90, 92, 94 
Economy, 75
Cerquiglini, Bernard, xxvi, xxvii 
Emblem, 83, 99, 106, 107
Champagne, 72, 76, 92, 94; fairs of, 107 
Enarratio, 4
Change, 29, 30, 31, 33, 35 
Enonciation, xxviii
Chanson de Roland, xxi, xxii, xxviii, 7, 11, 
Enthymeme, 47, 49
17, 20, 25, 27, 28, 33, 36, 49, 76, 81, 
Eriugena, John Scot, 18
82, 83, 99, 100 
Esclados, 11, 12
Character, 81 
Ethics, xxiii, 56, 57, 61, 66, 83
Charity, 71, 85 
Event, 20
Charlemagne, xxii, 33, 36, 81, 99
Chaucer, Geoffrey, 69 
Fabula, 20, 22
Chretien de Troyes, xxiii, xxxii-xxxiii, 28; 
Fantasy, 20
Le chevalier de la charette, 7, 98; Cliges, 
Faral, Edmond, xxx
6; Le conte del Graal, 7; Erec et Enide, 
Fiction, 6, 9, 11, 12, 19, 20, 21, 22, 37, 45,
10, 23, 30, 32, 33; 
48, 50, 53, 54, 81
Cicero, 18, 20, 35, 43, 44, 48, 59, 61 
Forest, 63, 69, 88
Closure, 107 
Frappier, Jean, 63
Code, 98 
Freud, Sigmund, 36, 90
Commerce, xx, xxi, 71, 73, 92, 107 
Friedman, John Bloch, 91
Compotista, Garlandus, 18
Conjointure, xxix, xxx, 9, 11, 22, 46, 48, 
Gandelman, Claude, 95, 96
53, 80 
Genus, 29, 54, 56, 57, 60, 61, 65, 85
Consignification, 19, 20, 22 
Geoffrey of Vinsauf, 45
Constable, Giles, xxxi 
Gift, 32, 34
Contraries, 26, 29, 35, 37, 48, 49, 50 
Grail, xxix, 14, 102
Conversion, 70 
Grammatica, xxiii, xxv, 3, 4, 5, 14, 16, 18,
Cooked, 8 
19, 21, 54, 77, 100, 102, 103, 107
Curtius, Enrst Robert, 42 
Grands rhetoriqueurs, xxvi
Custom, 31 
Guenevere, 9, 10, 23, 32
Dante, 27 
Haidu, Peter, xxviii, 22, 73, 94, 96, 97
D'Arbrissel, Robert, 74 
Harris, Julian, 85
Definition, 29 
Heap, 87, 90, 97
Dennys, Rodney, 106 
Heidegger, Martin, xxvi, 78
Derrida, Jacques, xxiii, xxvi, 78 
Helias, Peter, 17
Description, 30, 45, 46 
Henri-le-lib&al, Count, xxii, 72, 76
Desire, 9 
Heraldry, 84, 94, 97, 101, 105
Dialectics, 16, 17, 23, 25, 26, 28, 42, 43, 
Hermeneutics, xxiv, xxviii, 5, 7, 8, 9, 14,
45, 46 
20, 22, 23, 25, 41, 43, 45, 56
Difference, xxvi, 80, 89, 100; differentia, 
Hermitage, 68, 69, 70, 73-76
46, 47, 56, 66, 85, 86, 88, 97, 102, 
Heroic identity, 29, 30
104 
Hieroglyph, 81, 97
Dilthcy, Wilhelm, xxiv 
Historia, 6, 22

INDEX D 129
Homo erectus, 81 
Locus, 41
Huchet, Jean-Charles, xxx 
Logic, xxv, 16, 17, 19, 22, 23, 26, 29, 50,
Hugh of St. Victor, 16, 58, 59, 60, 67, 68, 
54, 56, 102
69, 72, 75, 81, 89 
Lying, 6
Hult, David F., xxviii
Humanism, 40, 54, 108 
Macrobius, 3
Hunt, R. W., xxx, 17, 18 
Marie de France, 3, 5, 21, 28, 50
Huntsman, Geoffrey F., xxxi 
Marriage, 37
Hyle, 63 
Marvelous, 20, 21, 22, 39, 46, 63
Matiere, 5, 8, 9, 10, 14, 53, 54, 65, 70, 77,
Iconicity, 99 
80, 84
Identity, 28; heroic, 29, 30 
Matthew of Vendome, 45
Imitation, 4 
Maximal proposition, 46, 47, 48, 51, 53, 54
Indexical signs, 97 
McKeon, Richard, 42
Inference, 42 
Mechanical arts, 60, 61, 67, 72, 81, 89, 93
Intellect, 11, 15, 19, 38, 39 
Medievialism, xx-xxxii; "de papa," xxvi;
Interpretation, 7, 8, 10 
orthodox, xxiii-xxiv;
Intertextuality, xxvii, 98 
Medisance, 9, 12, 35
Inventio, 10, 28, 30, 41 
Mela, Charles, xxix-xxx
Ira, 58 
Memory, xxi, 29
ludicium, see Judgment 
Merchant, 72
Merlin, 76, 77
Jauss, Hans Robert, xxviii 
Metafiction, 45, 47
John of Garland, 22, 23 
Metaphor, 84, 73
John of Salisbury, 3, 4, 103 
Metonymy, 49, 73
Jolivet, Jean, xxxi, 19, 23 
Mickel, Emanuel, J., 71, 72
Judgment, xxi, 7, 20, 29, 36, 41, 45, 84, 
Moderatio, 65
85 
Modemitas, xxiii, 5, 30
Monumentality, xxii
Kay, 9, 10, 12 
Mouvance epique, xxii
Kelly, Douglas, 5, 6, 22, 45, 46 
Murdoch, J. P., xxxii
Kohler, Erich, xxviii 
Murphy, James J., xxxi
Kristeva, Julia, xxv
Narrative, 20, 35, 45, 50, 56
Lacan, Jacques, xxiii, xxix 
Nature, 63, 77
Lancelot, 7 
Necessity, 20, 50
Laudine, 7, 11 
Neoplatonic, 40, 85, 90
Lausberg, Heinrich, xxxi 
Nichols, Stephen G., Jr., 6
Lawler, Traugott, 22
Le Goff, Jacques, 77 
Oedipus, 90
Leclerq, Jean, xxxi 
Old logic, 29
Lectio, 4 
Oilier, Marie-Louise, xxviii, 6
Leff, Michael, 43, 45 
Opposition, 28
Leupin, Alexandre, xxx, 102 
Orality, xxi, xxviii
Levi-Strauss, Claude, xxiii, 102, 103 
Ovid, 3, 18, 32
Libido, 58 
Oxymoron, 28, 30
Literacy, xx-xxii, 3, 7, 75
Littera, 4 
Passions, 30, 31, 58, 61, 63, 65, 70
Litteratum, 107 
Pastoureau, Michel, 101, 106
Litteratus, xxiii, 5, 7, 10, 65, 74, 78, 84, 107 
Peace movements, xxi

130 D INDEX
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 98 
Scientia, 39
Pentecost, 7 
Sens, 9, 65, 80, 104
Perceval, 14, 30 
Sensus, 5, 11
Perfection, 66, 90 
Sententia, 5
Perret, Michele, xxviii 
Servius, 63
Petroglyph, 97, 99 
Shell, Marc, 81
Pezard, Andre, xxxi 
Sign, xxiv, 4, 19, 23, 81, 96, 97, 103, 104;
Phantasies, 20 
arbitrariness of, 100, 102, 103, 107;
Phenomenon, 20 
metastable, 95, 96; natural, 51
Philippe-Auguste, King, xxii, 101 
Silva, 64, 65
Philippe de Flandres, 76 
Snoring, 49
Philology, xxiv-xxv, xxviii, 42, 43 
Soul: animal, 58, 66, 81; vegetable, 49, 58,
Pickens, Rupert T., 6, 8 
81
Pinborg, Jan, xxxi 
Species, 29, 39, 47, 51, 54, 56, 65, 71, 93
Plato, 48, 60, 62 
Stock, Brian, xx, 75, 105
Platonism, 32, 59 
Stoics, 61, 90
Poirion, Daniel, 20, 21 
Story, 15, 20, 25, 45, 49, 53, 59, 60
Politics, 68 
Stump, Eleonore, xxxi, 43, 86
Porphyry, 85-87 
Subjectivity, 38
Priscian, 4, 17, 104 
Substance, 17, 25, 26, 28-30, 32, 36, 38, 39,
Probability, 50 
57
Propositions, 19, 20, 23 
Suger, Abbot, 75
Purgatory, 77 
Suppositio, 18
Sylla, E. D., xxxii
Quadrivium, 16, 39 
Syllogism, 19, 48, 49
Quintilian, 8, 22 
Symbol, 84, 98, 99
Syntax, 17, 18, 53
Ralph of Beauvais, 17, 18
Rationality, 55, 59 
Taylor, Jerome, 68
Rawness, 8 
Tense, 5, 6
Reason, 17, 18, 58, 60, 68 
Term, 19
Referentiality, 23 
Textual community, 105
Remanieur, 11 
Textuality, xxi-xxxii, 7, 21, 94, 104
Repression, 90, 92, 93 
Todorov, Tzvetan, xxv
Rey-Flaud, Henri, xxix 
Topic, 19, 35, 41, 43, 48, 53, 65, 80, 83, 85
Rhetoric, xx, 16, 22, 26, 42, 43, 50, 54, 55, 102 
Totem, 84, 94, 102, 103
Riffaterre, Michael, xxvii 
Translatio, 22, 34
Robins, R. H., xxxi 
Tree, 93, 97
Roman d'antiquit, 4 
Tristan, 21, 48, 74
Roman de la rose, 27 
Trivium, xxiii, xxx-xxxii, 41
Roman de Thebes, 4 
Trope, 23, 27, 47, 80
Romanesque, 5 
Tyranny, 59, 60, 70, 91
Romantics, xxiv, xxv
Rosier, Irene, xxxi 
Uncanny, 89, 90
Rougemont, Denis de, xxix 
Understanding (Verstehen), xxiv
Rouse, Mary A., xxxi 
Universal, 39, 43
Rouse, Richard H., xxxi 
Urbanism, xx
Sapientia, 39 
Varro, 87
Saussure, Ferdinand dc, 96 
Vegetable soul, 49, 58, 81

INDEX D 131
Vico, 87 
William of Conches, 3, 20
Virgil, 3, 31, 32, 57, 64, 83 
Writing, 6, 20
Wetherbee, Winthrop, 39 
Zimmerman, Robert, xxxii
Will, 17 
Zumthor, Paul, xx, xxv, xxvi

Theory and History of Literature
Volume 23. Klaus Theweleit Male Fantasies, 2. Male Bodies: Psychoanalyz-
ing the White Terror
Volume 22. Klaus Theweleit Male Fantasies, 1. Women, Floods, Bodies,
History
Volume 21. Malek Alloula The Colonial Harem
Volume 20. Jean-Francois Lyotard and Jean-Loup Thebaud Just Gaming
Volume 19. Jay Caplan Framed Narratives: Diderot's Genealogy of the Be-
holder
Volume 18. Thomas G. Pavel The Poetics of Plot: The Case of English
Renaissance Drama
Volume 17. Michel de Certeau Heterologies
Volume 16. Jacques Attali Noise
Volume 15. Peter Szondi On Textual Understanding and Other Essays
Volume 14. Georges Bataille Visions of Excess: Selected Writings,
1927-1939
Volume 13. Tzvetan Todorov Mikhail Bakhtin: The Dialogical Principle
Volume 12. Ross Chambers Story and Situation: Narrative Seduction and
the Power of Fictio
Volume 11. Edited by John Fekete The Structural Allegory: Reconstructive
Encounters with the New French Thought
Volume 10. Jean-Francois Lyotard The Postmodern Condition: A Report on
Knowledge
Volume 9. Erich Auerbach Scenes from the Drama of European Literature
Volume 8. Mikhail Bakhtin Problems of Dostoevsky's Poetics
Volume 7. Paul de Man Blindness and Insight: Essays in the Rhetoric of
Contemporary Criticism 2nd ed., rev.
Volume 6. Edited by Jonathan Arac, Wlad Godzich, and Wallace Mar-
tin The Yale Critics: Deconstruction in America
Volume 5. Vladimir Propp Theory and History of Folklore
Volume 4. Peter Burger Theory of Avant-Garde
Volume 3. Hans Robert Jauss Aesthetic Experience and Literary Her-
meneutics
Volume 2. Hans Robert Jauss Toward an Aesthetic of Reception
Volume 1. Tzvetan Todorov Introduction to Poetics

Eugene Vance is a professor of French and comparative literature at
Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia. He is the author of Reading the
Song of Roland and Marvelous Signals: Poetics and Sign Theory in the
Middle Ages, and principal editor of the Regents Studies in Medieval
Culture at the University of Nebraska Press.
Wlad Godzich is director of the Center for Humanistic Studies at the
University of Minnesota and co-editor of the series Theory and History
of Literature.

