

FUNDAMENTALS
OF MODERN
MANUFACTURING
Materials,Processes,andSystems
Fourth Edition
Mikell P. Groover
Professor of Industrial and
Systems Engineering
Lehigh University
The author and publisher gratefully acknowledge the contributions of
Dr. Gregory L. Tonkay, Associate Professor of Industrial and
Systems Engineering, Lehigh University.
JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.

ACQUISITIONS EDITOR
Michael McDonald
EDITORIAL ASSISTANT
Renata Marchione
SENIOR PRODUCTION EDITOR
Anna Melhorn
MARKETING MANAGER
Christopher Ruel
SENIOR DESIGNER
James O’Shea
MEDIA EDITOR
Lauren Sapira
OUTSIDE PRODUCTION MANAGMENT
Thomson Digital
COVER PHOTO
Courtesy of Kennametal, Inc.
This book was set in Times New Roman by Thomson Digital and printed and bound by World Color. The
cover was printed by World Color.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1
Copyright ª 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher or authorization through payment
of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA
01923, website www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, (201)748-6011,
fax (201)748-6008, website http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Evaluation copies are provided to qualified academics and professionals for review purposes only, for use in
their courses during the next academic year. These copies are licensed and my not be sold or transferred to a
third party. Upon completion of the review period, please return the evaluation copy to Wiley. Return
instructions and a free of charge return shipping label are available at www.wiley.com/go/returnlabel. Outside
of the United States, please contact your local representative.
Groover, Mikell P.
Fundamentals of modern manufacturing: materials, processes and systems, 4th ed.
ISBN 978-0470-467002
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

PREFACE
Fundamentals of Modern Manufacturing: Materials, Processes, and Systems is designed
for a first course or two-course sequence in manufacturing at the junior level in
mechanical, industrial, and manufacturing engineering curricula. Given its coverage
of engineering materials, it is also suitable for materials science and engineering courses
that emphasize materials processing. Finally, it may be appropriate for technology
programs related to the preceding engineering disciplines. Most of the book’s content
is concerned with manufacturing processes (about 65% of the text), but it also provides
significant coverage of engineering materials and production systems. Materials, pro-
cesses, and systems are the basic building blocks of modern manufacturing and the three
broad subject areas covered in the book.
APPROACH
The author’s objective in this edition and its predecessors is to provide a treatment of
manufacturing that is modern and quantitative. Its claim to be ‘‘modern’’ is based on (1) its
balanced coverage of the basic engineering materials (metals, ceramics, polymers, and
composite materials), (2) its inclusion of recently developed manufacturing processes in
addition to the traditional processes that have been used and refined over many years, and
(3) its comprehensive coverage of electronics manufacturing technologies. Competing
textbooks tend to emphasize metals and their processing at the expense of the other
engineering materials, whose applications and methods of processing have grown signifi-
cantly in the last several decades. Also, most competing books provide minimum coverage
of electronics manufacturing. Yet the commercial importance of electronics products and
their associated industries have increased substantially during recent decades.
The book’s claim to be more ‘‘quantitative’’ is based on its emphasis on manufacturing
science and its greater use of mathematical models and quantitative (end-of-chapter) prob-
lemsthanothermanufacturingtextbooks.Inthecaseofsomeprocesses,itwasthefirstmanu-
facturing processes book to ever provide a quantitative engineering coverage of the topic.
NEW TO THIS EDITION
This fourth edition is an updated version of the third edition. The publisher’s instructions to
the author were to increase content but reduce page count. As this preface is being written,
it is too early to tell whether the page count is reduced, but the content has definitely been
increased. Additions and changes in the fourth edition include the following:

The chapter count has been reduced from 45 to 42 through consolidation of several
chapters.

Selected end-of-chapter problems have been revised to make use of PC spread sheet
calculations.

A new section on trends in manufacturing has been added in Chapter 1.
iii


Chapter 5 on dimensions, tolerances, and surfaces has been modified to include
measuring and gauging techniques used for these part features.

A new section on specialty steels has been added to Chapter 8 on metals.

Sections on polymer recycling and biodegradable plastics have been added in
Chapter 8 on polymers.

Several new casting processes are discussed in Chapter 11.

Sections on thread cutting and gear cutting have been added in Chapter 22 on
machining operations and machine tools.

Several additional hole-making tools have been included in Chapter 23 on cutting
tool technology.

Former Chapters 28 and 29 on industrial cleaning and coating processes have been
consolidated into a single chapter.

A new section on friction-stir welding has been added to Chapter 30 on welding
processes.

Chapter 37 on nanotechnology has been reorganized with several new topics and
processes added.

The three previous Chapters 39, 40, and 41on manufacturing systems have been
consolidated into two chapters: Chapter 38 titled Automation for Manufacturing
Systems and Chapter 39 on Integrated Manufacturing Systems. New topics covered
in
these
chapters
include
automation
components
and
material
handling
technologies.

Former Chapters 44 on Quality Control and 45 on Measurement and Inspection have
been consolidated into a single chapter, Chapter 42 titled Quality Control and
Inspection. New sections have been added on Total Quality Management, Six Sigma,
and ISO 9000. The text on conventional measuring techniques has been moved to
Chapter 5.
OTHER KEY FEATURES
Additional features of the book continued from the third edition include the following:

A DVD showing action videos of many of the manufacturing processes is included
with the book.

A large number of end-of-chapter problems, review questions, and multiple choice
questions are available to instructors to use for homework exercises and quizzes.

Sections on Guide to Processing are included in each of the chapters on engineering
materials.

Sections on Product Design Considerations are provided in many of the manufac-
turing process chapters.

Historical Notes on many of the technologies are included throughout the book.

The principal engineering units are System International (metric), but both metric
and U.S. Customary Units are used throughout the text.
SUPPORT MATERIAL FOR INSTRUCTORS
For instructors who adopt the book for their courses, the following support materials are
available:
iv
Preface


A Solutions Manual (in digital format) covering all problems, review questions, and
multiple-choice quizzes.

A complete set of PowerPoint slides for all chapters.
These support materials may be found at the website www.wiley.com/college/
groover. Evidence that the book has been adopted as the main textbook for the course
must be verified. Individual questions or comments may be directed to the author
personally at Mikell.Groover@Lehigh.edu.
Preface
v

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to express my appreciation to the following people who served as technical
reviewers of individual sets of chapters for the first edition: Iftikhar Ahmad (George
Mason University), J. T. Black (Auburn University), David Bourell (University of Texas
at Austin), Paul Cotnoir (Worcester Polytechnic Institute), Robert E. Eppich (American
Foundryman’s Society), Osama Eyeda (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univer-
sity), Wolter Fabricky (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University), Keith
Gardiner (Lehigh University), R. Heikes (Georgia Institute of Technology), Jay R.
Geddes (San Jose State University), Ralph Jaccodine (Lehigh University), Steven Liang
(Georgia Institute of Technology), Harlan MacDowell (Michigan State University), Joe
Mize (Oklahoma State University), Colin Moodie (Purdue University), Michael Philpott
(University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), Corrado Poli (University of Massachu-
setts at Amherst), Chell Roberts (Arizona State University), Anil Saigal (Tufts Univer-
sity), G. Sathyanarayanan (Lehigh University), Malur Srinivasan (Texas A&M
University), A. Brent Strong (Brigham Young University), Yonglai Tian (George Mason
University), Gregory L. Tonkay (Lehigh University), Chester VanTyne (Colorado School
of Mines), Robert Voigt (Pennsylvania State University), and Charles White (GMI
Engineering and Management Institute).
For their reviews of certain chapters in the second edition, I would like to thank
John T. Berry (Mississippi State University), Rajiv Shivpuri (The Ohio State University),
James B. Taylor (North Carolina State University), Joel Troxler (Montana State Univer-
sity), and Ampere A. Tseng (Arizona State University).
For their advice and encouragement on the third edition, I would like to thank
several of my colleagues at Lehigh, including John Coulter, Keith Gardiner, Andrew
Herzing, Wojciech Misiolek, Nicholas Odrey, Gregory Tonkay, and Marvin White. I am
especially grateful to Andrew Herzing in the Materials Science and Engineering
Department at Lehigh for his review of the new nanofabrication chapter and to Greg
Tonkay in my own department for developing many of the new and revised problems and
questions in this new edition. For their reviews of the third edition, I would like to thank
Mica Grujicic (Clemson University), Wayne Nguyen Hung (Texas A&M University),
Patrick Kwon (Michigan State University), Yuan-Shin Lee (North Carolina State
University), T. Warren Liao (Louisiana State University), Fuewen Frank Liou (Missouri
University of Science and Technology), Val Marinov (North Dakota State University),
William J. Riffe (Kettering University), John E. Wyatt (Mississippi State University), Y.
Lawrence Yao (Columbia University), Allen Yi (The Ohio State University), and Henry
Daniel Young (Wright State University).
For their advice on this fourth edition, I would like to thank the following people:
Barbara Mizdail (The Pennsylvania State University – Berks campus) and Jack Feng
(formerly of Bradley University and now at Caterpillar, Inc.) for conveying questions and
feedback from their students, Larry Smith (St. Clair College, Windsor, Ontario) for his
advice on using the ASME standards for hole drilling, Richard Budihas (Voltaic LLC) for
his contributed research on nanotechnology and integrated circuit processing, and
colleague Marvin White at Lehigh for his insights on integrated circuit technology.
In addition, it seems appropriate to acknowledge my colleagues at Wiley, Senior
Acquisition Editor Michael McDonald and Production Editor Anna Melhorn. Last but
certainly not least, I appreciate the kind efforts of editor Sumit Shridhar of Thomson
Digital.
vi

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Mikell P. Groover is Professor of Industrial and Systems Engineering at Lehigh Univer-
sity, where he also serves as faculty member in the Manufacturing Systems Engineering
Program. He received his B.A. in Arts and Science (1961), B.S. in Mechanical Engineer-
ing (1962), M.S. in Industrial Engineering (1966), and Ph.D. (1969), all from Lehigh. He is
a Registered Professional Engineer in Pennsylvania. His industrial experience includes
several years as a manufacturing engineer with Eastman Kodak Company. Since joining
Lehigh, he has done consulting, research, and project work for a number of industrial
companies.
His teaching and research areas include manufacturing processes, production sys-
tems, automation, material handling, facilities planning, and work systems. He has received
a number of teaching awards at Lehigh University, as well as the Albert G. Holzman
Outstanding Educator Award from the Institute of Industrial Engineers (1995) and the
SME Education Award from the Society of Manufacturing Engineers (2001). His publi-
cations include over 75 technical articles and ten books (listed below). His books are used
throughout the world and have been translated into French, German, Spanish, Portuguese,
Russian, Japanese, Korean, and Chinese. The first edition of the current book Funda-
mentals of Modern Manufacturing received the IIE Joint Publishers Award (1996) and
the M. Eugene Merchant Manufacturing Textbook Award from the Society of Manufac-
turing Engineers (1996).
Dr. Groover is a member of the Institute of Industrial Engineers, American Society
of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), the Society of Manufacturing Engineers (SME), the
North American Manufacturing Research Institute (NAMRI), and ASM International.
He is a Fellow of IIE (1987) and SME (1996).
PREVIOUS BOOKS BY THE AUTHOR
Automation, Production Systems, and Computer-Aided Manufacturing, Prentice Hall,
1980.
CAD/CAM: Computer-Aided Design and Manufacturing, Prentice Hall, 1984 (co-
authored with E. W. Zimmers, Jr.).
Industrial Robotics: Technology, Programming, and Applications, McGraw-Hill Book
Company, 1986 (co-authored with M. Weiss, R. Nagel, and N. Odrey).
Automation, Production Systems, and Computer Integrated Manufacturing, Prentice
Hall, 1987.
Fundamentals of Modern Manufacturing: Materials, Processes, and Systems, originally
published by Prentice Hall in 1996, and subsequently published by John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., 1999.
Automation, Production Systems, and Computer Integrated Manufacturing, Second
Edition, Prentice Hall, 2001.
Fundamentals of Modern Manufacturing: Materials, Processes, and Systems, Second
Edition, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2002.
vii

Work Systems and the Methods, Measurement, and Management of Work, Pearson
Prentice Hall, 2007.
Fundamentals of Modern Manufacturing: Materials, Processes, and Systems, Third
Edition, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2007.
Automation, Production Systems, and Computer Integrated Manufacturing, Third
Edition, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008.
viii
About the Author

CONTENTS
1 INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW
OF MANUFACTURING 1
1.1
What Is Manufacturing? 2
1.2
Materials in Manufacturing 7
1.3
Manufacturing Processes 10
1.4
Production Systems 16
1.5
Trends in Manufacturing 20
1.6
Organization of the Book 23
Part I Material Properties and Product
Attributes 25
2 THE NATURE OF MATERIALS 25
2.1
Atomic Structure and the Elements 26
2.2
Bonding between Atoms and Molecules 28
2.3
Crystalline Structures 30
2.4
Noncrystalline (Amorphous)
Structures 35
2.5
Engineering Materials 37
3 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF
MATERIALS 40
3.1
Stress–Strain Relationships 40
3.2
Hardness 52
3.3
Effect of Temperature on Properties 56
3.4
Fluid Properties 58
3.5
Viscoelastic Behavior of Polymers 60
4 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF
MATERIALS 67
4.1
Volumetric and Melting Properties 67
4.2
Thermal Properties 70
4.3
Mass Diffusion 72
4.4
Electrical Properties 73
4.5
Electrochemical Processes 75
5 DIMENSIONS, SURFACES, AND
THEIR MEASUREMENT 78
5.1
Dimensions, Tolerances, and
Related Attributes 78
5.2
Conventional Measuring Instruments
and Gages 79
5.3
Surfaces 87
5.4
Measurement of Surfaces 92
5.5
Effect of Manufacturing Processes 94
Part II Engineering Materials 98
6 METALS 98
6.1
Alloys and Phase Diagrams 99
6.2
Ferrous Metals 103
6.3
Nonferrous Metals 120
6.4
Superalloys 131
6.5
Guide to the Processing of Metals 132
7 CERAMICS 136
7.1
Structure and Properties of Ceramics 137
7.2
Traditional Ceramics 139
7.3
New Ceramics 142
7.4
Glass 144
7.5
Some Important Elements Related to
Ceramics 148
7.6
Guide to Processing Ceramics 150
8 POLYMERS 153
8.1
Fundamentals of Polymer Science
and Technology 155
8.2
Thermoplastic Polymers 165
8.3
Thermosetting Polymers 171
8.4
Elastomers 175
8.5
Polymer Recycling and Biodegradability 182
8.6
Guide to the Processing of Polymers 184
9 COMPOSITE MATERIALS 187
9.1
Technology and Classiﬁcation of
Composite Materials 188
9.2
Metal Matrix Composites 196
9.3
Ceramic Matrix Composites 198
9.4
Polymer Matrix Composites 199
9.5
Guide to Processing Composite Materials 201
Part III Solidiﬁcation Processes 205
10 FUNDAMENTALS OF METAL CASTING 205
10.1
Overview of Casting Technology 207
10.2
Heating and Pouring 210
10.3
Solidiﬁcation and Cooling 213
11 METAL CASTING PROCESSES 225
11.1
Sand Casting 225
11.2
Other Expendable-Mold Casting Processes 230
ix

11.3
Permanent-Mold Casting Processes 237
11.4
Foundry Practice 245
11.5
Casting Quality 249
11.6
Metals for Casting 251
11.7
Product Design Considerations 253
12 GLASSWORKING 258
12.1
Raw Materials Preparation and Melting 258
12.2
Shaping Processes in Glassworking 259
12.3
Heat Treatment and Finishing 264
12.4
Product Design Considerations 266
13 SHAPING PROCESSES FOR PLASTICS 268
13.1
Properties of Polymer Melts 269
13.2
Extrusion 271
13.3
Production of Sheet and Film 281
13.4
Fiber and Filament Production (Spinning) 284
13.5
Coating Processes 285
13.6
Injection Molding 286
13.7
Compression and Transfer Molding 295
13.8
Blow Molding and Rotational Molding 298
13.9
Thermoforming 302
13.10 Casting 306
13.11 Polymer Foam Processing and Forming 307
13.12 Product Design Considerations 308
14 RUBBER-PROCESSING TECHNOLOGY 315
14.1
Rubber Processing and Shaping 315
14.2
Manufacture of Tires and Other Rubber
Products 320
14.3
Product Design Considerations 324
15 SHAPING PROCESSES FOR POLYMER
MATRIX COMPOSITES 327
15.1
Starting Materials for PMCs 329
15.2
Open Mold Processes 331
15.3
Closed Mold Processes 335
15.4
Filament Winding 337
15.5
Pultrusion Processes 339
15.6
Other PMC Shaping Processes 341
Part IV Particulate Processing of Metals and
Ceramics 344
16 POWDER METALLURGY 344
16.1
Characterization of Engineering Powders 347
16.2
Production of Metallic Powders 350
16.3
Conventional Pressing and Sintering 352
16.4
Alternative Pressing and Sintering
Techniques 358
16.5
Materials and Products for Powder
Metallurgy 361
16.6
Design Considerations in Powder
Metallurgy 362
17 PROCESSING OF CERAMICS
AND CERMETS 368
17.1
Processing of Traditional Ceramics 368
17.2
Processing of New Ceramics 376
17.3
Processing of Cermets 378
17.4
Product Design Considerations 380
Part V Metal Forming and Sheet Metalworking 383
18 FUNDAMENTALS OF METAL
FORMING 383
18.1
Overview of Metal Forming 383
18.2
Material Behavior in Metal Forming 386
18.3
Temperature in Metal Forming 387
18.4
Strain Rate Sensitivity 389
18.5
Friction and Lubrication in Metal Forming 391
19 BULK DEFORMATION PROCESSES
IN METAL WORKING
395
19.1
Rolling 396
19.2
Other Deformation Processes Related to
Rolling 403
19.3
Forging 405
19.4
Other Deformation Processes Related
to Forging 416
19.5
Extrusion 420
19.6
Wire and Bar Drawing 430
20 SHEET METALWORKING 443
20.1
Cutting Operations 444
20.2
Bending Operations 450
20.3
Drawing 454
20.4
Other Sheet-Metal-Forming Operations 461
20.5
Dies and Presses for Sheet-Metal
Processes 464
20.6
Sheet-Metal Operations Not Performed
on Presses 471
20.7
Bending of Tube Stock 476
Part VI Material Removal Processes 483
21 THEORY OF METAL MACHINING 483
21.1
Overview of Machining Technology 485
21.2
Theory of Chip Formation in Metal
Machining 488
21.3
Force Relationships and the Merchant
Equation 492
21.4
Power and Energy Relationships
in Machining 497
21.5
Cutting Temperature 500
x
Contents

22 MACHINING OPERATIONS AND
MACHINE TOOLS 507
22.1
Machining and Part Geometry 507
22.2
Turning and Related Operations 510
22.3
Drilling and Related Operations 519
22.4
Milling 523
22.5
Machining Centers and Turning Centers 530
22.6
Other Machining Operations 533
22.7
Machining Operations for
Special Geometries 537
22.8
High-Speed Machining 545
23 CUTTING-TOOL TECHNOLOGY 552
23.1
Tool Life 552
23.2
Tool Materials 559
23.3
Tool Geometry 567
23.4
Cutting Fluids 577
24 ECONOMIC AND PRODUCT DESIGN
CONSIDERATIONS IN MACHINING 585
24.1
Machinability 585
24.2
Tolerances and Surface Finish 587
24.3
Selection of Cutting Conditions 591
24.4
Product Design Considerations
in Machining 597
25 GRINDING AND OTHER ABRASIVE
PROCESSES 604
25.1
Grinding 604
25.2
Related Abrasive Processes 621
26 NONTRADITIONAL MACHINING AND
THERMAL CUTTING PROCESSES 628
26.1
Mechanical Energy Processes 629
26.2
Electrochemical Machining Processes 632
26.3
Thermal Energy Processes 636
26.4
Chemical Machining 644
26.5
Application Considerations 650
Part VII Property Enhancing and Surface Processing
Operations 656
27 HEAT TREATMENT OF METALS 656
27.1
Annealing 657
27.2
Martensite Formation in Steel 657
27.3
Precipitation Hardening 661
27.4
Surface Hardening 663
27.5
Heat Treatment Methods and Facilities 664
28 SURFACE PROCESSING OPERATIONS 668
28.1
Industrial Cleaning Processes 668
28.2
Diffusion and Ion Implantation 673
28.3
Plating and Related Processes 674
28.4
Conversion Coating 678
28.5
Vapor Deposition Processes 680
28.6
Organic Coatings 685
28.7
Porcelain Enameling and Other Ceramic
Coatings 688
28.8
Thermal and Mechanical Coating
Processes 689
Part VIII Joining and Assembly Processes 693
29 FUNDAMENTALS OF WELDING 693
29.1
Overview of Welding Technology
695
29.2
The Weld Joint 697
29.3
Physics of Welding 700
29.4
Features of a Fusion-Welded Joint 704
30 WELDING PROCESSES
709
30.1
Arc Welding 709
30.2
Resistance Welding 719
30.3
Oxyfuel Gas Welding 726
30.4
Other Fusion-Welding Processes 729
30.5
Solid-State Welding 732
30.6
Weld Quality 738
30.7
Weldability 742
30.8
Design Considerations in Welding 742
31 BRAZING, SOLDERING, AND ADHESIVE
BONDING 748
31.1
Brazing 748
31.2
Soldering 754
31.3
Adhesive Bonding 758
32 MECHANICAL ASSEMBLY 766
32.1
Threaded Fasteners 767
32.2
Rivets and Eyelets 773
32.3
Assembly Methods Based on
Interference Fits 774
32.4
Other Mechanical Fastening
Methods 777
32.5
Molding Inserts and Integral
Fasteners 778
32.6
Design for Assembly 779
Part IX Special Processing and Assembly
Technologies 786
33 RAPID PROTOTYPING 786
33.1
Fundamentals of Rapid Prototyping 787
33.2
Rapid Prototyping Technologies 788
33.3
Application Issues in Rapid Prototyping 795
Contents
xi

34 PROCESSING OF INTEGRATED
CIRCUITS 800
34.1
Overview of IC Processing 800
34.2
Silicon Processing 805
34.3
Lithography 809
34.4
Layer Processes Used in IC
Fabrication 812
34.5
Integrating the Fabrication Steps 818
34.6
IC Packaging 820
34.7
Yields in IC Processing 824
35 ELECTRONICS ASSEMBLY AND
PACKAGING 830
35.1
Electronics Packaging 830
35.2
Printed Circuit Boards 832
35.3
Printed Circuit Board Assembly 840
35.4
Surface-Mount Technology 843
35.5
Electrical Connector Technology 847
36 MICROFABRICATION
TECHNOLOGIES 853
36.1
Microsystem Products 853
36.2
Microfabrication Processes 859
37 NANOFABRICATION
TECHNOLOGIES 869
37.1
Nanotechnology Products 870
37.2
Introduction to Nanoscience 873
37.3
Nanofabrication Processes 877
Part X Manufacturing Systems 886
38 AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGIES FOR
MANUFACTURING SYSTEMS 886
38.1
Automation Fundamentals 887
38.2
Hardware Components for
Automation 890
38.3
Computer Numerical Control 894
38.4
Industrial Robotics 907
39 INTEGRATED MANUFACTURING
SYSTEMS 918
39.1
Material Handling 918
39.2
Fundamentals of Production Lines 920
39.3
Manual Assembly Lines 923
39.4
Automated Production Lines 927
39.5
Cellular Manufacturing 931
39.6
Flexible Manufacturing Systems and Cells 935
39.7
Computer Integrated Manufacturing 939
Part XI Manufacturing Support Systems 945
40 MANUFACTURING ENGINEERING 945
40.1
Process Planning 946
40.2
Problem Solving and Continuous
Improvement 953
40.3
Concurrent Engineering and Design
for Manufacturability 954
41 PRODUCTION PLANNING AND
CONTROL 959
41.1
Aggregate Planning and the Master Production
Schedule 960
41.2
Inventory Control 962
41.3
Material and Capacity Requirements
Planning 965
41.4
Just-In-Time and Lean Production 969
41.5
Shop Floor Control 971
42 QUALITY CONTROL AND
INSPECTION 977
42.1
Product Quality 977
42.2
Process Capability and Tolerances 978
42.3
Statistical Process Control 980
42.4
Quality Programs in Manufacturing 984
42.5
Inspection Principles 990
42.6
Modern Inspection Technologies 992
INDEX 1003
xii
Contents

1
INTRODUCTION AND
OVERVIEW OF
MANUFACTURING
Chapter Contents
1.1
What Is Manufacturing?
1.1.1
Manufacturing Defined
1.1.2
Manufacturing Industries and Products
1.1.3
Manufacturing Capability
1.2
Materials in Manufacturing
1.2.1
Metals
1.2.2
Ceramics
1.2.3
Polymers
1.2.4
Composites
1.3
Manufacturing Processes
1.3.1
Processing Operations
1.3.2
Assembly Operations
1.3.3
Production Machines and Tooling
1.4
Production Systems
1.4.1
Production Facilities
1.4.2
Manufacturing Support Systems
1.5
Trends in Manufacturing
1.5.1
Lean Production and Six Sigma
1.5.2
Globalization and Outsourcing
1.5.3
Environmentally Conscious
Manufacturing
1.5.4
Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
1.6
Organization of the Book
Making things has been an essential activity of human civili-
zations since before recorded history. Today, the term man-
ufacturing is used for this activity. For technological and
economic reasons, manufacturing is important to the welfare
of the United States and most other developed and develop-
ing nations. Technology can be defined as the application of
science to provide society and its members with those things
that are needed or desired. Technology affects our daily lives,
directly and indirectly, in many ways. Consider the list of
products in Table 1.1. They represent various technologies
that help society and its members to live better. What do all
these products have in common? They are all manufactured.
Thesetechnologicalwonderswouldnotbeavailabletosociety
if they could not be manufactured. Manufacturing is the
critical factor that makes technology possible.
Economically, manufacturing is an important means
by which a nation creates material wealth. In the United
States, the manufacturing industries account for about
15% of gross domestic product (GDP). A country’s natural
resources, such as agricultural lands, mineral deposits, and
oil reserves, also create wealth. In the U.S., agriculture,
mining, and similar industries account for less than 5% of
GDP (agriculture alone is only about 1%). Construction
and public utilities make up around 5%. The rest is service
industries, which include retail, transportation, banking,
communication, education, and government. The service
sector accounts for more than 75% of U.S. GDP. Govern-
ment alone accounts for about as much of GDP as the
manufacturing sector; however, government services do
not create wealth. In the modern global economy, a nation
must have a strong manufacturing base (or it must have
significant natural resources) if it is to provide a strong
economy and a high standard of living for its people.
In this opening chapter, we consider some general
topics about manufacturing. What is manufacturing? How
is it organized in industry? What are the materials, pro-
cesses, and systems by which it is accomplished?
1

1.1
WHAT IS MANUFACTURING?
The word manufacture is derived from two Latin words, manus (hand) and factus
(make); the combination means made by hand. The English word manufacture is several
centuries old, and ‘‘made by hand’’ accurately described the manual methods used when
the word was ﬁrst coined.1 Most modern manufacturing is accomplished by automated and
computer-controlled machinery (Historical Note 1.1).
1As a noun, the word manufacture first appeared in English around 1567 AD. As a verb, it first appeared
around 1683 AD.
Historical Note 1.1
History of manufacturing
The history of manufacturing can be separated into
two subjects: (1) human’s discovery and invention of
materials and processes to make things, and (2)
development of the systems of production. The materials
and processes to make things predate the systems by
several millennia. Some of the processes—casting,
hammering (forging), and grinding—date back 6000
years or more. The early fabrication of implements and
weapons was accomplished more as crafts and trades
than manufacturing as it is known today. The ancient
Romans had what might be called factories to produce
weapons, scrolls, pottery and glassware, and other
products of the time, but the procedures were largely
based on handicraft.
The systems aspects of manufacturing are examined
here, and the materials and processes are postponed until
Historical Note 1.2. Systems of manufacturing refer to
the ways of organizing people and equipment so that
production can be performed more efﬁciently. Several
historical events and discoveries stand out as having had
a major impact on the development of modern
manufacturing systems.
Certainly one signiﬁcant discovery was the principle
of division of labor—dividing the total work into tasks
and having individual workers each become a specialist
at performing only one task. This principle had been
practiced for centuries, but the economist Adam Smith
(1723–1790) is credited with ﬁrst explaining its
economic signiﬁcance in The Wealth of Nations.
The Industrial Revolution (circa 1760–1830) had a
major impact on production in several ways. It marked
the change from an economy based on agriculture and
handicraft to one based on industry and manufacturing.
The change began in England, where a series of
machines were invented and steam power replaced
water, wind, and animal power. These advances gave
British industry signiﬁcant advantages over other nations,
and England attempted to restrict export of the new
technologies. However, the revolution eventually spread
to other European countries and the United States.
TABLE 1.1
Products representing various technologies, most of which affect nearly everyone.
Athletic shoes
Fax machine
One-piece molded plastic patio chair
Automatic teller machine
Flat-screen high-definition television
Optical scanner
Automatic dishwasher
Hand-held electronic calculator
Personal computer (PC)
Ballpoint pen
High density PC diskette
Photocopying machine
Cell phone
Home security system
Pull-tab beverage cans
Compact disc (CD)
Hybrid gas-electric automobile
Quartz crystal wrist watch
Compact disc player
Industrial robot
Self-propelled mulching lawnmower
Compact fluorescent light bulb
Ink-jet color printer
Supersonic aircraft
Contact lenses
Integrated circuit
Tennis racket of composite materials
Digital camera
Magnetic resonance imaging
Video games
Digital video disc (DVD)
(MRI) machine for medical diagnosis
Washing machine and dryer
Digital video disc player
Microwave oven
2
Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing

1.1.1 MANUFACTURING DEFINED
As a field of study in the modern context, manufacturing can be defined two ways, one
technologic and the other economic. Technologically, manufacturing is the application of
physical and chemical processes to alter the geometry, properties, and/or appearance of a
given starting material to make parts or products; manufacturing also includes assembly
of multiple parts to make products. The processes to accomplish manufacturing involve a
combination of machinery, tools, power, and labor, as depicted in Figure 1.1(a).
Several inventions of the Industrial Revolution greatly
contributed to the development of manufacturing: (1)
Watt’s steam engine, a new power-generating
technology for industry; (2) machine tools, starting with
John Wilkinson’s boring machine around 1775
(Historical Note 22.1); (3) the spinning jenny, power
loom, and other machinery for the textile industry
that permitted signiﬁcant increases in productivity;
and (4) the factory system, a new way of organizing
large numbers of production workers based on division
of labor.
While England was leading the industrial revolution,
an important concept was being introduced in the United
States: interchangeable parts manufacture. Much credit
for this concept is given to Eli Whitney (1765–1825),
although its importance had been recognized by others
[9]. In 1797, Whitney negotiated a contract to produce
10,000 muskets for the U.S. government. The traditional
way of making guns at the time was to custom fabricate
each part for a particular gun and then hand-ﬁt the parts
together by ﬁling. Each musket was unique, and the time
to make it was considerable. Whitney believed that the
components could be made accurately enough to permit
parts assembly without ﬁtting. After several years of
development in his Connecticut factory, he traveled to
Washington in 1801 to demonstrate the principle. He
laid out components for 10 muskets before government
ofﬁcials, including Thomas Jefferson, and proceeded
to select parts randomly to assemble the guns. No
special ﬁling or ﬁtting was required, and all of the guns
worked perfectly. The secret behind his achievement
was the collection of special machines, ﬁxtures, and
gages that he had developed in his factory.
Interchangeable parts manufacture required many
years of development before becoming a practical
reality, but it revolutionized methods of manufacturing.
It is a prerequisite for mass production. Because its
origins were in the United States, interchangeable parts
production came to be known as the American System
of manufacture.
The mid- and late 1800s witnessed the expansion of
railroads, steam-powered ships, and other machines that
created a growing need for iron and steel. New steel
production methods were developed to meet this
demand (Historical Note 6.1). Also during this period,
several consumer products were developed, including
the sewing machine, bicycle, and automobile. To meet
the mass demand for these products, more efﬁcient
production methods were required. Some historians
identify developments during this period as the Second
Industrial Revolution, characterized in terms of its effects
on manufacturing systems by: (1) mass production, (2)
scientiﬁc management movement, (3) assembly lines,
and (4) electriﬁcation of factories.
In the late 1800s, the scientiﬁc management
movement was developing in the United States in
response to the need to plan and control the activities of
growing numbers of production workers. The
movement’s leaders included Frederick W. Taylor
(1856–1915), Frank Gilbreth (1868–1924), and his wife
Lilian (1878–1972). Scientiﬁc management included
several features [2]: (1) motion study, aimed at ﬁnding
the best method to perform a given task; (2) time study,
to establish work standards for a job; (3) extensive use of
standards in industry; (4) the piece rate system and
similar labor incentive plans; and (5) use of data
collection, record keeping, and cost accounting in
factory operations.
Henry Ford (1863–1947) introduced the assembly
line in 1913 at his Highland Park, MI plant. The assembly
line made possible the mass production of complex
consumer products. Use of assembly line methods
permitted Ford to sell a Model T automobile for as little
as $500, thus making ownership of cars feasible for a
large segment of the U.S. population.
In 1881, the ﬁrst electric power generating station had
been built in New York City, and soon electric motors
were being used as a power source to operate factory
machinery. This was a far more convenient power
delivery system than steam engines, which required
overhead belts to distribute power to the machines. By
1920, electricity had overtaken steam as the principal
power source in U.S. factories. The twentieth century
was a time of more technological advances than in all
other centuries combined. Many of these developments
resulted in the automation of manufacturing.
Section 1.1/What Is Manufacturing?
3

Manufacturing is almost always carried out as a sequence of operations. Each operation
brings the material closer to the desired final state.
Economically, manufacturing is the transformation of materials into items of greater
value by means of one or more processing and/or assembly operations, as depicted in
Figure 1.1(b). The key point is that manufacturing adds value to the material by changing its
shape or properties, or by combining it with other materials that have been similarly altered.
Thematerialhasbeenmademorevaluablethroughthemanufacturingoperationsperformed
on it. When iron ore is converted into steel, value is added. When sand is transformed into
glass, value is added. When petroleum is refined into plastic, value is added. And when plastic
is molded into the complex geometry of a patio chair, it is made even more valuable.
The words manufacturing and production are often used interchangeably. The
author’s view is that production has a broader meaning than manufacturing. To illustrate,
onemightspeakof‘‘crudeoilproduction,’’butthephrase‘‘crudeoilmanufacturing’’seems
out of place. Yet when used in the context of products such as metal parts or automobiles,
either word seems okay.
1.1.2 MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES AND PRODUCTS
Manufacturing is an important commercial activity performed by companies that sell
products to customers. The type of manufacturing done by a company depends on the
kind of product it makes. Let us explore this relationship by examining the types of
industries in manufacturing and identifying the products they make.
Manufacturing Industries
Industry consists of enterprises and organizations that pro-
duce or supply goods and services. Industries can be classified as primary, secondary, or
tertiary. Primary industries cultivate and exploit natural resources, such as agriculture and
mining. Secondary industries take the outputs of the primary industries and convert them
into consumer and capital goods. Manufacturing is the principal activity in this category, but
construction and power utilities are also included. Tertiary industries constitute the service
sector of the economy. A list of specificindustries in these categories is presented in Table 1.2.
This book is concerned with the secondary industries in Table 1.2, which include the
companies engaged in manufacturing. However, the International Standard Industrial
Classification (ISIC) used to compile Table 1.2 includes several industries whose
production technologies are not covered in this text; for example, beverages, chemicals,
and food processing. In this book, manufacturing means production of hardware, which
ranges from nuts and bolts to digital computers and military weapons. Plastic and ceramic
(a)
(b)
Starting
material
Starting
material
Processed
part
Processed
part
Material in
processing
Value
added $$
Manufacturing
process
Manufacturing
process
Scrap and
waste
Labor
Power
Tooling
Machinery
$$$
$
FIGURE 1.1
Two ways to deﬁne manufacturing: (a) as a technical process, and (b) as an economic process.
4
Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing

products are included, but apparel, paper, pharmaceuticals, power utilities, publishing,
and wood products are excluded.
Manufactured Products
Final products made by the manufacturing industries can be
divided into two major classes: consumer goods and capital goods. Consumer goods are
products purchased directly by consumers, such as cars, personal computers, TVs, tires,
and tennis rackets. Capital goods are those purchased by companies to produce goods
and/or provide services. Examples of capital goods include aircraft, computers, commu-
nication equipment, medical apparatus, trucks and buses, railroad locomotives, machine
tools, and construction equipment. Most of these capital goods are purchased by the
service industries. It was noted in the Introduction that manufacturing accounts for about
15% of GDP and services about 75% of GDP in the United States. Yet the manufactured
capital goods purchased by the service sector are the enablers of that sector. Without the
capital goods, the service industries could not function.
In addition to final products, other manufactured items include the materials,
components, and supplies used by the companies that make the final products. Examples
of these items include sheet steel, bar stock, metal stampings, machined parts, plastic
moldings and extrusions, cutting tools, dies, molds, and lubricants. Thus, the manufactur-
ing industries consist of a complex infrastructure with various categories and layers of
intermediate suppliers with whom the final consumer never deals.
This book is generally concerned with discrete items—individual parts and
assembled products, rather than items produced by continuous processes. A metal
stamping is a discrete item, but the sheet-metal coil from which it is made is continuous
(almost). Many discrete parts start out as continuous or semicontinuous products, such as
extrusions and electrical wire. Long sections made in almost continuous lengths are cut to
the desired size. An oil refinery is a better example of a continuous process.
Production Quantity and Product Variety
The quantity of products made by a factory
has an important influence on the way its people, facilities, and procedures are organized.
Annual production quantities can be classified into three ranges: (1) low production,
quantities in the range 1 to 100 units per year; (2) medium production, from 100 to 10,000
units annually; and (3) high production, 10,000 to millions of units. The boundaries
TABLE 1.2
Speciﬁc industries in the primary, secondary, and tertiary categories.
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary (Service)
Agriculture
Aerospace
Food processing
Banking
Insurance
Forestry
Apparel
Glass, ceramics
Communications
Legal
Fishing
Automotive
Heavy machinery
Education
Real estate
Livestock
Basic metals
Paper
Entertainment
Repair and
Quarries
Beverages
Petroleum refining
Financial services
maintenance
Mining
Building materials
Pharmaceuticals
Government
Restaurant
Petroleum
Chemicals
Plastics (shaping)
Health and
Retail trade
Computers
Power utilities
medical
Tourism
Construction
Publishing
Hotel
Transportation
Consumer
Textiles
Information
Wholesale trade
appliances
Tire and rubber
Electronics
Wood and furniture
Equipment
Fabricated metals
Section 1.1/What Is Manufacturing?
5

between the three ranges are somewhat arbitrary (in the author’s judgment). Depending
on the kinds of products, these boundaries may shift by an order of magnitude or so.
Production quantity refers to the number of units produced annually of a particular
product type. Some plants produce a variety of different product types, each type being made
in low or medium quantities. Other plants specialize in high production of only one product
type. It is instructive to identify product variety as a parameter distinct from production
quantity. Product variety refers to different product designs or types that are produced in the
plant. Different products have different shapes and sizes; they perform different functions;
they are intended for different markets; some have more components than others; and so
forth. The number of different product types made each year can be counted. When the
number of product types made in the factory is high, this indicates high product variety.
There is an inverse correlation between product variety and production quantity in
terms of factory operations. If a factory’s product variety is high, then its production quantity
is likely to be low; but if production quantity is high, then product variety will be low, as
depictedinFigure1.2.Manufacturingplantstendtospecializeinacombinationofproduction
quantity and product variety that lies somewhere inside the diagonal band in Figure 1.2.
Although product variety has been identified as a quantitative parameter (the number
of different product types made by the plant or company), this parameter is much less exact
than production quantity, because details on how much the designs differ are not captured
simply by the number of different designs. Differences between an automobile and an air
conditioner are far greater than between an air conditioner and a heat pump. Within each
product type, there are differences among specific models.
The extent of the product differences may be small or great, as illustrated in the
automotive industry. Each of the U.S. automotive companies produces cars with two or
three different nameplates in the same assembly plant, although the body styles and other
design features are virtually the same. In different plants, the company builds heavy trucks.
The terms ‘‘soft’’ and ‘‘hard’’ might be used to describe these differences in product variety.
Soft product variety occurs when there are only small differences among products, such as
the differences among car models made on the same production line. In an assembled
product, soft variety is characterized by a high proportion of common parts among the
models. Hard product variety occurs when the products differ substantially, and there are
few commonparts, ifany. Thedifferencebetweena car and atruckexemplifies hardvariety.
1.1.3 MANUFACTURING CAPABILITY
A manufacturing plant consists of a set of processes and systems (and people, of course)
designed to transform a certain limited range of materials into products of increased
value. These three building blocks—materials, processes, and systems—constitute the
FIGURE 1.2
Relationship
between product variety and
production quantity in discrete
product manufacturing.
6
Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing

subject of modern manufacturing. There is a strong interdependence among these
factors. A company engaged in manufacturing cannot do everything. It must do only
certain things, and it must do those things well. Manufacturing capability refers to the
technical and physical limitations of a manufacturing firm and each of its plants. Several
dimensions of this capability can be identified: (1) technological processing capability, (2)
physical size and weight of product, and (3) production capacity.
Technological Processing Capability
The technological processing capability of a
plant (or company) is its available set of manufacturing processes. Certain plants perform
machining operations, others roll steel billets into sheet stock, and others build automo-
biles. A machine shop cannot roll steel, and a rolling mill cannot build cars. The underlying
feature that distinguishes these plants is the processes they can perform. Technological
processing capability is closely related to material type. Certain manufacturing processes
are suited to certain materials, whereas other processes are suited to other materials. By
specializing in a certain process or group of processes, the plant is simultaneously
specializing in certain material types. Technological processing capability includes not
only the physical processes, but also the expertise possessed by plant personnel in these
processing technologies. Companies must concentrate on the design and manufacture of
products that are compatible with their technological processing capability.
Physical Product Limitations
Asecond aspectof manufacturing capability isimposedby
the physical product. A plant with a given set of processes is limited in terms of the size and
weight of the products that can be accommodated. Large, heavy products are difficult to
move. To move these products about, the plant must be equipped with cranes of the required
load capacity. Smaller parts and products made in large quantities can be moved by conveyor
or other means. The limitation on product size and weight extends to the physical capacity of
the manufacturing equipment as well. Production machines come in different sizes. Larger
machines must be used to process larger parts. The production and material handling
equipment must be planned for products that lie within a certain size and weight range.
Production Capacity
A third limitation on a plant’s manufacturing capability is the
production quantity that can be produced in a given time period (e.g., month or year). This
quantity limitation is commonly called plant capacity, or production capacity, defined as
the maximum rate of production that a plant can achieve under assumed operating
conditions. The operating conditions refer to number of shifts per week, hours per shift,
direct labor manning levels in the plant, and so on. These factors represent inputs to the
manufacturing plant. Given these inputs, how much output can the factory produce?
Plant capacity is usually measured in terms of output units, such as annual tons of
steel produced by a steel mill, or number of cars produced by a final assembly plant. In
these cases, the outputs are homogeneous. In cases in which the output units are not
homogeneous, other factors may be more appropriate measures, such as available labor
hours of productive capacity in a machine shop that produces a variety of parts.
Materials, processes, and systems are the basic building blocks of manufacturing and
the three broad subject areas of this book. This introductory chapter provides an overview
of these three subjects before embarking on detailed coverage in the remaining chapters.
1.2
MATERIALS IN MANUFACTURING
Most engineering materials can be classified into one of three basic categories:(1) metals, (2)
ceramics, and (3) polymers.Their chemistries are different, their mechanical and physical
properties are different, and these differences affect the manufacturing processes that can
be used to produce products from them. In addition to the three basic categories, there are
Section 1.2/Materials in Manufacturing
7

(4) composites—nonhomogeneous mixtures of the other three basic types rather than a
unique category. The classification of the four groups is pictured in Figure 1.3. This section
surveys these materials. Chapters 6 through 9 cover the four material types in more detail.
1.2.1 METALS
Metals used in manufacturing are usually alloys, which are composed of two or more
elements, with at least one being a metallic element. Metals and alloys can be divided into
two basic groups: (1) ferrous and (2) nonferrous.
Ferrous Metals
Ferrous metals are based on iron; the group includes steel and cast iron.
These metals constitute the most important group commercially, more than three fourths of
the metal tonnage throughout the world. Pure iron has limited commercial use, but when
alloyed with carbon, iron has more uses and greater commercial value than any other metal.
Alloys of iron and carbon form steel and cast iron.
Steelcanbedefinedasaniron–carbonalloycontaining0.02%to2.11%carbon.Itisthe
most important category within the ferrous metal group. Its composition often includes other
alloyingelementsaswell,suchasmanganese,chromium,nickel,andmolybdenum,toenhance
the properties of the metal. Applications of steel include construction (bridges, I-beams, and
FIGURE 1.3
Classiﬁcation of the four
engineering materials.
Ferrous Metals 
Metals
Nonferrous
Metals
Crystalline
Ceramics 
Ceramics
Glasses 
Engineering
Materials
Thermoplastics
Polymers
Thermosets
Elastomers
Metal Matrix
Composites 
Composites
Ceramic Matrix
Composites
Polymer Matrix
Composites
8
Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing

nails), transportation (trucks, rails, and rolling stock for railroads), and consumer products
(automobiles and appliances).
Cast iron is an alloy of iron and carbon (2% to 4%) used in casting (primarily sand
casting). Silicon is also present in the alloy (in amounts from 0.5% to 3%), and other
elements are often added also, to obtain desirable properties in the cast part. Cast iron is
available in several different forms, of which gray cast iron is the most common; its
applications include blocks and heads for internal combustion engines.
Nonferrous Metals
Nonferrous metals include the other metallic elements and their
alloys. In almost all cases, the alloys are more important commercially than the pure metals.
The nonferrous metals include the pure metals and alloys of aluminum, copper, gold,
magnesium, nickel, silver, tin, titanium, zinc, and other metals.
1.2.2 CERAMICS
A ceramic is defined as a compound containing metallic (or semimetallic) and nonmetallic
elements. Typical nonmetallic elements areoxygen,nitrogen, andcarbon. Ceramicsinclude a
variety of traditional and modern materials. Traditional ceramics, some of which have been
used for thousands of years, include: clay (abundantly available, consisting of fine particles of
hydrous aluminum silicates and other minerals used in making brick, tile, and pottery); silica
(the basis for nearly all glass products); and alumina and silicon carbide (two abrasive
materialsusedingrinding).Modernceramicsincludesomeoftheprecedingmaterials,suchas
alumina,whosepropertiesareenhancedinvariouswaysthroughmodernprocessingmethods.
Newer ceramics include: carbides—metal carbides such as tungsten carbide and titanium
carbide, which are widely used as cutting tool materials; and nitrides—metal and semimetal
nitridessuchastitaniumnitrideandboronnitride,usedascuttingtoolsandgrindingabrasives.
For processing purposes, ceramics can be divided into crystalline ceramics and glasses.
Different methods of manufacturing are required for the two types. Crystalline ceramics are
formed in various ways from powders and then fired (heated to a temperature below the
melting point to achieve bonding between the powders). The glass ceramics (namely, glass)
can be melted and cast, and then formed in processes such as traditional glass blowing.
1.2.3 POLYMERS
A polymer is a compound formed of repeating structural units called mers, whose atoms
share electrons to form very large molecules. Polymers usually consist of carbon plus one
or more other elements, such as hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and chlorine. Polymers are
divided into three categories: (1) thermoplastic polymers, (2) thermosetting polymers,
and (3) elastomers.
Thermoplasticpolymerscanbesubjectedtomultipleheatingandcoolingcycleswithout
substantiallyalteringthemolecularstructureofthepolymer.Commonthermoplasticsinclude
polyethylene, polystyrene, polyvinylchloride, and nylon. Thermosetting polymers chemically
transform (cure) into a rigid structure on cooling from a heated plastic condition; hence the
name thermosetting. Members of this type include phenolics, amino resins, and epoxies.
Although the name thermosetting is used, some of these polymers cure by mechanisms other
than heating. Elastomers are polymers that exhibit significant elastic behavior; hence the
name elastomer. They include natural rubber, neoprene, silicone, and polyurethane.
1.2.4 COMPOSITES
Composites do not really constitute a separate category of materials; they are mixtures of the
other three types. A composite is a material consisting of two or more phases that are
Section 1.2/Materials in Manufacturing
9

processed separately and then bonded together to achieve properties superior to those of its
constituents. The term phase refers to a homogeneous mass of material, such as an
aggregation of grains of identical unit cell structure in a solid metal. The usual structure
of a composite consists of particles or fibers of one phase mixed in a second phase, called the
matrix.
Composites are found in nature (e.g., wood), and they can be produced synthetically.
The synthesized type is of greater interest here, and it includes glass fibers in a polymer
matrix, such as fiber-reinforced plastic; polymer fibers of one type in a matrix of a second
polymer, such as an epoxy-Kevlar composite; and ceramic in a metal matrix, such as a
tungsten carbide in a cobalt binder to form a cemented carbide cutting tool.
Properties of a composite depend on its components, the physical shapes of the
components, and the way they are combined to form the final material. Some composites
combine high strength with light weight and are suited to applications such as aircraft
components, car bodies, boat hulls, tennis rackets, and fishing rods. Other composites are
strong, hard, and capable of maintaining these properties at elevated temperatures, for
example, cemented carbide cutting tools.
1.3
MANUFACTURING PROCESSES
A manufacturing process is a designed procedure that results in physical and/or chemical
changes to a starting work material with the intention of increasing the value of that material.
A manufacturing process is usually carried out as a unit operation , which means that it is a
single step in the sequence of steps required to transform the starting material into a final
product. Manufacturing operations can be divided into two basic types: (1) processing
operations and (2) assembly operations. A processing operation transforms a work
material from one state of completion to a more advanced state that is closer to the
final desired product. It adds value by changing the geometry, properties, or appearance of
the starting material. In general, processing operations are performed on discrete work-
parts, but certain processing operations are also applicable to assembled items (e.g.,
painting a spot-welded car body). An assembly operation joins two or more components
to create a new entity, called an assembly, subassembly, or some other term that refers to
the joining process (e.g., a welded assembly is called a weldment). A classification of
manufacturing processes is presented in Figure 1.4. Many of the manufacturing processes
covered in this text can be viewed on the DVD that comes with this book. Alerts are
provided on these video clips throughout the text. Some of the basic processes used in
modern manufacturing date from antiquity (Historical Note 1.2).
1.3.1 PROCESSING OPERATIONS
A processing operation uses energy to alter a workpart’s shape, physical properties, or
appearance to add value to the material. The forms of energy include mechanical, thermal,
electrical, and chemical. The energy is applied in a controlled way by means of machinery
and tooling. Human energy may also be required, but the human workers are generally
employedtocontrolthemachines,overseetheoperations,andloadandunloadpartsbefore
and after each cycle of operation.A general modelof a processing operation is illustrated in
Figure1.1(a).Materialisfedintotheprocess,energyisappliedbythemachineryandtooling
to transform the material, and the completed workpart exits the process. Most production
operations produce waste or scrap, either as a natural aspect of the process (e.g., removing
material, as in machining) or in the form of occasional defective pieces. It is an important
objective in manufacturing to reduce waste in either of these forms.
10
Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing

FIGURE 1.4
Classiﬁcation of
manufacturing
processes.
Permanent
fastening methods
Threaded
fasteners
Brazing and
soldering
Coating and
deposition processes
Cleaning and
surface treatments
Heat
treatment
Material
removal
Deformation
processes
Shaping
processes
Property
enhancing processes
Processing
operations
Assembly
operations
Manufacturing
processes
Surface processing
operations
Permanent
joining processes
Mechanical
fastening
Particulate
processing
Solidification
processes
Welding
Adhesive
bonding
Historical Note 1.2
Manufacturing materials and processes
Although most of the historical developments that form
the modern practice of manufacturing have occurred
only during the last few centuries (Historical Note 1.1),
several of the basic fabrication processes date as far back
as the Neolithic period (circa 8000–3000 BCE.). It was
during this period that processes such as the following
were developed: carving and other woodworking, hand
forming and ﬁring of clay pottery, grinding and polishing
of stone, spinning and weaving of textiles, and dyeing of
cloth.
Metallurgy and metalworking also began during the
Neolithic period, in Mesopotamia and other areas
around the Mediterranean. It either spread to, or
developed independently in, regions of Europe and Asia.
Gold was found by early humans in relatively pure form
in nature; it could be hammered into shape. Copper was
probably the ﬁrst metal to be extracted from ores, thus
requiring smelting as a processing technique. Copper
could not be hammered readily because it strain
hardened; instead, it was shaped by casting (Historical
Note 10.1). Other metals used during this period were
silver and tin. It was discovered that copper alloyed with
tin produced a more workable metal than copper alone
(casting and hammering could both be used). This
heralded the important period known as the Bronze Age
(circa 3500–1500 BCE.).
Iron was also ﬁrst smelted during the Bronze Age.
Meteorites may have been one source of the metal,
but iron ore was also mined. Temperatures required
to reduce iron ore to metal are signiﬁcantly higher
than for copper, which made furnace operations more
difﬁcult. Other processing methods were also more
difﬁcult for the same reason. Early blacksmiths
learned that when certain irons (those containing
small amounts of carbon) were sufﬁciently heated and
then quenched, they became very hard. This
permitted grinding a very sharp cutting edge on
knives and weapons, but it also made the metal
brittle. Toughness could be increased by reheating at
a lower temperature, a process known as tempering.
Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes
11

More than one processing operation is usually required to transform the starting
material into final form. The operations are performed in the particular sequence
required to achieve the geometry and condition defined by the design specification.
Threecategoriesofprocessingoperationsaredistinguished:(1)shapingoperations,(2)
property-enhancingoperations,and(3)surfaceprocessingoperations.Shapingoperations
alter the geometry of the starting work material by various methods. Common shaping
processes include casting, forging, and machining. Property-enhancing operations add
value to the material by improving its physical properties without changing its shape. Heat
treatment is the most common example. Surface processing operations are performed to
clean, treat, coat, or deposit material onto the exterior surface of the work. Common
examples of coating are plating and painting. Shaping processes are covered in Parts III
through VI, corresponding to the four main categories of shaping processes in Figure 1.4.
Property-enhancing processes and surface processing operations are covered in Part VII.
Shaping Processes
Most shape processing operations apply heat, mechanical force, or
a combination of these to effect a change in geometry of the work material. There are
various ways to classify the shaping processes. The classification used in this book is based
on the state of the starting material, by which we have four categories: (1) solidification
processes, in which the starting material is a heated liquid or semifluid that cools and
solidifies to form the part geometry; (2) particulate processing, in which the starting
material is a powder, and the powders are formed and heated into the desired geometry;
(3) deformation processes, in which the starting material is a ductile solid (commonly
metal) that is deformed to shape the part; and (4) material removal processes, in which
What we have described is, of course, the heat
treatment of steel. The superior properties of steel
caused it to succeed bronze in many applications
(weaponry, agriculture, and mechanical devices). The
period of its use has subsequently been named the
Iron Age (starting around 1000 BCE.). It was not until
much later, well into the nineteenth century, that the
demand for steel grew signiﬁcantly and more modern
steelmaking techniques were developed (Historical
Note 6.1).
The beginnings of machine tool technology
occurred during the Industrial Revolution. During the
period 1770–1850, machine tools were developed for
most of the conventional material removal processes,
such as boring, turning, drilling, milling, shaping,
and planing (Historical Note 22.1). Many of the
individual processes predate the machine tools by
centuries; for example, drilling and sawing (of wood)
date from ancient times, and turning (of wood) from
around the time of Christ.
Assembly methods were used in ancient cultures to
make ships, weapons, tools, farm implements,
machinery, chariots and carts, furniture, and garments.
The earliest processes included binding with twine and
rope, riveting and nailing, and soldering. Around 2000
years ago, forge welding and adhesive bonding were
developed. Widespread use of screws, bolts, and nuts as
fasteners—so common in today’s assembly—required
the development of machine tools that could accurately
cut the required helical shapes (e.g., Maudsley’s screw
cutting lathe, 1800). It was not until around 1900 that
fusion welding processes started to be developed as
assembly techniques (Historical Note 29.1).
Natural rubber was the ﬁrst polymer to be used in
manufacturing (if we overlook wood, which is a polymer
composite). The vulcanization process, discovered by
Charles Goodyear in 1839, made rubber a useful
engineering material (Historical Note 8.2). Subsequent
developments included plastics such as cellulose nitrate
in 1870, Bakelite in 1900, polyvinylchloride in 1927,
polyethylene in 1932, and nylon in the late 1930s
(Historical Note 8.1). Processing requirements for
plastics led to the development of injection molding
(based on die casting, one of the metal casting processes)
and other polymer-shaping techniques.
Electronics products have imposed unusual demands
on manufacturing in terms of miniaturization. The
evolution of the technology has been to package more
and more devices into smaller and smaller areas—in
some cases millions of transistors onto a ﬂat piece of
semiconductor material that is only 12 mm (0.50 in.) on
a side. The history of electronics processing and
packaging dates from only a few decades (Historical
Notes 34.1, 35.1, and 35.2).
12
Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing

the starting material is a solid (ductile or brittle), from which material is removed so that
the resulting part has the desired geometry.
In the first category, the starting material is heated sufficiently to transform it into a
liquid or highly plastic (semifluid) state. Nearly all materials can be processed in this way.
Metals, ceramic glasses, and plastics can all be heated to sufficiently high temperatures to
convertthem intoliquids.Withthe materialinaliquidorsemifluidform,itcanbepouredor
otherwise forced to flow into a mold cavity and allowed to solidify, thus taking a solid shape
that is the same as the cavity. Most processes that operate this way are called casting or
molding. Casting is the name used for metals, and molding is the common term used for
plastics. This category of shaping process is depicted in Figure 1.5.
In particulate processing, the starting materials are powders of metals or ceramics.
Although these two materials are quite different, theprocesses to shapethem in particulate
processing are quite similar. The common technique involves pressing and sintering,
illustrated in Figure 1.6, in which the powders are first squeezed into a die cavity under
high pressure and then heated to bond the individual particles together.
In deformation processes, the starting workpart is shaped by the application of forces
that exceed the yield strength of the material. For the material to be formed in this way, it
must be sufficiently ductile to avoid fracture during deformation. To increase ductility (and
forotherreasons), theworkmaterialisoftenheatedbefore formingtoatemperature below
the melting point. Deformation processes are associated most closely with metalworking
and include operations such as forging and extrusion, shown in Figure 1.7.
FIGURE 1.6
Particulate
processing: (1) the
starting material is
powder; the usual
process consists of
(2) pressing and (3)
sintering.
FIGURE 1.5
Casting
and molding processes
start with a work material
heated to a ﬂuid or
semiﬂuid state. The
process consists of:
(1) pouring the ﬂuid into a
mold cavity and (2)
allowing the ﬂuid to
solidify, after which the
solid part is removed
from the mold.
Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes
13

Materialremovalprocessesareoperationsthatremoveexcessmaterialfromthestarting
workpiecesothattheresultingshapeisthedesiredgeometry.Themostimportantprocessesin
this category are machining operations such as turning, drilling, and milling, shown in
Figure 1.8. These cutting operations are most commonly applied to solid metals, performed
using cutting tools that are harder and stronger than the work metal. Grinding is another
common process in this category. Other material removal processes are known as non-
traditional processes because they use lasers, electron beams, chemical erosion, electric
discharges,andelectrochemicalenergytoremovematerialratherthancuttingorgrindingtools.
It is desirable to minimize waste and scrap in converting a starting workpart into its
subsequent geometry. Certain shaping processes are more efficient than others in terms of
material conservation. Material removal processes (e.g., machining) tend to be wasteful of
material,simplybythewaytheywork.Thematerialremovedfromthestartingshapeiswaste,
at least in terms of the unit operation. Other processes, such as certain casting and molding
operations, often convert close to 100% of the starting material into final product. Manu-
facturing processes that transform nearly all of the starting material into product and require
nosubsequentmachiningtoachievefinalpartgeometryarecalled netshape processes.Other
processesrequireminimummachiningtoproducethefinalshapeandarecallednearnetshape
processes.
Property-Enhancing Processes
The second major type of part processing is performed
to improve mechanical or physical properties of the work material. These processes do not
alter the shape of the part, except unintentionally in some cases. The most important
property-enhancing processes involve heat treatments, which include various annealing
FIGURE 1.7
Some
common deformation
processes: (a) forging, in
which two halves of a die
squeeze the workpart,
causing it to assume the
shape of the die cavity;
and (b) extrusion, in
which a billet is forced to
ﬂow through a die oriﬁce,
thus taking the cross-
sectional shape of the
oriﬁce.
Single point
cutting tool
Feed tool
Rotation
(work)
Workpiece
Starting
diameter
Chip
Diameter
after turning
(a)
(b)
(c)
Drill bit
Work part
Work
Hole
Feed
Feed
Rotation
Rotation
Material
removed
Milling
cutter
FIGURE 1.8
Common machining operations: (a) turning, in which a single-point cutting tool removes metal from a
rotating workpiece to reduce its diameter; (b) drilling, in which a rotating drill bit is fed into the work to create a round
hole; and (c) milling, in which a workpart is fed past a rotating cutter with multiple edges.
14
Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing

and strengthening processes for metals and glasses. Sintering of powdered metals and
ceramics is also a heat treatment that strengthens a pressed powder metal workpart.
Surface Processing
Surface processing operations include (1) cleaning, (2) surface treat-
ments,and(3)coatingandthinfilmdepositionprocesses.Cleaningincludesbothchemicaland
mechanical processes to remove dirt, oil, and other contaminants from the surface. Surface
treatments include mechanical working such as shot peening and sand blasting, and physical
processes such as diffusion and ion implantation. Coating and thin film deposition processes
applyacoatingofmaterialtotheexteriorsurfaceoftheworkpart.Commoncoatingprocesses
include electroplating, anodizing of aluminum, organic coating (call it painting), and
porcelain enameling. Thin film deposition processes include physical vapor deposition and
chemical vapor deposition to form extremely thin coatings of various substances.
Several surface-processing operations have been adapted to fabricate semi-
conductor materials into integrated circuits for microelectronics. These processes include
chemical vapor deposition, physical vapor deposition, and oxidation. They are applied to
very localized areas on the surface of a thin wafer of silicon (or other semiconductor
material) to create the microscopic circuit.
1.3.2 ASSEMBLY OPERATIONS
The second basic type of manufacturing operation is assembly, in which two or more separate
parts are joined to form a new entity. Components of the new entity are connected either
permanently or semipermanently. Permanent joining processes include welding, brazing,
soldering,andadhesivebonding.Theyformajointbetweencomponentsthatcannotbeeasily
disconnected. Certain mechanical assembly methods are available to fasten two (or more)
parts together in a joint that can be conveniently disassembled. The use of screws, bolts, and
other threaded fasteners are important traditionalmethods in this category. Other mechanical
assemblytechniquesformamorepermanentconnection;theseincluderivets,pressfitting,and
expansion fits. Special joining and fastening methods are used in the assembly of electronic
products.Someofthemethodsareidenticaltoorareadaptationsoftheprecedingprocesses,for
example, soldering. Electronics assembly is concerned primarily with the assembly of compo-
nents such as integrated circuit packages to printed circuit boards to produce the complex
circuits used in so many of today’s products. Joining and assembly processes are discussed in
Part VIII, and the specialized assembly techniques for electronics are described in Part IX.
1.3.3 PRODUCTION MACHINES AND TOOLING
Manufacturing operations are accomplished using machinery and tooling (and people). The
extensive use of machinery in manufacturing began with the Industrial Revolution. It was at
that time that metal cutting machines started to be developed and widely used. These were
called machine tools—power-driven machines used to operate cutting tools previously
operated by hand. Modern machine tools are described by the same basic definition, except
that the power is electrical rather than water or steam, and the level of precision and
automation is much greater today. Machine tools are among the most versatile of all
production machines. They are used to make not only parts for consumer products, but
also components for other production machines. Both in a historic and a reproductive sense,
the machine tool is the mother of all machinery.
Other production machines include presses for stamping operations, forge hammers
for forging, rolling mills for rolling sheet metal, welding machines for welding, and insertion
machines for inserting electronic components into printed circuit boards. The name of the
equipment usually follows from the name of the process.
Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes
15

Production equipment can be general purpose or special purpose. General purpose
equipment is more flexible and adaptable to a variety of jobs. It is commercially available for
any manufacturing company to invest in. Special purpose equipment is usually designed to
produce a specific part or product in very large quantities. The economics of mass production
justify large investments in special purpose machinery to achieve high efficiencies and short
cycle times. This is not the only reason for special purpose equipment, but it is the dominant
one. Another reason may be because the process is unique and commercial equipment is not
available. Some companies with unique processing requirements develop their own special
purpose equipment.
Production machinery usually requires tooling that customizes the equipment for the
particularpartorproduct.Inmanycases,thetoolingmustbedesignedspecificallyforthepart
or product configuration. When used with general purpose equipment, it is designed to be
exchanged. Foreachworkpart type, the toolingis fastenedtothe machine andtheproduction
run is made. When the run is completed, the tooling is changed for the next workpart type.
When used with special purpose machines, the tooling is often designed as an integral part of
themachine.Becausethespecialpurposemachineislikelybeingusedformassproduction,the
toolingmayneverneedchangingexceptforreplacementof worncomponentsorforrepairof
worn surfaces.
The type of tooling depends on the type of manufacturing process. Table 1.3 lists
examples of special tooling used in various operations. Details are provided in the chapters
that discuss these processes.
1.4
PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
To operate effectively, a manufacturing firm must have systems that allow it to efficiently
accomplish its type of production. Production systems consist of people, equipment, and
procedures designed for the combination of materials and processes that constitute a firm’s
manufacturing operations. Production systems can be divided into two categories: (1)
production facilities and (2) manufacturing support systems, as shown in Figure 1.10.
Production facilities refer to the physical equipment and the arrangement of equipment
in the factory. Manufacturing support systems are the procedures used by the company to
manage production and solve the technical and logistics problems encountered in order-
ing materials, moving work through the factory, and ensuring that products meet quality
TABLE 1.3
Production equipment and tooling used for various
manufacturing processes.
Process
Equipment
Special Tooling (Function)
Casting
a
Mold (cavity for molten metal)
Molding
Molding machine
Mold (cavity for hot polymer)
Rolling
Rolling mill
Roll (reduce work thickness)
Forging
Forge hammer or press
Die (squeeze work to shape)
Extrusion
Press
Extrusion die (reduce cross-section)
Stamping
Press
Die (shearing, forming sheet metal)
Machining
Machine tool
Cutting tool (material removal)
Fixture (hold workpart)
Jig (hold part and guide tool)
Grinding
Grinding machine
Grinding wheel (material removal)
Welding
Welding machine
Electrode (fusion of work metal)
Fixture (hold parts during welding)
aVarious types of casting setups and equipment (Chapter 11).
16
Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing

standards. Both categories include people. People make these systems work. In general,
direct labor workers are responsible for operating the manufacturing equipment; and
professional staff workers are responsible for manufacturing support.
1.4.1 PRODUCTION FACILITIES
Production facilities consist of the factory and the production, material handling, and
other equipment in the factory. The equipment comes in direct physical contact with
the parts and/or assemblies as they are being made. The facilities ‘‘touch’’ the product.
Facilities also include the way the equipment is arranged in the factory—the plant layout. The
equipment is usually organized into logical groupings; which can be called manufacturing
systems, such as an automated production line, or a machine cell consisting of an
industrial robot and two machine tools.
A manufacturing company attempts to design its manufacturing systems and orga-
nize its factories to serve the particular mission of each plant in the most efficient way. Over
the years, certain types of production facilities have come to be recognized as the most
appropriate way to organize for a given combination of product variety and production
quantity, as discussed in Section 1.1.2. Different types of facilities are required for each of
the three ranges of annual production quantities.
Low-Quantity Production
In the low-quantity range (1–100 units/year), the term job
shop is often used to describe the type of production facility. A job shop makes low
quantitiesofspecialized andcustomizedproducts. Theproductsaretypicallycomplex,such
as space capsules, prototype aircraft, and special machinery. The equipment in a job shop is
general purpose, and the labor force is highly skilled.
A job shop must be designed for maximum flexibility to deal with the wide product
variationsencountered(hardproductvariety).Iftheproductislargeandheavy,andtherefore
difficult to move, it typically remains in a single location during its fabrication or assembly.
Workers and processing equipment are brought to the product, rather than moving the
product to the equipment. This type of layout is referred to as a fixed-position layout, shown
in Figure 1.9(a). In a pure situation, the product remains in a single location during its entire
production.Examplesofsuchproductsincludeships,aircraft,locomotives,andheavymachin-
ery.Inactualpractice,theseitemsareusuallybuiltinlargemodulesatsinglelocations,andthen
the completed modules are brought together for final assembly using large-capacity cranes.
The individual components of these large products are often made in factories in which
the equipment is arranged according to function or type. This arrangement is called a process
layout. The lathes are in one department, the milling machines are in another department,
and so on, as in Figure 1.9(b). Different parts, each requiring a different operation sequence,
are routed through the departments in the particular order needed for their processing,
usually in batches. The process layout is noted for its flexibility; it can accommodate a great
variety of operation sequences for different part configurations. Its disadvantage is that the
machinery and methods to produce a part are not designed for high efficiency.
Medium Quantity Production
In the medium-quantity range (100–10,000 units annu-
ally), two different types of facility are distinguished, depending on product variety. When
productvarietyishard,theusualapproachisbatchproduction,inwhichabatchofoneproduct
is made, after which the manufacturing equipment is changed over to produce a batch of the
nextproduct,andsoon.Theproductionrateoftheequipmentisgreaterthanthedemandrate
foranysingleproducttype,andsothesameequipmentcanbesharedamongmultipleproducts.
The changeover between production runs takes time—time to change tooling and set up the
machinery. This setup time is lost production time, and this is a disadvantage of batch
manufacturing. Batch production is commonly used for make-to-stock situations, in which
Section 1.4/Production Systems
17

items are manufactured to replenish inventory that has been gradually depleted by demand.
The equipment is usually arranged in a process layout, as in Figure 1.9(b).
An alternative approach to medium-range production is possible if product variety is
soft. In this case, extensive changeovers between one product style and the next may not be
necessary. It is often possible to configure the manufacturing system so that groups of similar
products can be made on the same equipment without significant lost time because of setup.
Theprocessingorassemblyofdifferentpartsorproductsisaccomplishedincellsconsistingof
several workstations or machines. The term cellular manufacturing is often associated with
this type of production. Each cell is designed to produce a limited variety of part configura-
tions; that is, the cell specializes in the production of a given set of similar parts, according to
the principles of group technology (Section 39.5). The layout is called a cellular layout,
depicted in Figure 1.9(c).
High Production
The high-quantity range (10,000 to millions of units per year) is referred
to as mass production. The situation is characterized by a high demand rate for the product,
and the manufacturing system is dedicated to the production of that single item. Two
categories of mass production can be distinguished: quantity production and flow line
production. Quantity production involves the mass production of single parts on single
pieces of equipment. It typically involves standard machines (e.g., stamping presses)
equipped with special tooling (e.g., dies and material handling devices), in effect dedicating
the equipment to the production of one part type. Typical layouts used in quantity production
are the process layout and cellular layout.
Flow line production involves multiple pieces of equipment or workstations arranged
in sequence, and the work units are physically moved through the sequence to complete the
product. The workstations and equipment are designed specifically for the product to
maximize efficiency. The layout is called a product layout, and the workstations are arranged
Departments
Product
Equipment
(modile)
Work unit
Production
machines
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Workers
Worker
Cell
Cell
Workstation
Equipment
Conveyor
Workers
v
FIGURE 1.9
Various types of plant layout: (a) ﬁxed-position layout, (b) process layout,
(c) cellular layout, and (d) product layout.
18
Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing

into one long line, as in Figure 1.9(d), or into a series of connected line segments. The work is
usually moved between stations by mechanized conveyor. At each station, a small amount of
the total work is completed on each unit of product.
The most familiar example of flow line production is the assembly line, associated
with products such as cars and household appliances. The pure case of flow line production
occurs when there is no variation in the products made on the line. Every product is
identical, and the line is referred to as a single model production line. To successfully
market a given product, it is often beneficial to introduce feature and model variations so
that individual customers can choose the exact merchandise that appeals to them. From a
production viewpoint, the feature differences represent a case of soft product variety. The
term mixed-model production line applies to situations in which there is soft variety in
theproductsmadeonthe line. Modernautomobileassemblyisanexample. Carscomingoff
the assembly line have variations in options and trim representing different models and in
many cases different nameplates of the same basic car design.
1.4.2 MANUFACTURING SUPPORT SYSTEMS
To operate its facilities efficiently, a company must organize itself to design the processes
and equipment, plan and control the production orders, and satisfy product quality
requirements. These functions are accomplished by manufacturing support systems—
people and procedures by which a company manages its production operations. Most of
these support systems do not directly contact the product, but they plan and control its
progress through the factory. Manufacturing support functions are often carried out in the
firm by people organized into departments such as the following:

Manufacturing engineering. The manufacturing engineering department is responsi-
ble forplanning the manufacturing processes—deciding what processes should be used
to make the parts and assemble the products. This department is also involved in
designing and ordering the machine tools and other equipment used by the operating
departments to accomplish processing and assembly.

Production planning and control. This department is responsible for solving the
logistics problem in manufacturing—ordering materials and purchased parts, sched-
uling production, and making sure that the operating departments have the necessary
capacity to meet the production schedules.

Quality control. Producing high-quality products should be a top priority of any
manufacturing firm in today’s competitive environment. It means designing and
FIGURE 1.10
Overview
of major topics covered
in the book.
Manufacturing processes and assembly operations
Facilities
Manufacturing
support
Quality control
systems
Manufacturing
systems
Manufacturing
support systems
Production system
Finished
products
Engineering
materials
Section 1.4/Production Systems
19

building products that conform to specifications and satisfy or exceed customer
expectations. Much of this effort is the responsibility of the QC department.
1.5
TRENDS IN MANUFACTURING
This section considers several trends that are affecting the materials, processes, and systems
used in manufacturing. These trends are motivated by technological and economic factors
occurring throughout theworld.Their effects are not limited to manufacturing; they impact
society as a whole. The discussion is organized into the following topic areas: (1) lean
production and Six Sigma, (2) globalization, (3) environmentally conscious manufactur-
ing, and (4) microfabrication and nanotechnology.
1.5.1 LEAN PRODUCTION AND SIX SIGMA
These are two programs aimed at improving efficiency and quality in manufacturing. They
address the demands by customers for the products they buy to be both low in cost and high
in quality. The reason why lean and Six Sigma are trends is because they are being so widely
adopted by companies, especially in the United States.
Lean production is based on the Toyota Production System developed by Toyota
Motors in Japan. Its origins date from the 1950s, when Toyota began using unconventional
methodstoimprovequality,reduceinventories,andincreaseflexibilityinitsoperations.Lean
production can be defined simply as ‘‘doing more work with fewer resources.’’2 It means that
fewer workers and less equipment are used to accomplish more production in less time, and
yet achieve higher quality in the final product. The underlying objective of lean production is
the elimination of waste. In the Toyota Production System, the seven forms of waste in
production are (1) production of defective parts, (2) production of more parts than required,
(3) excessive inventories, (4) unnecessary processing steps, (5) unnecessary movement of
workers, (6) unnecessary movement and handling of materials, and (7) workers waiting. The
methods used by Toyota to reduce waste include techniques for preventing errors, stopping a
process when something goes wrong, improved equipment maintenance, involving workers
in process improvements (so-called continuous improvement), and standardized work
procedures. Probably the most important development was the just-in-time delivery system,
which is described in Section 41.4 in the chapter on production and inventory control.
Six Sigma was started in the 1980s at Motorola Corporation in the United States. The
objective was to reduce variability in the company’s processes and products to increase
customer satisfaction. Today, Six Sigma can be defined as ‘‘a quality-focused program that
utilizes worker teams to accomplish projects aimed at improving an organization’s
operational performance.’’3 Six Sigma is discussed in more detail in Section 42.4.2.
1.5.2 GLOBALIZATION AND OUTSOURCING
Theworldisbecomingmoreandmoreintegrated,creatinganinternationaleconomyinwhich
barriers once established by national boundaries have been reduced or eliminated. This has
enableda freerflow of goods andservices, capital, technology, and people among regions and
countries.Globalizationisthetermthatdescribesthistrend,whichwasrecognizedinthelate
1980s and is now a dominant economic reality. Of interest here is that once underdeveloped
2M. P. Groover, Work Systems and the Methods, Measurement, and Management of Work [7], p. 514. The
term lean production was coined by researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who studied
the production operations at Toyota and other automobile companies in the 1980s.
3Ibid, p. 541.
20
Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing

nations suchasChina,India, andMexicohavedevelopedtheirmanufacturinginfrastructures
and technologies to a point where they are now important producers in the global economy.
The advantages of these three countries in particular are their large populations (therefore,
largeworkforcepool)andlowlaborcosts.Hourlywagesarecurrentlyanorderofmagnitudeor
more higher in the United States than in these countries, making it difficult for domestic U.S.
companies to compete in many products requiring a high labor content. Examples include
garments, furniture, many types of toys, and electronic gear. The result has been a loss of
manufacturing jobs in the United States and a gain of related work to these countries.
Globalization is closely related to outsourcing. In manufacturing, outsourcing refers
to the use of outside contractors to perform work that was traditionally accomplished in-
house. Outsourcing can be done in several ways, including the use of local suppliers. In this
case the jobs remain in the United States. Alternatively, U.S. companies can outsource to
foreign countries, so that parts and products once made in the United States are now made
outside the country. In this case U.S. jobs are displaced. Two possibilities can be distin-
guished: (1) offshore outsourcing, which refers to production in China or other overseas
locations and transporting the items by cargo ship to the United States, and (2) near-shore
outsourcing, which means the items are made in Canada, Mexico, or Central America and
shipped by rail or truck into the United States.
China is a country of particular interest in this discussion of globalization because of
its fast-growing economy, the importance of manufacturing in that economy, and the extent
towhichU.S.companieshaveoutsourcedworktoChina.Totakeadvantageofthelowlabor
rates, U.S. companies have outsourced much of their production to China (and other east
Asian countries). Despite the logistics problems and costs of shipping the goods back into
the United States, the result has been lower costs and higher profits for the outsourcing
companies, as well as lower prices and a wider variety of available products for U.S.
consumers. Thedownsidehas beenthelossofwell-paying manufacturingjobsintheUnited
States. Another consequence of U.S. outsourcing to China has been a reduction in the
relative contribution of the manufacturing sector to GDP. In the 1990s, the manufacturing
industries accounted for about 20%of GDP in the United States. Todaythat contribution is
less than 15%. At the same time, the manufacturing sector in China has grown (along with
the rest of its economy), now accounting for almost 35% of Chinese GDP. Because the U.S.
GDP is roughly three times China’s, the United States’ manufacturing sector is still larger.
However, China is the world leader in several industries. Its tonnage output of steel is
greater than the combined outputs of the next six largest steel producing nations (in order,
Japan, United States, Russia, India, South Korea, and Germany).4 China is also the largest
producer of metal castings, accounting for more tonnage than the next three largest
producers (in order, United States, Japan, and India) [5].
Steel production and casting are considered ‘‘dirty’’ industries, and environmental
pollution is an issue not only in China, but in many places throughout the World. This issue
is addressed in the next trend.
1.5.3 ENVIRONMENTALLY CONSCIOUS MANUFACTURING
Aninherentfeatureofvirtuallyallmanufacturingprocessesiswaste(Section1.3.1).Themost
obvious examples are material removal processes, in which chips are removed from a starting
workpiece to create the desired part geometry. Waste in one form or another is a by-product
of nearly all production operations. Another unavoidable aspect of manufacturing is that
powerisrequiredtoaccomplishanygivenprocess.Generatingthatpowerrequiresfossilfuels
(at least in the United States and China), the burning of which results in pollution of the
environment. At the end of the manufacturing sequence, a product is created that is sold to a
4Source: World Steel Association, 2008 data.
Section 1.5/Trends in Manufacturing
21

customer. Ultimately, the product wears out and is disposed of, perhaps in some landfill, with
the associated environmental degradation. More and more attention is being paid by society
to the environmental impact of human activities throughout the world and how modern
civilization is using our natural resources at an unsustainable rate. Global warming is
presently a major concern. The manufacturing industries contribute to these problems.
Environmentally conscious manufacturing refers to programs that seek to deter-
mine the most efficient use of materials and natural resources in production, and minimize
the negative consequences on the environment. Other associated terms for these programs
includegreenmanufacturing,cleanerproduction,andsustainablemanufacturing.Theyall
boil down to two basic approaches: (1) design products that minimize their environmental
impact, and (2) design processes that are environmentally friendly.
Product design is the logical starting point in environmentally conscious manufactur-
ing. The term design for environment (DFE) is sometimes used for the techniques that
attempt to consider environmental impact during product design prior to production.
Considerations in DFE include the following: (1) select materials that require minimum
energy to produce, (2) select processes that minimize waste of materials and energy, (3)
design parts that can be recycled or reused, (4) design products that can be readily
disassembled to recover the parts, (5) design products that minimize the use of hazardous
and toxic materials, and (6) give attention to how the product will be disposed of at the
end of its useful life.
Toagreatdegree,decisionsmadeduringdesigndictatethematerialsandprocessesthat
are used to make the product. These decisions limit the options available to the manufactur-
ing departments to achieve sustainability. However, various approaches can be applied to
make plant operations more environmentally friendly. They include the following: (1) adopt
good housekeeping practices—keep the factory clean, (2) prevent pollutants from
escaping into the environment (rivers and atmosphere), (3) minimize waste of materials
in unit operations, (4) recycle rather than discard waste materials, (5) use net shape
processes, (6) use renewable energy sources when feasible, (7) provide maintenance to
production equipment so that it operates at maximum efficiency, and (8) invest in
equipment that minimizes power requirements.
Various topics related to environmentally conscious manufacturing are discussed in
the text. The topics of polymer recycling and biodegradable plastics are covered in
Section 8.5. Cutting fluid filtration and dry machining, which reduce the adverse effects of
contaminated cutting fluids, are considered in Section 23.4.2.
1.5.4 MICROFABRICATION AND NANOTECHNOLOGY
Anothertrendinmanufacturingistheemergenceofmaterialsandproductswhosedimensions
are sometimes so smallthat they cannot be seen by the naked eye. In extreme cases, the items
cannot even be seen under an optical microscope. Products that are so miniaturized require
special fabrication technologies. Microfabrication refers to the processes needed to make
parts and products whose features sizes are in the micrometer range 1 mm ¼ 103 mm ¼

106 mÞ. Examples include ink-jet printing heads, compact discs (CDs and DVDs), and
microsensors used in automotive applications (e.g., air-bag deployment sensors). Nano-
technology refers to materials and products whose feature sizes are in the nanometer
scale 1 nm ¼ 103 mm ¼ 106 mm ¼ 109 m


, a scale that approaches the size of atoms
andmolecules.Ultra-thincoatingsforcatalyticconverters,flatscreenTVmonitors,andcancer
drugs are examples of products based on nanotechnology. Microscopic and nanoscopic
materials and products are expected to increase in importance in the future, both technologi-
callyandeconomically,andprocessesareneededtoproducethemcommercially.Thepurpose
here is to make the reader aware of this trend toward miniaturization. Chapters 36 and 37 are
devoted to these technologies.
22
Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing

1.6
ORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK
The preceding sections provide an overview of the book. The remaining 41 chapters are
organizedinto11parts.TheblockdiagraminpreviousFigure1.10summarizesthemajortopics
that are covered. It shows the production system (outlined in dashed lines) with engineering
materials entering from the left and finished products exiting at the right. Part I, Material
Properties and Product Attributes, consists of four chapters that describe the important
characteristics and specifications of materials and the products made from them. Part II
discusses the four basic engineering materials: metals, ceramics, polymers, and composites.
The largest block in Figure 1.10 is labeled ‘‘Manufacturing processes and assembly
operations.’’ The processes and operations included in the text are those identified in
Figure 1.4. Part III begins the coverage of the four categories of shaping processes. Part
III consists of six chapters on the solidification processes that include casting of metals,
glassworking, and polymer shaping. In Part IV, the particulate processing of metals and
ceramics is covered in two chapters. Part V deals with metal deformation processes such
as rolling, forging, extrusion, and sheet metalworking. Finally, Part VI discusses the
material removal processes. Four chapters are devoted to machining, and two chapters
cover grinding (and related abrasive processes) and the nontraditional material removal
technologies.
The other types of processing operations, property enhancing and surface process-
ing, are covered in two chapters in Part VII. Property enhancing is accomplished by heat
treatment, and surface processing includes operations such as cleaning, electroplating,
and coating (painting).
Joining and assembly processes are considered in Part VIII, which is organized into
four chapters on welding, brazing, soldering, adhesive bonding, and mechanical assembly.
Several unique processes that do not neatly fit into the classification scheme of
Figure 1.4 are covered in Part IX, Special Processing and Assembly Technologies. Its five
chapters cover rapid prototyping, processing of integrated circuits, electronics, micro-
fabrication, and nanofabrication.
The remaining blocks in Figure 1.10 deal with the systems of production. Part X,
‘‘Manufacturing Systems,’’ covers the major systems technologies and equipment group-
ings located in the factory: numerical control, industrial robotics, group technology, cellular
manufacturing, flexible manufacturing systems, and production lines. Finally, Part XI deals
with manufacturing support systems: manufacturing engineering, production planning and
control, and quality control and inspection.
REFERENCES
[1] Black, J., and Kohser, R. DeGarmo’s Materials and
Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed. John Wiley &
Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
[2] Emerson, H. P., and Naehring, D. C. E. Origins of
Industrial Engineering. Industrial Engineering &
Management Press, Institute of Industrial Engineers,
Norcross, Georgia, 1988.
[3] Flinn, R. A., and Trojan, P. K. Engineering Materials
and Their Applications, 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1995.
[4] Garrison, E. A History of Engineering and Technol-
ogy. CRC Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Florida,
1991.
[5] Gray, A.‘‘Global Automotive Metal Casting,’’ Ad-
vanced Materials & Processes, April 2009, pp. 33– 35.
[6] Groover, M. P. Automation, Production Systems,
and Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 3rd ed.
Pearson Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, New
Jersey, 2008.
[7] Groover, M. P. Work Systems and the Methods,
Measurement, and Management of Work, Pearson
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey,
2007.
[8] Hornyak, G. L., Moore, J. J., Tibbals, H. F., and
Dutta, J., Fundamentals of Nanotechnology, CRC
Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2009.
References
23

[9] Hounshell, D. A. From the American System to
Mass Production, 1800–1932. The Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore, Maryland, 1984.
[10] Kalpakjian, S., and Schmid S. R. Manufacturing
Processes
for
Engineering
Materials,
6th
ed.
Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New
Jersey, 2010.
[11] wikipedia.org/wiki/globalization
[12] www.bsdglobal.com/tools
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.1.
What are the differences among primary, secondary,
and tertiary industries? Give an example of each
category.
1.2.
What is a capital good? Provide an example.
1.3.
How are product variety and production quantity
related when comparing typical factories?
1.4.
Define manufacturing capability.
1.5.
Name the three basic categories of materials.
1.6.
How does a shaping process differ from a surface
processing operation?
1.7.
What are two subclasses of assembly processes?
Provide an example process for each subclass.
1.8.
Define batch production and describe why it is often
used for medium-quantity production products.
1.9.
What is the difference between a process layout and
a product layout in a production facility?
1.10.
Name two departments that are typically classified
as manufacturing support departments.
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 18 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
1.1.
Which of the following industries are classified
as secondary industries (three correct answers):
(a) beverages (b) financial services, (c) fishing,
(d) mining, (e) power utilities, (f) publishing, and,
(g) transportation?
1.2.
Mining is classified in which one of the following
industry
categories:
(a)
agricultural
industry,
(b) manufacturing industry, (c) primary industry,
(d) secondary industry, (e) service industry, or,
(f) tertiary industry?
1.3.
Inventions of the Industrial Revolution include which
one of the following: (a) automobile, (b) cannon,
(c) printing press, (d) steam engine, or, (e) sword?
1.4.
Ferrous metals include which of the following (two
correct answers): (a) aluminum, (b) cast iron,
(c) copper, (d) gold, and, (e) steel?
1.5.
Which one of the following engineering materials is
defined as a compound containing metallic and
nonmetallic elements: (a) ceramic, (b) composite,
(c) metal, or, (d) polymer?
1.6.
Which of the following processes start with a mate-
rial that is in a fluid or semifluid state and solidifies
the material in a cavity (two best answers):
(a) casting, (b) forging, (c) machining, (d) molding,
(e) pressing, and, (f) turning?
1.7.
Particulate processing of metals and ceramics in-
volves which of the following steps (two best
answers): (a) adhesive bonding, (b) deformation,
(c) forging, (d) material removal, (e) melting,
(f) pressing, and, (g) sintering?
1.8.
Deformation processes include which of the follow-
ing (two correct answers): (a) casting, (b) drilling,
(c) extrusion, (d) forging, (e) milling, (f) painting,
and, (g) sintering?
1.9.
Which one of the following is a machine used to
perform extrusion: (a) forge hammer, (b) milling
machine, (c) rolling mill, (d) press, (e) torch?
1.10.
High-volume production of assembled products is
most closely associated with which one of the follow-
ing layout types: (a) cellular layout, (b) fixed position
layout, (c) process layout, or, (d) product layout?
1.11.
A production planning and control department
accomplishes which of the following functions in
its role of providing manufacturing support (two
best answers): (a) designs and orders machine tools,
(b) develops corporate strategic plans, (c) orders
materials and purchased parts, (d) performs quality
inspections, and, (e) schedules the order of products
on a machine?
24
Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing

Part I Material Properties
and Product Attributes
2
THE NATURE
OF MATERIALS
Chapter Contents
2.1
Atomic Structure and the Elements
2.2
Bonding between Atoms and Molecules
2.3
Crystalline Structures
2.3.1
Types of Crystal Structures
2.3.2
Imperfections in Crystals
2.3.3
Deformation in Metallic Crystals
2.3.4
Grains and Grain Boundaries in Metals
2.4
Noncrystalline (Amorphous) Structures
2.5
Engineering Materials
An understanding of materials is fundamental in the study of
manufacturing processes. In Chapter 1, manufacturing was
defined as a transformation process. It is the material that is
transformed; and it is the behavior of the material when
subjected to the particular forces, temperatures, and other
physical parameters of the process that determines the
success of the operation. Certain materials respond well
to certain types of manufacturing processes, and poorly or
not at all to others. What are the characteristics and propert-
ies of materials that determine their capacity to be trans-
formed by the different processes?
Part I of this book consists of four chapters that address
this question. The current chapter considers the atomic struc-
ture of matter and the bonding between atoms and molecules.
It also shows how atoms and molecules inengineering materi-
als organize themselves into two structural forms: crystalline
and noncrystalline. It turns out that the basic engineering
materials—metals,ceramics,andpolymers—canexistineither
form, although a preference for a particular form is usually
exhibited by a given material. For example, metals almost
always exist as crystals in their solid state. Glass (e.g., window
glass), a ceramic, assumes a noncrystalline form. Some poly-
mers are mixtures of crystalline and amorphous structures.
Chapters 3 and 4 discuss the mechanical and physical
propertiesthatarerelevantinmanufacturing.Ofcourse,these
properties are also important in product design. Chapter 5 is
concerned with several part and product attributes that are
specified during product design and must be achieved in
25

manufacturing: dimensions, tolerances, andsurfacefinish. Chapter5 alsodescribeshow these
attributes are measured.
2.1
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE ELEMENTS
The basic structural unit of matter isthe atom. Each atom is composed of a positively charged
nucleus,surroundedbyasufficientnumberofnegativelychargedelectronssothatthecharges
are balanced. The number of electrons identifies the atomic number and the element of the
atom. There are slightly more than 100 elements (not counting a few extras that have been
artificially synthesized), and these elements are the chemical building blocks of all matter.
Just as there are differences among the elements, there are also similarities. The
elements can be grouped into families and relationships established between and within the
families by means of the Periodic Table, shown in Figure 2.1. In the horizontal direction there
is a certain repetition, or periodicity, in the arrangement of elements. Metallic elements
occupy the left and center portions of the chart, and nonmetals are located to the right.
Betweenthem, alongadiagonal,isatransitionzonecontainingelementscalled metalloidsor
semimetals. In principle, each of the elements can exist as a solid, liquid, or gas, depending on
temperature and pressure. At room temperature and atmospheric pressure, they each have a
natural phase; e.g., iron (Fe) is a solid, mercury (Hg) is a liquid, and nitrogen (N) is a gas.
In the table, the elements are arranged into vertical columns and horizontal rows in
such a way that similarities exist among elements in the same columns. For example, in the
extreme right column are the noble gases (helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon),
all of which exhibit great chemical stability and low reaction rates. The halogens (fluorine,
chlorine, bromine, iodine, and astatine) in column VIIA share similar properties (hydrogen is
not included among the halogens). The noble metals (copper, silver, and gold) in column IB
havesimilarproperties.Generallytherearecorrelationsinpropertiesamongelementswithin
a given column, whereas differences exist among elements in different columns.
FIGURE 2.1
Periodic Table of Elements. The atomic number and symbol are listed for the 103 elements.
26
Chapter 2/The Nature of Materials

Many of the similarities and differences among the elements can be explained by their
respective atomic structures. The simplest model of atomic structure, called the planetary
model, shows the electrons of the atom orbiting around the nucleus at certain fixed distances,
calledshells,asshowninFigure2.2.Thehydrogenatom(atomicnumber1)hasoneelectronin
theorbitclosesttothenucleus.Helium(atomicnumber2)hastwo.Alsoshowninthefigureare
the atomic structures for fluorine (atomic number 9), neon (atomic number 10), and sodium
(atomic number 11). One might infer from these models that there is a maximum number of
electronsthatcanbecontainedinagivenorbit.Thisturnsouttobecorrect,andthemaximumis
defined by
Maximum number of electrons in an orbit ¼ 2n2
ð2:1Þ
where n identifies the orbit, with n ¼ 1 closest to the nucleus.
Thenumberofelectronsintheoutermostshell,relativetothemaximumnumberallowed,
determines to a large extent the atom’s chemical affinity for other atoms. These outer-shell
electrons are called valence electrons. For example, because a hydrogen atom has only one
electron in its single orbit, it readily combines with another hydrogen atom to form a
hydrogenmoleculeH2.Forthesamereason,hydrogenalsoreactsreadilywithvariousother
elements (e.g., to form H2O). In the helium atom, the two electrons in its only orbit are the
maximumallowed(2n2¼2(1)2¼2),andsoheliumisverystable.Neonisstableforthesame
reason:Itsoutermostorbit(n¼2)haseightelectrons(themaximumallowed),soneonisan
inert gas.
In contrast to neon, fluorine has one fewer electron in its outer shell (n ¼ 2) than the
maximum allowed and is readily attracted to other elements that might share an electron to
make a more stable set. The sodium atom seems divinely made for the situation, with one
electron in its outermost orbit. It reacts strongly with fluorine to form the compound sodium
fluoride, as pictured in Figure 2.3.
FIGURE 2.2
Simple model of atomic structure for several elements: (a) hydrogen, (b) helium, (c) ﬂuorine, (d) neon,
and (e) sodium.
FIGURE 2.3
The sodium
ﬂuoride molecule, formed by the
transfer of the ‘‘extra’’ electron
of the sodium atom to complete
the outer orbit of the ﬂuorine
atom.
Section 2.1/Atomic Structure and the Elements
27

At the low atomic numbers considered here, the prediction of the number of electrons
in the outer orbit is straightforward. As the atomic number increases to higher levels, the
allocation of electrons to the different orbits becomes somewhat more complicated. There
are rules and guidelines, based on quantum mechanics, that can be used to predict the
positions of the electrons among the various orbits and explain their characteristics. A
discussion of these rules is somewhat beyond the scope of the coverage of materials for
manufacturing.
2.2
BONDING BETWEEN ATOMS AND MOLECULES
Atoms are held together in molecules by various types of bonds that depend on the valence
electrons. By comparison, molecules are attracted to each other by weaker bonds, which
generally result from the electron configuration in the individual molecules. Thus, we have
two types of bonding: (1) primary bonds, generally associated with the formation of
molecules; and (2) secondary bonds, generally associated with attraction between mol-
ecules. Primary bonds are much stronger than secondary bonds.
Primary Bonds
Primary bonds are characterized by strong atom-to-atom attractions
that involve the exchange of valence electrons. Primary bonds include the following forms:
(a) ionic, (b) covalent, and (c) metallic, as illustrated in Figure 2.4. Ionic and covalent
bonds are called intramolecular bonds because they involve attractive forces between
atoms within the molecule.
In the ionic bond, the atoms of one element give up their outer electron(s), which are
in turn attracted to the atoms of some other element to increase their electron count in the
outermost shell to eight. In general, eight electrons in the outer shell is the most stable
atomic configuration (except for the very light atoms), and nature provides a very strong
bond between atoms that achieves this configuration. The previous example of the reaction
of sodium and fluorine to form sodium fluoride (Figure 2.3) illustrates this form of atomic
bond. Sodium chloride (table salt) is a more common example. Because of the transfer of
electrons between the atoms, sodium and fluorine (or sodium and chlorine) ions are
formed, from which this bonding derives its name. Properties of solid materials with ionic
bonding include low electrical conductivity and poor ductility.
The covalent bond is one in which electrons are shared (as opposed to transferred)
between atoms in their outermost shells to achieve a stable set of eight. Fluorine and
diamond are two examples of covalent bonds. In fluorine, one electron from each of two
atoms is shared to form F2 gas, as shown in Figure 2.5(a). In the case of diamond, which is
carbon (atomic number 6), each atom has four neighbors with which it shares electrons.
This produces a very rigid three-dimensional structure, not adequately represented in
Figure 2.5(b), and accounts for the extreme high hardness of this material. Other forms of
FIGURE 2.4
Three forms of
primary bonding: (a) ionic,
(b) covalent, and (c) metallic.
28
Chapter 2/The Nature of Materials

carbon (e.g., graphite) do not exhibit this rigid atomic structure. Solids with covalent
bonding generally possess high hardness and low electrical conductivity.
Themetallicbondis,ofcourse,theatomicbondingmechanisminpuremetalsandmetal
alloys. Atoms of the metallic elements generally possess too few electrons in their outermost
orbits to complete the outer shells for all of the atoms in, say, a given block of metal.
Accordingly, instead of sharing on an atom-to-atom basis, metallic bonding involves the
sharing of outer-shell electrons by all atoms to form a general electron cloud that permeates
theentireblock.Thiscloudprovidestheattractiveforcestoholdtheatomstogetherandforms
a strong, rigid structure in most cases. Because of the general sharing of electrons, and their
freedomtomovewithinthemetal,metallicbondingprovidesforgoodelectricalconductivity.
Other typical properties of materials characterized by metallic bonding include good
conduction of heat and good ductility. (Although some of these terms are yet to be defined,
the text relies on the reader’s general understanding of material properties.)
Secondary Bonds
Whereas primary bonds involve atom-to-atom attractive forces, sec-
ondary bonds involve attraction forces between molecules, or intermolecular forces. There is
no transfer or sharing of electrons in secondary bonding, and these bonds are therefore
weaker than primary bonds. There are three forms of secondary bonding: (a) dipole forces,
(b) London forces, and (c) hydrogen bonding, illustrated in Figure 2.6. Types (a) and (b)
are often referred to as van der Waals forces, after the scientist who first studied and
quantified them.
Dipole forces arise in a molecule comprised of two atoms that have equal and opposite
electrical charges. Each molecule therefore forms a dipole, as shown in Figure 2.6(a) for
hydrogen chloride. Although the material is electrically neutral in its aggregate form, on a
molecular scale the individual dipoles attract each other, given the proper orientation of
positive and negative ends of the molecules. These dipole forces provide a net intermolecular
bonding within the material.
London forces involve attractive forces between nonpolar molecules; that is, the atoms
in the molecule do not form dipoles in the sense of the preceding paragraph. However, owing
to the rapid motion of the electrons in orbit around the molecule, temporary dipoles form
whenmoreelectrons happentobeononesideofthe moleculethanthe other,assuggestedby
FIGURE 2.5
Two examples
of covalent bonding: (a) ﬂuo-
rine gas F2, and (b) diamond.
FIGURE 2.6
Three types of secondary bonding: (a) dipole forces, (b) London forces, and (c) hydrogen bonding.
Section 2.2/Bonding Between Atoms and Molecules
29

Figure 2.6(b). These instantaneous dipoles provide aforce of attractionbetween molecules in
the material.
Finally, hydrogen bonding occurs in molecules containing hydrogen atoms that are
covalently bonded to another atom (e.g., oxygen in H2O). Because the electrons needed to
complete the shell of the hydrogen atom are aligned on one side of its nucleus, the opposite
side has a net positive charge that attracts the electrons of atoms in neighboring molecules.
Hydrogen bonding is illustrated in Figure 2.6(c) for water, and is generally a stronger
intermolecular bonding mechanism than the other two forms of secondary bonding. It is
important in the formation of many polymers.
2.3
CRYSTALLINE STRUCTURES
Atoms and molecules are used as building blocks for the more macroscopic structure of
matter that is considered here and in the following section. When materials solidify from the
molten state, they tend to close ranks and pack tightly, in many cases arranging themselves
into a very orderly structure, and in other cases, not quite so orderly. Two fundamentally
different material structures can be distinguished:(1) crystalline and (2) noncrystalline.
Crystalline structures are examined in this section, and noncrystalline in the next. The
video clip on heat treatment shows how metals naturally form into crystal structures.
VIDEO CLIP
Heat treatment: View the segment titled ‘‘metal and alloy structures.’’
Many materials form into crystals on solidification from the molten or liquid state. It
is characteristic of virtually all metals, as well as many ceramics and polymers. A crystalline
structure is one in which the atoms are located at regular and recurring positions in three
dimensions. The pattern may be replicated millions of times within a given crystal. The
structure can be viewed in the form of a unit cell, which is the basic geometric grouping of
atoms that is repeated. To illustrate, consider the unit cell for the body-centered cubic
(BCC) crystal structure shown in Figure 2.7, one of the common structures found in metals.
The simplest model of the BCC unit cell is illustrated in Figure 2.7(a). Although this model
clearly depicts the locations of the atoms within the cell, it does not indicate the close
packing of the atoms that occurs in the real crystal, as in Figure 2.7(b). Figure 2.7(c) shows
the repeating nature of the unit cell within the crystal.
FIGURE 2.7
Body-centered cubic (BCC) crystal structure: (a) unit cell, with atoms indicated
as point locations in a three-dimensional axis system; (b) unit cell model showing closely
packed atoms (sometimes called the hard-ball model); and (c) repeated pattern of the
BCC structure.
30
Chapter 2/The Nature of Materials

2.3.1 TYPES OF CRYSTAL STRUCTURES
In metals, three lattice structures are common: (1) body-centered cubic (BCC), (2) face-
centered cubic (FCC), and (3) hexagonal close-packed (HCP), illustrated in Figure 2.8.
Crystal structures for the common metals are presented in Table 2.1. Note that some
metals undergo a change of structure at different temperatures. Iron, for example, is BCC
at room temperature; it changes to FCC above 912C (1674F) and back to BCC at
temperatures above 1400C (2550F). When a metal (or other material) changes structure
like this, it is referred to as being allotropic.
2.3.2 IMPERFECTIONS IN CRYSTALS
Thus far, crystal structures have been discussed as if they were perfect—the unit cell
repeated in the material over and over in all directions. A perfect crystal is sometimes
desirable to satisfy aesthetic or engineering purposes. For instance, a perfect diamond
(contains no flaws) is more valuable than one containing imperfections. In the production
of integrated circuit chips, large single crystals of silicon possess desirable processing
characteristics for forming the microscopic details of the circuit pattern.
However, there are various reasons why a crystal’s lattice structure may not be perfect.
The imperfections often arise naturally because of the inability of the solidifying material to
continue thereplicationof the unit cellindefinitely withoutinterruption.Grainboundariesin
metals are an example. In other cases, the imperfections are introduced purposely during the
FIGURE 2.8
Three types of crystal structures in metals: (a) body-centered cubic, (b) face-centered
cubic, and (c) hexagonal close-packed.
TABLE 2.1
Crystal structures for the common metals (at room temperature).
Body-Centered Cubic
(BCC)
Face-Centered Cubic
(FCC)
Hexagonal Close-Packed
(HCP)
Chromium (Cr)
Aluminum (Al)
Magnesium (Mg)
Iron (Fe)
Copper (Cu)
Titanium (Ti)
Molybdenum (Mo)
Gold (Au)
Zinc (Zn)
Tantalum (Ta)
Lead (Pb)
Tungsten (W)
Silver (Ag)
Nickel (Ni)
Section 2.3/Crystalline Structures
31

manufacturing process; for example, the addition of an alloying ingredient in a metal to
increase its strength.
The various imperfections in crystalline solids are also called defects. Either term,
imperfection or defect, refers to deviations in the regular pattern of the crystalline lattice
structure. They can be catalogued as (1) point defects, (2) line defects, and (3) surface defects.
Point defects are imperfections in the crystal structure involving either a single atom or
afewatoms.Thedefectscantakevariousformsincluding,asshowninFigure2.9:(a)vacancy,
the simplest defect, involving a missing atom within the lattice structure; (b) ion-pair
vacancy, also called a Schottky defect, which involves a missing pair of ions of opposite
charge in a compound that has an overall charge balance; (c) interstitialcy, a lattice
distortion produced by the presence of an extra atom in the structure; and (d) displaced
ion, known as a Frenkel defect, which occurs when an ion becomes removed from a regular
position in the lattice structure and inserted into an interstitial position not normally
occupied by such an ion.
A line defect is a connected group of point defects that forms a line in the lattice
structure. The most important line defect is the dislocation, which can take two forms: (a)
edge dislocation and (b) screw dislocation. An edge dislocation is the edge of an extra
plane of atoms that exists in the lattice, as illustrated in Figure 2.10(a). A screw disloca-
tion, Figure 2.10(b), is a spiral within the lattice structure wrapped around an imperfection
line, like a screw is wrapped around its axis. Both types of dislocations can arise in the
crystal structure during solidification (e.g., casting), or they can be initiated during a
FIGURE 2.9
Point defects: (a) vacancy, (b) ion-pair vacancy, (c) interstitialcy, and (d) displaced ion.
FIGURE 2.10
Line defects:
(a) edge dislocation and
(b) screw dislocation.
(a)
(b)
32
Chapter 2/The Nature of Materials

deformation process (e.g., metal forming) performed on the solid material. Dislocations
are useful in explaining certain aspects of mechanical behavior in metals.
Surface defects are imperfections that extend in two directions to form a boundary.
The most obvious example is the external surface of a crystalline object that defines its
shape. The surface is an interruption in the lattice structure. Surface boundaries can also lie
inside the material. Grain boundaries are the best example of these internal surface
interruptions. Metallic grains are discussed in a moment, but first consider how deforma-
tion occurs in a crystal lattice, and how the process is aided by the presence of dislocations.
2.3.3 DEFORMATION IN METALLIC CRYSTALS
Whenacrystalissubjectedtoagraduallyincreasingmechanicalstress,itsinitialresponseisto
deform elastically. This can be likened to a tilting of the lattice structure without any changes
of position among the atoms in the lattice, in the manner depicted in Figure 2.11(a) and (b). If
the force is removed, the lattice structure (and therefore the crystal) returns to its original
shape.Ifthestressreachesahighvaluerelativetotheelectrostaticforcesholdingtheatomsin
their lattice positions, a permanent shape change occurs, called plastic deformation. What
has happened is that the atoms in the lattice have permanently moved from their previous
locations, and a new equilibrium lattice has been formed, as suggested by Figure 2.11(c).
The lattice deformation shown in (c) of the figure is one possible mechanism, called
slip, by which plastic deformation can occur in a crystalline structure. The other is called
twinning, discussed later.
Slip involves the relative movement of atoms on opposite sides of a plane in the lattice,
called the slip plane. The slip plane must be somehow aligned with the lattice structure
(as indicated in the sketch), and so there are certain preferred directions along which slip is
more likely to occur. The number of these slip directions depends on the lattice type.
The three common metal crystal structures are somewhat more complicated, especially in
threedimensions,thanthesquarelatticedepictedinFigure2.11.ItturnsoutthatHCPhasthe
fewest slip directions, BCC the most, and FCC falls in between. HCP metals show poor
ductility and are generally difficult to deform at room temperature. Metals with BCC
structure would figure to have the highest ductility, if the number of slip directions were the
only criterion. However, nature is not so simple. These metals are generally stronger than the
others, which complicates the issue; and the BCC metals usually require higher stresses to
causeslip.Infact,someoftheBCCmetalsexhibitpoorductility.Lowcarbonsteelisanotable
exception; althoughrelatively strong, it iswidelyusedwith great commercial successin sheet-
metal-forming operations, in which it exhibits good ductility. The FCC metals are generally
the most ductile of the three crystal structures, combining a good number of slip directions
with(usually) relatively low to moderate strength. All three of these metal structuresbecome
more ductile at elevated temperatures, and this fact is often exploited in shaping them.
Dislocations play an important role in facilitating slip in metals. When a lattice
structure containing an edge dislocation is subjected to a shear stress, the material deforms
FIGURE 2.11
Deformation
of a crystal structure: (a)
original lattice; (b) elastic de-
formation,withnopermanent
change in positions of atoms;
and (c) plastic deformation, in
which atoms in the lattice are
forced to move to new
‘‘homes.’’
Section 2.3/Crystalline Structures
33

muchmorereadilythaninaperfectstructure.Thisisexplainedbythefactthatthedislocation
is put into motion within the crystal lattice in the presence of the stress, as shown in the series
of sketchesinFigure 2.12. Whyisit easiertomove adislocationthroughthelatticethanitisto
deformthelatticeitself?Theansweristhattheatomsattheedgedislocationrequireasmaller
displacement within the distorted lattice structure to reach a new equilibrium position. Thus,
a lower energy level is needed to realign the atoms into the new positions than if the lattice
were missing the dislocation. A lower stress level is therefore required to effect the
deformation. Because the new position manifests a similar distorted lattice, movement of
atoms at the dislocation continues at the lower stress level.
The slip phenomenon and the influence of dislocations have been explained here
on a very microscopic basis. On a larger scale, slip occurs many times over throughout the
metal when subjected to a deforming load, thus causing it to exhibit the familiar
macroscopic behavior. Dislocations represent a good-news–bad-news situation. Because
of dislocations, the metal is more ductile and yields more readily to plastic deformation
(forming) during manufacturing. However, from a product design viewpoint, the metal is
not nearly as strong as it would be in the absence of dislocations.
Twinning is a second way in which metal crystals plastically deform. Twinning can be
defined as a mechanism of plastic deformation in which atoms on one side of a plane (called
the twinning plane) are shifted to form a mirror image of the other side of the plane. It is
illustrated in Figure 2.13. The mechanism is important in HCP metals (e.g., magnesium, zinc)
FIGURE 2.12
Effect of dislocations in the lattice structure under stress. In the series of diagrams, the
movement of the dislocation allows deformation to occur under a lower stress than in a perfect lattice.
FIGURE 2.13
Twinning
involves the formation of an
atomic mirror image (i.e., a
‘‘twin’’) on the opposite side
of the twinning plane: (a) be-
fore, and (b) after twinning.
(a)
(b)
34
Chapter 2/The Nature of Materials

because they do not slip readily. Besides structure, another factor in twinning is the rate of
deformation. The slip mechanism requires more time than twinning, which can occur almost
instantaneously. Thus, in situations in which the deformation rate is very high, metals twin
that would otherwise slip. Low carbon steel is an example that illustrates this rate sensitivity;
when subjected to high strain rates it twins, whereas at moderate rates it deforms by slip.
2.3.4 GRAINS AND GRAIN BOUNDARIES IN METALS
Agivenblockofmetalmaycontainmillionsofindividualcrystals,calledgrains.Eachgrainhas
itsownuniquelatticeorientation;butcollectively,thegrainsarerandomlyorientedwithinthe
block. Such a structure is referred to as polycrystalline. It is easy to understand how such a
structureisthenaturalstateofthematerial.Whentheblockiscooledfromthemoltenstateand
beginstosolidify,nucleationofindividualcrystalsoccursatrandompositionsandorientations
throughoutthe liquid.Asthesecrystals grow they finallyinterfere witheachother,formingat
theirinterfaceasurfacedefect—agrainboundary.Thegrainboundaryconsistsofatransition
zone, perhaps only a few atoms thick, in which the atoms are not aligned with either grain.
Thesizeofthegrainsinthemetalblockisdeterminedbythenumberofnucleationsites
in the molten material and the cooling rate of the mass, among other factors. In a casting
process, the nucleation sites are often created by the relatively cold walls of the mold, which
motivate a somewhat preferred grain orientation at these walls.
Grainsizeisinverselyrelatedtocoolingrate:Fastercoolingpromotessmallergrainsize,
whereas slower cooling has the opposite effect. Grain size is important in metals because it
affects mechanical properties. Smaller grain size is generally preferable from a design view-
pointbecauseitmeanshigherstrengthandhardness.Itisalsodesirableincertainmanufactur-
ingoperations(e.g.,metalforming),becauseitmeanshigherductilityduringdeformationand
a better surface on the finished product.
Another factor influencing mechanical properties is the presence of grain boundaries
in the metal. They represent imperfections in the crystalline structure that interrupt the
continued movement of dislocations. This helps to explain why smaller grain size—
therefore more grains and more grain boundaries—increases the strength of the metal.
By interfering with dislocation movement, grain boundaries also contribute to the charac-
teristicpropertyofametaltobecomestrongerasitisdeformed.Thepropertyiscalled strain
hardening, and it is examined more closely in the discussion of mechanical properties in
Chapter 3.
2.4
NONCRYSTALLINE (AMORPHOUS) STRUCTURES
Many important materials are noncrystalline—liquids and gases, for example. Water and air
have noncrystalline structures. A metal loses its crystalline structure when it is melted.
Mercury is a liquid metal at room temperature, with its melting point of 38C (37F).
Importantclassesofengineeringmaterialshave anoncrystalline formintheirsolidstate; the
term amorphous is often used to describe these materials. Glass, many plastics, and rubber
fall intothiscategory. Many important plastics are mixtures of crystalline andnoncrystalline
forms. Even metals can be amorphous rather than crystalline, given that the cooling rate
during transformation from liquid to solid is fast enough to inhibit the atoms from arranging
themselves into their preferred regular patterns. This can happen, for instance, if the molten
metal is poured between cold, closely spaced, rotating rolls.
Two closely related features distinguish noncrystalline from crystalline materials:
(1) absence of a long-range order in the molecular structure, and (2) differences in
melting and thermal expansion characteristics.
Section 2.4/Noncrystalline (Amorphous) Structures
35

The difference in molecular structure can be visualized with reference to Figure 2.14.
Thecloselypackedandrepeatingpatternofthe crystalstructureisshownontheleft; andthe
less dense and random arrangement of atoms in the noncrystalline material on the right.
The difference is demonstrated by a metal when it melts. The more loosely packed atoms in
the molten metal show an increase in volume (reduction in density) compared with the
material’s solid crystalline state. This effect is characteristic of most materials when melted.
(Ice is a notable exception; liquid water is denser than solid ice.) It is a general characteristic
of liquids and solid amorphous materials that they are absent of long-range order as on the
right in our figure.
The melting phenomenon will now be examined in more detail, and in doing so, the
secondimportantdifferencebetweencrystallineandnoncrystallinestructureswillbedefined.
As indicated, a metal experiences an increase in volume when it melts from the solid to the
liquid state. For a pure metal, this volumetric change occurs rather abruptly, at a constant
temperature (i.e., the melting temperature Tm), as indicated in Figure 2.15. The change
represents a discontinuity from the slopes on either side in the plot. The gradual slopes
characterize the metal’s thermal expansion—the change in volume as a function of tempera-
ture,whichisusuallydifferentinthesolidandliquidstates.Associatedwiththesuddenvolume
increase as the metal transforms from solid to liquid at the melting point is the addition of a
certain quantity of heat, called the heat of fusion, which causes the atoms to lose the dense,
regular arrangement of the crystalline structure. The process is reversible; it operates in both
directions. If the molten metal is cooled through its melting temperature, the same abrupt
changeinvolumeoccurs(exceptthatitisadecrease),andthesamequantityofheatisgivenoff
by the metal.
Anamorphousmaterialexhibitsquitedifferentbehaviorthanthatofapuremetalwhen
it changes from solid to liquid, as shown in Figure 2.15. The process is again reversible, but
observe the behavior of the amorphous material during cooling from the liquid state, rather
FIGURE 2.14
Illustration of
difference in structure between:
(a) crystalline and (b) noncrystalline
materials. The crystal structure is
regular, repeating, and denser,
whereas the noncrystalline structure
is more loosely packed and random.
FIGURE 2.15
Characteristic change
in volume for a pure metal (a crystalline
structure), compared to the same
volumetric changes in glass (a
noncrystalline structure).
36
Chapter 2/The Nature of Materials

than during melting from the solid, as before. Glass (silica, SiO2) is used to illustrate. At high
temperatures, glass is a true liquid, and the molecules are free to move about as in the usual
definition of a liquid. As the glass cools, it gradually transforms into the solid state, going
through a transition phase, called a supercooled liquid, before finally becoming rigid. It does
notshowthesuddenvolumetricchangethatischaracteristicofcrystallinematerials;instead,it
passesthroughitsmeltingtemperature Tmwithoutachangeinitsthermalexpansionslope.In
this supercooled liquid region, the material becomes increasingly viscous as the temperature
continues to decrease. As it cools further, a point is finally reached at which the supercooled
liquidconvertstoasolid.Thisiscalledtheglass-transitiontemperatureTg.Atthispoint,there
is a change in the thermal expansion slope. (It might be more precise to refer to it as the
thermalcontractionslope;however,theslopeisthesameforexpansionandcontraction.)The
rate of thermal expansion is lower for the solid material than for the supercooled liquid.
The difference in behavior between crystalline and noncrystalline materials can be
traced to the response of their respective atomic structures to changes in temperature. When
a pure metal solidifies from the molten state, the atoms arrange themselves into a regular and
recurring structure. This crystal structure is much more compact than the random and loosely
packed liquid from which it formed. Thus, the process of solidification produces the abrupt
volumetric contraction observed in Figure 2.15 for the crystalline material. By contrast,
amorphous materials do not achieve this repeating and closely packed structure at low
temperatures. The atomic structure is the same random arrangement as in the liquid state;
thus, there is no abrupt volumetric change as these materials transition from liquid to solid.
2.5
ENGINEERING MATERIALS
Let us summarize how atomic structure, bonding, and crystal structure (or absence
thereof) are related to the type of engineering material—metals, ceramics, and polymer.
Metals
Metals have crystalline structures in the solid state, almost without exception.
The unit cellsof these crystal structures arealmostalwaysBCC, FCC, or HCP. The atoms of
the metals are held together by metallic bonding, which means that their valence electrons
can move about with relative freedom (compared with the other types of atomic and
molecular bonding). These structures and bonding generally make the metals strong and
hard. Many of the metals are quite ductile (capable of being deformed, which is useful in
manufacturing), especially the FCC metals. Other general properties of metals related to
structure and bonding include: high electrical and thermal conductivity, opaqueness
(impervious to light rays), and reflectivity (capacity to reflect light rays).
Ceramics
Ceramic molecules are characterized by ionic or covalent bonding, or both.
The metallic atoms release or sharetheiroutermost electrons to thenonmetallicatoms, and
a strong attractive force exists within the molecules. The general properties that result from
these bonding mechanisms include: high hardness and stiffness (even at elevated tempera-
tures), brittleness (no ductility), electrical insulation (nonconducting) properties, refrac-
toriness (being thermally resistant), and chemical inertness.
Ceramics possess either a crystalline or noncrystalline structure. Most ceramics have
a crystal structure, whereas glasses based on silica (SiO2) are amorphous. In certain cases,
either structure can exist in the same ceramic material. For example, silica occurs in nature
as crystalline quartz. Whenthis mineralis melted and then cooled,it solidifies to form fused
silica, which has a noncrystalline structure.
Polymers
A polymer molecule consists of many repeating mers to form very large
molecules held together by covalent bonding. Elements in polymers are usually carbon
Section 2.5/Engineering Materials
37

plus one or more other elements such as hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and chlorine.
Secondary bonding (van der Waals) holds the molecules together within the aggregate
material (intermolecular bonding). Polymers have either a glassy structure or mixture of
glassy and crystalline. There are differences among the three polymer types. In thermo-
plastic polymers, the molecules consist of long chains of mers in a linear structure. These
materials can be heated and cooled without substantially altering their linear structure. In
thermosetting polymers, the molecules transform into a rigid, three-dimensional struc-
ture on cooling from a heated plastic condition. If thermosetting polymers are reheated,
they degrade chemically rather than soften. Elastomers have large molecules with coiled
structures. The uncoiling and recoiling of the molecules when subjected to stress cycles
motivate the aggregate material to exhibit its characteristic elastic behavior.
The molecular structure and bonding of polymers provide them with the following
typical properties: low density, high electrical resistivity (some polymers are used as
insulating materials), and low thermal conductivity. Strength and stiffness of polymers
vary widely. Some are strong and rigid (although not matching the strength and stiffness of
metals or ceramics), whereas others exhibit highly elastic behavior.
REFERENCES
[1] Callister, W. D., Jr., Materials Science and Engineer-
ing: An Introduction, 7th ed. John Wiley & Sons,
Hoboken, New Jersey, 2007.
[2] Dieter, G. E. Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd ed.
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1986.
[3] Flinn, R. A., and Trojan, P. K. Engineering Materials
and Their Applications, 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1995.
[4] Guy, A. G., and Hren, J. J. Elements of Physical
Metallurgy, 3rd ed. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mas-
sachusetts, 1974.
[5] Van Vlack, L. H. Elements of Materials Science
and Engineering, 6th ed. Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Massachusetts, 1989.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
2.1.
The elements listed in the Periodic Table can be
divided into three categories. What are these cate-
gories? Give an example of each.
2.2.
Which elements are the noble metals?
2.3.
What is the difference between primary and sec-
ondary bonding in the structure of materials?
2.4.
Describe how ionic bonding works.
2.5.
What is the difference between crystalline and
noncrystalline structures in materials?
2.6.
What are some common point defects in a crystal
lattice structure?
2.7.
Define the difference between elastic and plastic
deformation in terms of the effect on the crystal
lattice structure.
2.8.
How do grain boundaries contribute to the strain
hardening phenomenon in metals?
2.9.
Identify some materials that have a crystalline
structure.
2.10.
Identify
some
materials
that
possess
a
non-
crystalline structure.
2.11.
What is the basic difference in the solidification (or
melting) process between crystalline and non-
crystalline structures?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 20 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
38
Chapter 2/The Nature of Materials

omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
2.1.
The basic structural unit of matter is which one of
the following: (a) atom, (b) electron, (c) element,
(d) molecule, or (e) nucleus?
2.2.
Approximately how many different elements have
been identified (one best answer): (a) 10, (b) 50,
(c) 100, (d) 200, or (e) 500?
2.3.
In the Periodic Table, the elements can be divided
into which of the following categories (three best
answers): (a) ceramics, (b) gases, (c) liquids,
(d) metals, (e) nonmetals, (f) polymers, (g) semi-
metals, and (h) solids?
2.4.
The element with the lowest density and smallest
atomic weight is which one of the following:
(a) aluminum, (b) argon, (c) helium, (d) hydrogen,
or (e) magnesium?
2.5.
Which of the following bond types are classified as
primary bonds (three correct answers): (a) covalent
bonding, (b) hydrogen bonding, (c) ionic bonding,
(d) metallic bonding, and (e) van der Waals forces?
2.6.
How many atoms are there in the face-centered
cubic (FCC) unit cell (one correct answer): (a) 8,
(b) 9, (c) 10, (d) 12, or (e) 14?
2.7.
Which of the following are not point defects in
a crystal lattice structure (three correct answers):
(a) edge dislocation, (b) grain boundaries, (c) inter-
stitialcy, (d) Schottky defect, (e) screw dislocation,
or (f) vacancy?
2.8.
Which one of the following crystal structures has the
fewest slip directions, thus making the metals with
this structure generally more difficult to deform at
room temperature: (a) BCC, (b) FCC, or (c) HCP?
2.9.
Grain boundaries are an example of which one of
the following types of crystal structure defects:
(a) dislocation, (b) Frenkel defect, (c) line defects,
(d) point defects, or (e) surface defects?
2.10.
Twinningiswhichofthefollowing(threebestanswers):
(a) elastic deformation, (b) mechanism of plastic
deformation, (c) more likely at high deformation
rates, (d) more likely in metals with HCP structure,
(e) slip mechanism, and (f) type of dislocation?
2.11.
Polymers are characterized by which of the fol-
lowing
bonding
types
(two
correct
answers):
(a) adhesive, (b) covalent, (c) hydrogen, (d) ionic,
(e) metallic, and (f) van der Waals?
Multiple Choice Quiz
39

3
MECHANICAL
PROPERTIES
OF MATERIALS
Chapter Contents
3.1
Stress–Strain Relationships
3.1.1
Tensile Properties
3.1.2
Compression Properties
3.1.3
Bending and Testing of Brittle Materials
3.1.4
Shear Properties
3.2
Hardness
3.2.1
Hardness Tests
3.2.2
Hardness of Various Materials
3.3
Effect of Temperature on Properties
3.4
Fluid Properties
3.5
Viscoelastic Behavior of Polymers
Mechanical properties of a material determine its behavior
when subjected to mechanical stresses. These properties in-
clude elastic modulus, ductility, hardness, and various mea-
sures of strength. Mechanical properties are important in
design because the function and performance of a product
depend on its capacity to resist deformation under the stresses
encountered in service. In design, the usual objective is for the
product and its components to withstand these stresses with-
out significant change in geometry. This capability depends on
properties such as elastic modulus and yield strength. In
manufacturing,theobjectiveisjusttheopposite.Here,stresses
that exceed the yield strength of the material must be applied
to alter its shape. Mechanical processes such as forming and
machining succeed by developing forces that exceed the
material’s resistance to deformation. Thus, there is the follow-
ing dilemma: Mechanical properties that are desirable to the
designer, such as high strength, usually make the manufacture
of the product more difficult. It is helpful for the manufactur-
ing engineer to appreciate the design viewpoint and for the
designer to be aware of the manufacturing viewpoint.
This chapter examines the mechanical properties of
materials that are most relevant in manufacturing.
3.1
STRESS–STRAIN
RELATIONSHIPS
There are three types of static stresses to which materials can
be subjected: tensile, compressive, and shear. Tensile stresses
tend to stretch the material, compressive stresses tend to
squeeze it, and shear involves stresses that tend to cause
adjacent portions of the material to slide against each other.
The stress–strain curve is the basic relationship that describes
the mechanical properties of materials for all three types.
40

3.1.1 TENSILE PROPERTIES
The tensile test is the most common procedure for studying the stress–strain relationship,
particularly for metals. In the test, a force is applied that pulls the material, tending to
elongate it and reduce its diameter, as shown in Figure 3.1(a). Standards by ASTM
(American Society for Testing and Materials) specify the preparation of the test specimen
and theconductofthetestitself. The typical specimenandgeneral setupof the tensiletestis
illustrated in Figure 3.1(b) and (c), respectively.
The starting test specimen has an original length Lo and area Ao. The length is
measured as the distance between the gage marks, and the area is measured as the (usually
round) cross section of the specimen. During the testing of a metal, the specimen stretches,
thennecks, andfinallyfractures, asshowninFigure 3.2.Theloadandthe change inlengthof
the specimen are recorded as testing proceeds, to provide the data required to determine
FIGURE 3.1
Tensile test: (a) tensile force applied in (1) and (2) resulting elongation of material; (b) typical test
specimen; and (c) setup of the tensile test.
FIGURE 3.2
Typical
progress of a tensile test:
(1) beginning of test, no
load; (2) uniform elonga-
tion and reduction of
cross-sectional area;
(3) continued elongation,
maximum load reached;
(4) necking begins, load
begins to decrease; and
(5) fracture. If pieces are
put back together as in,
(6) ﬁnal length can be
measured.
Section 3.1/Stress–Strain Relationships
41

the stress–strain relationship. There are two different types of stress–strain curves:
(1) engineering stress–strain and (2) true stress–strain. The first is more important in
design, and the second is more important in manufacturing.
Engineering Stress–Strain
The engineering stress and strain in a tensile test are defined
relative to the original area and length of the test specimen. These values are of interest in
design because the designer expects that the strains experienced by any component of the
product will not significantly change its shape. The components are designed to withstand
the anticipated stresses encountered in service.
A typical engineering stress–strain curve from a tensile test of a metallic specimen
is illustrated in Figure 3.3. The engineering stress at any point on the curve is defined as
the force divided by the original area:
s ¼ F
Ao
ð3:1Þ
where s ¼ engineering stress, MPa (lb/in2), F ¼applied force in the test, N (lb), and
Ao ¼ original area of the test specimen, mm2 (in2).
The engineering strain at any point in the test is given by
e ¼ L  Lo
Lo
ð3:2Þ
where e ¼ engineering strain, mm/mm (in/in); L ¼ length at any point during the
elongation, mm (in); and Lo ¼ original gage length, mm (in).
The units of engineering strain are given as mm/mm (in/in), but think of it as
representing elongation per unit length, without units.
The stress–strain relationship in Figure 3.3 has two regions, indicating two distinct
forms of behavior: (1) elastic and (2) plastic. In the elastic region, the relationship between
stress and strain is linear, and the material exhibits elastic behavior by returning to its
original length when the load (stress) is released. The relationship is defined by Hooke’s
law:
s ¼ Ee
ð3:3Þ
where E ¼ modulus of elasticity, MPa (lb/in2), a measure of the inherent stiffness of a
material.
FIGURE 3.3
Typical
engineering stress–strain plot
in a tensile test of a metal.
42
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

It is a constant of proportionality whose value is different for different materials.
Table 3.1 presents typical values for several materials, metals and nonmetals.
Asstressincreases,somepointinthelinearrelationshipisfinallyreachedatwhichthe
material begins to yield. This yield point Yof the material can be identified in the figure by
the change in slope at the end of the linear region. Because the start of yielding is usually
difficulttosee ina plot oftestdata(it doesnotusuallyoccurasanabrupt changeinslope),Y
is typically defined as the stress at which a strain offset of 0.2% from the straight line has
occurred. More specifically, it is the point where the stress–strain curve for the material
intersects a line that is parallel to the straight portion of the curve but offset from it by a
strain of 0.2%. The yield point is a strength characteristic of the material, and is therefore
often referred to as the yield strength (other names include yield stress and elastic limit).
The yield point marks the transition to the plastic region and the start of plastic
deformation of the material. The relationship between stress and strain is no longer guided
by Hooke’s law. As the load is increased beyond the yield point, elongation of the specimen
proceeds, but at a much faster rate than before, causing the slope of the curve to change
dramatically, as shown in Figure 3.3. Elongation is accompanied by a uniform reduction in
cross-sectional area, consistent with maintaining constant volume. Finally, the applied load
F reaches a maximum value, and the engineering stress calculated at this point is called the
tensile strength or ultimate tensile strength of the material. It is denoted as TS where
TS ¼ Fmax=Ao. TS and Y are important strength properties in design calculations. (They
are also used in manufacturing calculations.) Some typical values of yield strength and
tensile strength are listed in Table 3.2 for selected metals. Conventional tensile testing of
ceramics is difficult, and an alternative test is used to measure the strength of these brittle
materials (Section 3.1.3). Polymers differ in their strength properties from metals and
ceramics because of viscoelasticity (Section 3.5).
To the right of the tensile strength on the stress–strain curve, the load begins to decline,
and the test specimen typically begins a process of localized elongation known as necking.
Instead of continuing to strain uniformly throughout its length, straining becomes concen-
trated in one small section of the specimen. The area of that section narrows down (necks)
significantly until failure occurs. The stress calculated immediately before failure is known as
the fracture stress.
The amount of strain that the material can endure before failure is also a mechanical
property of interest in many manufacturing processes. The common measure of this
property is ductility, the ability of a material to plastically strain without fracture. This
TABLE 3.1
Elastic modulus for selected materials.
Modulus of Elasticity
Modulus of Elasticity
Metals
MPa
lb/in2
Ceramics and Polymers
MPa
lb/in2
Aluminum and alloys
69  103
10  106
Alumina
345  103
50  106
Cast iron
138  103
20  106
Diamonda
1035  103
150  106
Copper and alloys
110  103
16  106
Plate glass
69  103
10  106
Iron
209  103
30  106
Silicon carbide
448  103
65  106
Lead
21  103
3  106
Tungsten carbide
552  103
80  106
Magnesium
48  103
7  106
Nylon
3.0  103
0.40  106
Nickel
209  103
30  106
Phenol formaldehyde
7.0  103
1.00  106
Steel
209  103
30  106
Polyethylene (low density)
0.2  103
0.03  106
Titanium
117  103
17  106
Polyethylene (high density)
0.7  103
0.10  106
Tungsten
407  103
59  106
Polystyrene
3.0  103
0.40  106
aCompiled from [8], [10], [11], [15], [16], and other sources.
Although diamond is not a ceramic, it is often compared with the ceramic materials.
Section 3.1/Stress–Strain Relationships
43

measure can be taken as either elongation or area reduction. Elongation is defined as
EL ¼ Lf  Lo
Lo
ð3:4Þ
where EL ¼ elongation, often expressed as a percent; Lf ¼ specimen length at fracture,
mm (in), measured as the distance between gage marks after the two parts of the specimen
have been put back together; and Lo ¼ original specimen length, mm (in).
Area reduction is defined as
AR ¼ Ao  Af
Ao
ð3:5Þ
where AR ¼ area reduction, often expressed as a percent; Af ¼ area of the cross section at
the point of fracture, mm2(in2); and Ao ¼ original area, mm2 (in2).
There are problems with both of these ductility measures because of necking that
occurs in metallic test specimens and the associated nonuniform effect on elongation and
area reduction. Despite these difficulties, percent elongation and percent area reduction
are the most commonly used measures of ductility in engineering practice. Some typical
values of percent elongation for various materials (mostly metals) are listed in Table 3.3.
True Stress–Strain
Thoughtful readers may be troubled by the use of the original area
of the test specimen to calculate engineering stress, rather than the actual (instantaneous)
area that becomes increasingly smaller as the test proceeds. If the actual area were used,
the calculated stress value would be higher. The stress value obtained by dividing the
instantaneous value of area into the applied load is defined as the true stress:
s ¼ F
A
ð3:6Þ
where s ¼ true stress, MPa (lb/in2); F ¼ force, N (lb); and A ¼ actual (instantaneous) area
resisting the load, mm2 (in2).
Similarly, true strain provides a more realistic assessment of the ‘‘instantaneous’’
elongation per unit length of the material. The value of true strain in a tensile test can be
estimated by dividing the total elongation into small increments, calculating the engineer-
ing strain for each increment on the basis of its starting length, and then adding up the
strain values. In the limit, true strain is defined as
e ¼
ZL
Lo
dL
L ¼ ln L
Lo
ð3:7Þ
TABLE 3.2
Yield strength and tensile strength for selected metals.
Yield Strength
Tensile
Strength
Yield Strength
Tensile
Strength
Metal
MPa
lb/in2
MPa
lb/in2
Metal
MPa
lb/in2
MPa
lb/in2
Aluminum, annealed
28
4,000
69
10,000
Nickel, annealed
150
22,000
450
65,000
Aluminum, CWa
105
15,000
125
18,000
Steel, low Ca
175
25,000
300
45,000
Aluminum alloysa
175
25,000
350
50,000
Steel, high Ca
400
60,000
600
90,000
Cast irona
275
40,000
275
40,000
Steel, alloya
500
75,000
700
100,000
Copper, annealed
70
10,000
205
30,000
Steel, stainlessa
275
40,000
650
95,000
Copper alloysa
205
30,000
410
60,000
Titanium, pure
350
50,000
515
75,000
Magnesium alloysa
175
25,000
275
40,000
Titanium alloy
800
120,000
900
130,000
Compiled from [8], [10], [11], [16], and other sources.
aValues given are typical. For alloys, there is a wide range in strength values depending on composition and treatment (e.g., heat
treatment, work hardening).
44
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

where L ¼ instantaneous length at any moment during elongation.
At the end of the test (or other deformation), the final strain value can be
calculated using L ¼ Lf.
When the engineering stress–strain data in Figure 3.3 are plotted using the true stress
and strain values, the resulting curve would appear as in Figure 3.4. In the elastic region, the
plot is virtually the same as before. Strain values are small, and true strain is nearly equal to
engineering strain for most metals of interest. The respective stress values are also very close
to each other. The reason for these near equalities is that the cross-sectional area of the test
specimen is not significantly reduced in the elastic region. Thus, Hooke’s law can be used to
relate true stress to true strain: s ¼ E e.
The difference between the true stress–strain curve and its engineering counterpart
occurs in the plastic region. The stress values are higher in the plastic region because the
TABLE 3.3
Ductility as a percent of elongation (typical values) for various selected
materials.
Material
Elongation
Material
Elongation
Metals
Metals, continued
Aluminum, annealed
40%
Steel, low Ca
30%
Aluminum, cold worked
8%
Steel, high Ca
10%
Aluminum alloys, annealeda
20%
Steel, alloya
20%
Aluminum alloys, heat treateda
8%
Steel, stainless, austenitica
55%
Aluminum alloys, casta
4%
Titanium, nearly pure
20%
Cast iron, graya
0.6%
Zinc alloy
10%
Copper, annealed
45%
Ceramics
0b
Copper, cold worked
10%
Polymers
Copper alloy: brass, annealed
60%
Thermoplastic polymers
100%
Magnesium alloysa
10%
Thermosetting polymers
1%
Nickel, annealed
45%
Elastomers (e.g., rubber)
1%c
Compiled from [8], [10], [11], [16], and other sources.
aValues given are typical. For alloys, there is a range of ductility that depends on composition and
treatment (e.g., heat treatment, degree of work hardening).
bCeramic materials are brittle; they withstand elastic strain but virtually no plastic strain.
cElastomers endure significant elastic strain, but their plastic strain is very limited, only around 1% being
typical.
FIGURE 3.4
True
stress–strain curve for the
previous engineering
stress–strain plot in
Figure 3.3.
Section 3.1/Stress–Strain Relationships
45

instantaneous cross-sectional area of the specimen, which has been continuously reduced
during elongation, is now used in the computation. As in the previous curve, a downturn
finallyoccursasaresultofnecking.Adashedlineisusedinthefiguretoindicatetheprojected
continuation of the true stress–strain plot if necking had not occurred.
As strain becomes significant in the plastic region, the values of true strain and
engineering strain diverge. True strain can be related to the corresponding engineering
strain by
e ¼ ln 1 þ e
ð
Þ
ð3:8Þ
Similarly, true stress and engineering stress can be related by the expression
s ¼ s 1 þ e
ð
Þ
ð3:9Þ
In Figure 3.4, note that stress increases continuously in the plastic region until necking
begins. When this happened in the engineering stress–strain curve, its significance was lost
because an admittedly erroneous area value was used to calculate stress. Now when the true
stress also increases, it cannot be dismissed so lightly. What it means is that the metal is
becoming stronger as strain increases. This is the property called strain hardening that was
mentioned in the previous chapter in the discussion of metallic crystal structures, and it is a
property that most metals exhibit to a greater or lesser degree.
Strainhardening,orworkhardeningasitisoftencalled,isanimportantfactorincertain
manufacturing processes, particularly metal forming. Consider the behavior of a metal as it is
affected by this property. If the portion of the true stress–strain curve representing the plastic
region were plotted on a log–log scale, the result would be a linear relationship, as shown in
Figure 3.5. Because it is a straight line in this transformation of the data, the relationship
between true stress and true strain in the plastic region can be expressed as
s ¼ Ken
ð3:10Þ
This equation is called the flow curve, and it provides a good approximation of the
behavior of metals in the plastic region, including their capacity for strain hardening. The
constant K is called the strength coefficient, MPa (lb/in2), and it equals the value of true stress
at a true strain value equal to one. The parameter n is called the strain hardening exponent,
and it is the slope of the line in Figure 3.5. Its value is directly related to a metal’s tendency to
work harden. Typical values of K and n for selected metals are given in Table 3.4.
Necking in a tensile test and metal-forming operations that stretch the workpart is
closely related to strain hardening. As the test specimen is elongated during the initial part of
the test (before necking begins), uniform straining occurs throughout the length because if
any element in the specimen becomes strained more than the surrounding metal, its strength
increases because of work hardening, thus making it more resistant to additional strain until
FIGURE 3.5
True stress–strain
curve plotted on log–log scale.
46
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

thesurroundingmetal hasbeenstrainedanequalamount.Finally,thestrainbecomessolarge
that uniform straining cannot be sustained. Aweak point in the length develops (because of
buildup of dislocations at grain boundaries, impurities in the metal, or other factors), and
necking is initiated, leading to failure. Empirical evidence reveals that necking begins for a
particular metal when the true strain reaches a value equal to the strain-hardening exponent
n. Therefore, ahigher n value means that the metal canbe strained further before the onset of
necking during tensile loading.
Types of Stress–Strain Relationships
Much information about elastic–plastic behavior
is provided by the true stress–strain curve. As indicated, Hooke’s law s ¼ Ee
ð
Þ governs the
metal’s behavior in the elastic region, and the flow curve s ¼ Ken
ð
Þ determines the behavior
in the plastic region. Three basic forms of stress–strain relationship describe the behavior of
nearly all types of solid materials, shown in Figure 3.6:
1. Perfectly elastic. The behavior of this material is defined completely by its stiffness,
indicated by the modulus of elasticity E. It fractures rather than yielding to plastic flow.
Brittle materials such as ceramics, many cast irons, and thermosetting polymers possess
stress–straincurves that fall into this category. These materialsare not good candidates for
forming operations.
2. Elastic and perfectly plastic. This material has a stiffness defined by E. Once the yield
strength Y is reached, the material deforms plastically at the same stress level. The flow
curve is given by K ¼ Yand n ¼ 0. Metals behave in this fashion when they have been
TABLE 3.4
Typical values of strength coefﬁcient K and strain hardening exponent n
for selected metals.
Strength Coefficient, K
Strain Hardening
Exponent, n
Material
MPa
lb/in2
Aluminum, pure, annealed
175
25,000
0.20
Aluminum alloy, annealeda
240
35,000
0.15
Aluminum alloy, heat treated
400
60,000
0.10
Copper, pure, annealed
300
45,000
0.50
Copper alloy: brassa
700
100,000
0.35
Steel, low C, annealeda
500
75,000
0.25
Steel, high C, annealeda
850
125,000
0.15
Steel, alloy, annealeda
700
100,000
0.15
Steel, stainless, austenitic, annealed
1200
175,000
0.40
Compiled from [9], [10], [11], and other sources.
aValues of K and n vary according to composition, heat treatment, and work hardening.
FIGURE 3.6
Three
categories of stress–
strain relationship:
(a) perfectly elastic,
(b) elastic and perfectly
plastic, and (c) elastic and
strain hardening.
Section 3.1/Stress–Strain Relationships
47

heated to sufficiently high temperatures that they recrystallize rather than strain harden
during deformation. Lead exhibits this behavior at room temperature because room
temperature is above the recrystallization point for lead.
3. Elastic and strain hardening. This material obeys Hooke’s law in the elastic region. It
begins to flow at its yield strength Y. Continued deformation requires an ever-increasing
stress, given by a flow curve whose strength coefficient K is greater than Y and whose
strain-hardening exponent n is greater than zero. The flow curve is generally represented
as a linear function on a natural logarithmic plot. Most ductile metals behave this way
when cold worked.
Manufacturing processes that deform materials through the application of tensile
stresses include wire and bar drawing (Section 19.6) and stretch forming (Section 20.6.1).
3.1.2 COMPRESSION PROPERTIES
A compression test applies a load that squeezes a cylindrical specimen between two
platens, as illustrated in Figure 3.7. As the specimen is compressed, its height is reduced
and its cross-sectional area is increased. Engineering stress is defined as
s ¼ F
Ao
ð3:11Þ
where Ao ¼ original area of the specimen.
This is the same definition of engineering stress used in the tensile test. The
engineering strain is defined as
e ¼ h  ho
ho
ð3:12Þ
where h ¼ height of the specimen at a particular moment into the test, mm (in); and
ho ¼ starting height, mm (in).
Because the height is decreased during compression, the value of e will be negative.
The negative sign is usually ignored when expressing values of compression strain.
When engineering stress is plotted against engineering strain in a compression test, the
results appear as in Figure 3.8. The curve is divided into elastic and plastic regions, as before,
FIGURE 3.7
Compression test:
(a) compression force
applied to test piece in
(1), and (2) resulting
change in height; and
(b) setup for the test, with
size of test specimen
exaggerated.
48
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

but the shape of the plastic portion of the curve is different from its tensile test complement.
Because compression causes the cross section to increase (rather than decrease as in the
tensile test), the load increases more rapidly than previously. This results in a higher value of
calculated engineering stress.
Something else happens in the compression test that contributes to the increase in
stress. As the cylindrical specimen is squeezed, friction at the surfaces in contact with the
platens tends to prevent the ends of the cylinder from spreading. Additional energy is
consumed by this friction during the test, and this results in a higher applied force. It also
shows up as an increase in the computed engineering stress. Hence, owing to the increase in
cross-sectional area and friction between the specimen and the platens, the characteristic
engineering stress–strain curve is obtained in a compression test as seen in the figure.
Another consequence of the friction between the surfaces is that the material near
themiddleofthespecimenispermitted toincrease inarea much more thanattheends. This
results in the characteristic barreling of the specimen, as seen in Figure 3.9.
Although differences exist between the engineering stress–strain curves in tension and
compression, when the respective data are plotted as true stress–strain, the relationships are
nearlyidentical(foralmostallmaterials).Becausetensiletestresultsaremoreabundantinthe
literature, values of the flow curve parameters (K and n) can be derived from tensile test data
FIGURE 3.8
Typical engineering stress–
strain curve for a compression test.
FIGURE 3.9
Barreling effect in a compression test:
(1) start of test; and (2) after considerable compression
has occurred.
Section 3.1/Stress–Strain Relationships
49

and applied with equal validity to a compression operation. What must be done in using the
tensile test results for a compression operation is to ignore the effect of necking, a phenome-
non that is peculiar to straining induced by tensile stresses. In compression, there is no
corresponding collapse of the work. In previous plots of tensile stress–strain curves, the data
were extended beyond the point of necking by means of the dashed lines. The dashed lines
better represent the behavior of the material in compression than the actual tensile test data.
Compression operations in metal forming are much more common than stretching
operations. Important compression processes in industry include rolling, forging, and
extrusion (Chapter 19).
3.1.3 BENDING AND TESTING OF BRITTLE MATERIALS
Bending operations are used to form metal plates and sheets. As shown in Figure 3.10,
the process of bending a rectangular cross section subjects the material to tensile stresses
(and strains) in the outer half of the bent section and compressive stresses (and strains) in
the inner half. If the material does not fracture, it becomes permanently (plastically) bent
as shown in (3.1) of Figure 3.10.
Hard, brittle materials (e.g., ceramics), which possess elasticity but little or no
plasticity, are often tested by a method that subjects the specimen to a bending load.
These materials do not respond well to traditional tensile testing because of problems in
preparing the test specimens and possible misalignment of the press jaws that hold the
specimen. The bending test (also known as the flexure test) is used to test the strength of
these materials, using a setup illustrated in the first diagram in Figure 3.10. In this
procedure, a specimen of rectangular cross section is positioned between two supports,
and a load is applied at its center. In this configuration, the test is called a three-point
bending test. A four-point configuration is also sometimes used. These brittle materials do
not flex to theexaggeratedextentshown inFigure 3.10;insteadthey deform elastically until
immediately before fracture. Failure usually occurs because the ultimate tensile strength of
the outer fibers of the specimen has been exceeded. This results in cleavage, a failure mode
associated with ceramics and metals operating at low service temperatures, in which
separation rather than slip occurs along certain crystallographic planes. The strength value
derived from this test is called the transverse rupture strength, calculated from the formula
TRS ¼ 1:5 FL
bt2
ð3:13Þ
FIGURE 3.10
Bending of a rectangular cross section results in both tensile and compressive stresses in the material:
(1) initial loading; (2) highly stressed and strained specimen; and (3) bent part.
50
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

where TRS ¼ transverse rupture strength, MPa (lb/in2); F ¼applied load at fracture, N
(lb); L ¼ length of the specimen between supports, mm (in); and b and t are the dimensions
of the cross section of the specimen as shown in the figure, mm (in).
The flexure test is also used for certain nonbrittle materials such as thermoplastic
polymers. In this case, because the material is likely to deform rather than fracture, TRS
cannot be determined based on failure of the specimen. Instead, either of two measures is
used: (1) the load recorded at a given level of deflection, or (2) the deflection observed at a
given load.
3.1.4 SHEAR PROPERTIES
Shear involves application of stresses in opposite directions on either side of a thin element
to deflect it, as shown in Figure 3.11. The shear stress is defined as
t ¼ F
A
ð3:14Þ
wheret ¼ shear stress, lb/in2 (MPa); F ¼appliedforce, N(lb); and A ¼ area over which the
force is applied, in2 (mm2).
Shear strain can be defined as
g ¼ d
b
ð3:15Þ
where g ¼ shear strain, mm/mm (in/in); d ¼ the deflection of the element, mm (in); and
b ¼ the orthogonal distance over which deflection occurs, mm (in).
Shear stress and strain are commonly tested in a torsion test, in which a thin-walled
tubular specimen is subjected to a torque as shown in Figure 3.12. As torque is increased,
the tube deflects by twisting, which is a shear strain for this geometry.
The shear stress can be determined in the test by the equation
t ¼
T
2pR2t
ð3:16Þ
FIGURE 3.11
Shear
(a) stress and
(b) strain.
FIGURE 3.12
Torsion
test setup.
Section 3.1/Stress–Strain Relationships
51

where T ¼applied torque, N-mm (lb-in); R ¼ radius of the tube measured to the neutral
axis of the wall, mm (in); and t ¼ wall thickness, mm (in).
The shear strain can be determined by measuring the amount of angular deflection of
the tube, converting this into a distance deflected, and dividing by the gauge length L.
Reducing this to a simple expression
g ¼ Ra
L
ð3:17Þ
where a ¼ the angular deflection (radians).
A typical shear stress–strain curve is shown in Figure 3.13. In the elastic region, the
relationship is defined by
t ¼ Gg
ð3:18Þ
where G ¼ the shear modulus, or shear modulus of elasticity, MPa (lb/in2). For most
materials, the shear modulus can be approximated by G ¼ 0.4E, where E is the
conventional elastic modulus.
Intheplasticregionoftheshearstress–straincurve,thematerialstrainhardenstocause
the applied torque to continue toincrease until fracture finally occurs. The relationship in this
regionissimilartotheflowcurve.Theshearstressatfracturecanbecalculatedandthisisused
as the shear strength S of the material. Shear strength can be estimated from tensile strength
data by the approximation: S ¼ 0.7(TS).
Because the cross-sectional area of the test specimen in the torsion test does not
change as it does in the tensile and compression tests, the engineering stress–strain curve
for shear derived from the torsion test is virtually the same as the true stress–strain curve.
Shear processes are common in industry. Shearing action is used to cut sheet metal in
blanking, punching, and other cutting operations (Section 20.1). In machining, the material
is removed by the mechanism of shear deformation (Section 21.2).
3.2
HARDNESS
The hardness of a material is defined as its resistance to permanent indentation. Good
hardness generally means that the material is resistant to scratching and wear. For many
engineering applications, including most of the tooling used in manufacturing, scratch
FIGURE 3.13
Typical shear stress–
strain curve from a torsion test.
52
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

and wear resistance are important characteristics. As the reader shall see later in this
section, there is a strong correlation between hardness and strength.
3.2.1 HARDNESS TESTS
Hardness tests are commonly used for assessing material properties because they are quick
and convenient. However, a variety of testing methods are appropriate because of
differences in hardness among different materials. The best-known hardness tests are
Brinell and Rockwell.
Brinell Hardness Test
The Brinell hardness test is widely used for testing metals and
nonmetals of low to mediumhardness. It is named after the Swedish engineer who developed
it around 1900. In the test, a hardened steel (or cemented carbide) ball of 10-mm diameter is
pressed into the surface of a specimen using a load of 500, 1500, or 3000 kg. The load is then
dividedintotheindentationareatoobtaintheBrinellHardnessNumber(BHN). Inequation
form
HB ¼
2F
pDb Db 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
D2
b  D2
i
q


ð3:19Þ
where HB ¼ Brinell Hardness Number (BHN); F ¼ indentation load, kg; Db ¼ diameter
of the ball, mm; and Di ¼ diameter of the indentation on the surface, mm.
These dimensions are indicated in Figure 3.14(a). The resulting BHN has units of kg/
mm2, but the units are usually omitted in expressing the number. For harder materials
(above 500 BHN), the cemented carbide ball is used because the steel ball experiences
elastic deformation that compromises the accuracy of the reading. Also, higher loads (1500
and 3000 kg) are typically used for harder materials. Because of differences in results under
different loads, it is considered good practice to indicate the load used in the test when
reporting HB readings.
FIGURE 3.14
Hardness testing
methods:
(a) Brinell; (b) Rockwell:
(1) initial minor load
and (2) major load,
(c) Vickers, and
(d) Knoop.
Section 3.2/Hardness
53

Rockwell Hardness Test
This is another widely used test, named after the metallurgist
who developed it in the early 1920s. It is convenient to use, and several enhancements
over the years have made the test adaptable to a variety of materials.
In the Rockwell Hardness Test, a cone-shaped indenter or small-diameter ball, with
diameter ¼ 1.6 or 3.2 mm (1/16 or 1/8 in) is pressed into the specimen using a minor load of
10kg,thusseatingtheindenterinthematerial.Then,amajorloadof150kg(orothervalue)is
applied, causing the indenter to penetrate into the specimen a certain distance beyond its
initial position. This additional penetration distance d is converted into a Rockwell hardness
reading by the testing machine. The sequence is depicted in Figure 3.14(b). Differences in
loadandindentergeometryprovidevariousRockwellscalesfordifferentmaterials.Themost
common scales are indicated in Table 3.5.
Vickers Hardness Test
This test, also developed in the early 1920s, uses a pyramid-
shapedindentermadeofdiamond.Itisbasedonthe principle that impressionsmadebythis
indenter are geometrically similar regardless of load. Accordingly, loads of various size are
applied, depending on the hardness of the material to be measured. The Vickers Hardness
(HV) is then determined from the formula
HV ¼ 1:854 F
D2
ð3:20Þ
where F ¼applied load, kg, and D ¼ the diagonal of the impression made by the indenter,
mm, as indicated in Figure 3.14(c).
The Vickers test can be used for all metals and has one of the widest scales among
hardness tests.
Knoop Hardness Test
The Knoop test, developed in 1939, uses a pyramid-shaped
diamond indenter, but the pyramid has a length-to-width ratio of about 7:1, as indicated
in Figure 3.14(d), and the applied loads are generally lighter than in the Vickers test. It is a
microhardness test, meaning that it is suitable for measuring small, thin specimens or hard
materials that might fracture if a heavier load were applied. The indenter shape facilitates
reading of the impression under the lighter loads used in this test. The Knoop hardness value
(HK) is determined according to the formula
HK ¼ 14:2 F
D2
ð3:21Þ
where F ¼ load, kg; and D ¼ the long diagonal of the indentor, mm.
Because the impression made in this test is generally very small, considerable care
must be taken in preparing the surface to be measured.
Scleroscope
The previous tests base their hardness measurements either on the ratio of
applied load divided by the resulting impression area (Brinell, Vickers, and Knoop) or by
the depth of the impression (Rockwell). The Scleroscope is an instrument that measures the
rebound height of a ‘‘hammer’’ dropped from a certain distance above the surface of the
material to be tested. The hammer consists of a weight with diamond indenter attached to it.
TABLE 3.5
Common Rockwell hardness scales.
Rockwell Scale Hardness Symbol
Indenter
Load (kg)
Typical Materials Tested
A
HRA
Cone
60
Carbides, ceramics
B
HRB
1.6 mm ball
100
Nonferrous metals
C
HRC
Cone
150
Ferrous metals,
tool steels
54
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

The Scleroscope therefore measures the mechanical energy absorbed by the material when
the indenter strikes the surface. The energy absorbed gives an indication of resistance to
penetration, which matches the definition of hardness given here. If more energy is absorbed,
thereboundwillbeless,meaningasoftermaterial.Iflessenergyisabsorbed,thereboundwill
be higher—thus a harder material. The primary use of the Scleroscope seems to be in
measuring the hardness of large parts of steel and other ferrous metals.
Durometer
The previous tests are all based on resistance to permanent or plastic
deformation (indentation). The durometer is a device that measures the elastic deformation
of rubber and similar flexible materials by pressing an indenter into the surface of the object.
The resistance to penetration is an indication of hardness, as the term is applied to these types
of materials.
3.2.2 HARDNESS OF VARIOUS MATERIALS
This section compares the hardness values of some common materials in the three
engineering material classes: metals, ceramics, and polymers.
Metals
The Brinell and Rockwell hardness tests were developed at a time when metals
were the principal engineering materials. A significant amount of data has been collected
using these tests on metals. Table 3.6 lists hardness values for selected metals.
For most metals, hardness is closely related to strength. Because the method of testing
forhardnessisusuallybasedonresistancetoindentation,whichisaformofcompression,one
would expect a good correlation between hardness and strength properties determined in a
compression test. However, strength properties in a compression test are nearly the same as
thosefromatensiontest,afterallowancesforchangesincross-sectionalareaoftherespective
test specimens; so the correlation with tensile properties should also be good.
Brinell hardness (HB) exhibits a close correlation with the ultimate tensile strength
TS of steels, leading to the relationship [9, 15]:
TS ¼ Kh HB
ð
Þ
ð3:22Þ
where Kh is a constant of proportionality. If TS is expressed in MPa, then Kh ¼ 3.45; and if
TS is in lb/in2, then Kh ¼ 500.
TABLE 3.6
Typical hardness of selected metals.
Metal
Brinell
Hardness,
HB
Rockwell
Hardness,
HRa
Metal
Brinell
Hardness,
HB
Rockwell
Hardness,
HRa
Aluminum, annealed
20
Magnesium alloys, hardenedb
70
35B
Aluminum, cold worked
35
Nickel, annealed
75
40B
Aluminum alloys, annealedb
40
Steel, low C, hot rolledb
100
60B
Aluminum alloys, hardenedb
90
52B
Steel, high C, hot rolledb
200
95B, 15C
Aluminum alloys, castb
80
44B
Steel, alloy, annealedb
175
90B, 10C
Cast iron, gray, as castb
175
10C
Steel, alloy, heat treatedb
300
33C
Copper, annealed
45
Steel, stainless, austeniticb
150
85B
Copper alloy: brass, annealed
100
60B
Titanium, nearly pure
200
95B
Lead
4
Zinc
30
Compiled from [10], [11], [16], and other sources.
aHR values are given in the B or C scale as indicated by the letter designation. Missing values indicate that the hardness is too low for
Rockwell scales.
bHB values given are typical. Hardness values will vary according to composition, heat treatment, and degree of work hardening.
Section 3.2/Hardness
55

Ceramics
The Brinell hardness test is not appropriate for ceramics because the materials
being tested are often harder than the indenter ball. The Vickers and Knoop hardness tests
are used to test these hard materials. Table 3.7 lists hardness values for several ceramics and
hard materials. For comparison, the Rockwell C hardness for hardened tool steel is 65 HRC.
The HRC scale does not extend high enough to be used for the harder materials.
Polymers
Polymers have the lowest hardness among the three types of engineering
materials. Table 3.8 lists several of the polymers on the Brinell hardness scale, although this
testing method is not normally used for these materials. It does, however, allow comparison
with the hardness of metals.
3.3
EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON PROPERTIES
Temperature has a significant effect onnearly all properties ofa material. Itisimportant for
the designer to know the material properties at the operating temperatures of the product
wheninservice.Itisalsoimportanttoknowhowtemperatureaffectsmechanicalproperties
in manufacturing. At elevated temperatures, materials are lower in strength and higher in
ductility. The general relationships formetals aredepicted inFigure3.15.Thus, most metals
can be formed more easily at elevated temperatures than when they are cold.
Hot Hardness
A property often used to characterize strength and hardness at elevated
temperatures is hot hardness. Hot hardness is simply the ability of a material to retain
hardness at elevated temperatures; it is usuallypresented as either a listing of hardness values
at different temperatures or as a plot of hardness versus temperature, as in Figure 3.16. Steels
can be alloyed to achieve significant improvements in hot hardness, as shown in the figure.
TABLE 3.7
Hardness of selected ceramics and other hard materials, arranged in ascending order of hardness.
Material
Vickers
Hardness,
HV
Knoop
Hardness,
HK
Material
Vickers
Hardness,
HV
Knoop
Hardness,
HK
Hardened tool steela
800
850
Titanium nitride, TiN
3000
2300
Cemented carbide (WC – Co)a
2000
1400
Titanium carbide, TiC
3200
2500
Alumina, Al2O3
2200
1500
Cubic boron nitride, BN
6000
4000
Tungsten carbide, WC
2600
1900
Diamond, sintered polycrystal
7000
5000
Silicon carbide, SiC
2600
1900
Diamond, natural
10,000
8000
Compiled from [14], [16], and other sources.
aHardened tool steel and cemented carbide are the two materials commonly used in the Brinell hardness test.
TABLE 3.8
Hardness of selected polymers.
Polymer
Brinell
Hardness, HB
Polymer
Brinell
Hardness, HB
Nylon
12
Polypropylene
7
Phenol formaldehyde
50
Polystyrene
20
Polyethylene, low density
2
Polyvinyl-chloride
10
Polyethylene, high density
4
Compiled from [5], [8], and other sources.
56
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

Ceramics exhibit superior properties at elevated temperatures. These materials are often
selected for high temperature applications, such as turbine parts, cutting tools, and refractory
applications. The outside skin of a shuttle spacecraft is lined with ceramic tiles to withstand
the friction heat of high-speed re-entry into the atmosphere.
Good hot hardness is also desirable in the tooling materials used in many manufactur-
ing operations. Significant amounts of heat energy are generated in most metalworking
processes, and the tools must be capable of withstanding the high temperatures involved.
Recrystallization Temperature
Most metals behave at room temperature according to
the flow curve in the plastic region. As the metal is strained, it increases in strength because
of strainhardening (thestrain-hardening exponent n > 0).However, ifthe metal isheatedto
a sufficiently elevated temperature and then deformed, strain hardening does not occur.
Instead, new grains are formed that are free of strain, and the metal behaves as a perfectly
plasticmaterial; thatis, witha strain-hardeningexponent n¼ 0.Theformation of new strain-
free grains is a process called recrystallization, and the temperature at which it occurs is
about one-half the melting point (0.5 Tm), as measured on an absolute scale (R or K). This is
called the recrystallization temperature. Recrystallization takes time. The recrystallization
temperature for a particular metal is usually specified as the temperature at which complete
formation of new grains requires about 1 hour.
FIGURE 3.15
General effect of
temperature on strength and ductility.
FIGURE 3.16
Hot hardness—typical
hardness as a function of temperature for
several materials.
Section 3.3/Effect of Temperature on Properties
57

Recrystallization is a temperature-dependent characteristic of metals that can be
exploited in manufacturing. By heating the metal to the recrystallization temperature
before deformation, the amount of straining that the metal can endure is substantially
increased, and the forces and power required to carry out the process are significantly
reduced. Forming metals at temperatures above the recrystallization temperature is
called hot working (Section 18.3).
3.4
FLUID PROPERTIES
Fluids behave quite differently than solids. A fluid flows; it takes the shape of the container
that holds it. A solid does not flow; it possesses a geometric form that is independent of its
surroundings. Fluids include liquids and gases; the interest in this section is on the former.
Many manufacturing processes are accomplished on materials that have been converted
from solid to liquid state by heating. Metals are cast in the molten state; glass is formed in a
heated and highly fluid state; and polymers are almost always shaped as thick fluids.
Viscosity
Although flow is a defining characteristic of fluids, the tendency to flow varies
for different fluids. Viscosity is the property that determines fluid flow. Roughly, viscosity
can be defined as the resistance to flow that is characteristic of a fluid. It is a measure of the
internal friction that arises when velocity gradients are present in the fluid—the more
viscous the fluid is, the higher theinternal frictionand thegreatertheresistanceto flow. The
reciprocal of viscosity is fluidity—the ease with which a fluid flows.
ViscosityisdefinedmorepreciselywithrespecttothesetupinFigure3.17, inwhichtwo
parallel plates are separated by a distance d. One of the plates is stationary while the other is
movingat avelocityv,andthespacebetweentheplatesisoccupiedbyafluid.Orienting these
parametersrelativetoanaxissystem,disinthey-axisdirectionandvisinthex-axisdirection.
The motion of the upper plate is resisted by force F that results from the shear viscous action
of the fluid. This force can be reduced to a shear stress by dividing F by the plate area A
t ¼ F
A
ð3:23Þ
where t ¼ shear stress, N/m2 or Pa (lb/in2).
This shear stress is related to the rate of shear, which is defined as the change in
velocity dv relative to dy. That is
_g ¼ dv
dy
ð3:24Þ
where _g ¼ shear rate, 1/s; dv ¼ incremental change in velocity, m/s (in/sec); and
dy ¼ incremental change in distance y, m (in).
FIGURE 3.17
Fluid ﬂow
between two parallel
plates, one stationary
and the other moving at
velocity v.
58
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

The shear viscosity is the fluid property that defines the relationship between F/A
and dv/dy; that is
F
A ¼ h dv
dy
or
t ¼ h_g
ð3:25Þ
where h ¼ a constant of proportionality called the coefficient of viscosity, Pa-s (lb-sec/in2).
Rearranging Equation 3.25, the coefficient of viscosity can be expressed as follows
h ¼ t
_g
ð3:26Þ
Thus, the viscosity of a fluid can be defined as the ratio of shear stress to shear rate
during flow, where shear stress is the frictional force exerted by the fluid per unit area, and
shear rate is the velocity gradient perpendicular to the flow direction. The viscous character-
istics of fluids defined by Equation 3.26 were first stated by Newton. He observed that
viscosity was a constant property of a given fluid, and such a fluid is referred to as a New-
tonian fluid.
The units of coefficient of viscosity require explanation. In the International System of
units (SI), because shear stress is expressed in N/m2 or Pascals and shear rate in 1/s, it follows
that h has units of N-s/m2 or Pascal-seconds, abbreviated Pa-s. In the U.S. customary units, the
corresponding units are lb/in2 and 1/sec, so that the units for coefficient of viscosity are lb-sec/
in2. Other units sometimes given for viscosity are poise, which ¼ dyne-sec/cm2 (10 poise ¼
1 Pa-s and 6895 Pa-s ¼ 1 lb-sec/in2). Some typical values of coefficient of viscosity for various
fluids are given in Table 3.9. One can observe in several of the materials listed that viscosity
varies with temperature.
Viscosity in Manufacturing Processes
For many metals, the viscosity in the molten
state compares with that of water at room temperature. Certain manufacturing pro-
cesses, notably casting and welding, are performed on metals in their molten state, and
success in these operations requires low viscosity so that the molten metal fills the mold
cavity or weld seam before solidifying. In other operations, such as metal forming and
machining, lubricants and coolants are used in the process, and again the success of these
fluids depends to some extent on their viscosities.
Glass ceramics exhibit a gradual transition from solid to liquid states as temperature
is increased; they do not suddenly melt as pure metals do. The effect is illustrated by the
viscosity values for glass at different temperatures in Table 3.9. At room temperature, glass
is solid and brittle, exhibiting no tendency to flow; for all practical purposes, its viscosity is
infinite. As glass is heated, it gradually softens, becoming less and less viscous (more and
morefluid),untilitcanfinallybeformed byblowing ormolding ataround1100C (2000F).
TABLE 3.9
Viscosity values for selected ﬂuids.
Coefficient of Viscosity
Coefficient of Viscosity
Material
Pa-s
lb-sec/in2
Material
Pa-s
lb-sec/in2
Glassb, 540 C (1000 F)
1012
108
Pancake syrup (room temp)
50
73  104
Glassb, 815 C (1500 F)
105
14
Polymer,a 151 C (300 F)
115
167  104
Glassb, 1095 C (2000 F)
103
0.14
Polymer,a 205 C (400 F)
55
80  104
Glassb, 1370 C (2500 F)
15
22  104
Polymer,a 260 C (500 F)
28
41  104
Mercury, 20 C (70 F)
0.0016
0.23  106
Water, 20 C (70 F)
0.001
0.15  106
Machine oil (room temp.)
0.1
0.14  104
Water, 100 C (212 F)
0.0003
0.04  106
Compiled from various sources.
aLow-density polyethylene is used as the polymer example here; most other polymers have slightly higher viscosities.
bGlass composition is mostly SiO2; compositions and viscosities vary; values given are representative.
Section 3.4/Fluid Properties
59

Most polymer-shaping processes are performed at elevated temperatures, at which
the material is in a liquid or highly plastic condition. Thermoplastic polymers represent the
most straightforward case, and they are also the most common polymers. At low tempera-
tures, thermoplastic polymers are solid; as temperature is increased, they typically trans-
form first into a soft rubbery material, and then into a thick fluid. As temperaturecontinues
to rise, viscosity decreases gradually, as in Table 3.9 for polyethylene, the most widely used
thermoplastic polymer. However, with polymers the relationship is complicated by other
factors. For example, viscosity is affected by flow rate. The viscosity of a thermoplastic
polymer is not a constant. A polymer melt does not behave in a Newtonian fashion. Its
relationship between shear stress and shear rate can be seen in Figure 3.18. A fluid that
exhibits this decreasing viscosity with increasing shear rate is called pseudoplastic. This
behavior complicates the analysis of polymer shaping.
3.5
VISCOELASTIC BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS
Another property that is characteristic of polymers is viscoelasticity. Viscoelasticity is the
property of a material that determines the strain it experiences when subjected to
combinations of stress and temperature over time. As the name suggests, it is a
combination of viscosity and elasticity. Viscoelasticity can be explained with reference
to Figure 3.19. The two parts of the figure show the typical response of two materials to an
applied stress below the yield point during some time period. The material in (a) exhibits
perfect elasticity; when the stress is removed, the material returns to its original shape. By
contrast, the material in (b) shows viscoelastic behavior. The amount of strain gradually
increases over time under the applied stress. When stress is removed, the material does
not immediately return to its original shape; instead, the strain decays gradually. If the
stress had been applied and then immediately removed, the material would have
returned immediately to its starting shape. However, time has entered the picture
and played a role in affecting the behavior of the material.
A simple model of viscoelasticity can be developed using the definition of elasticity
as a starting point. Elasticity is concisely expressed by Hooke’s law, s ¼ Ee, which simply
relates stress to strain through a constant of proportionality. In a viscoelastic solid, the
FIGURE 3.18
Viscous
behaviors of Newtonian and
pseudoplastic ﬂuids.
Polymer melts exhibit
pseudoplastic behavior. For
comparison, the behavior of
a plastic solid material is
shown.
60
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

relationship between stress and strain is time dependent; it can be expressed as
s tð Þ ¼ f tð Þe
ð3:27Þ
The time function f(t) can be conceptualized as a modulus of elasticity that depends on
time. It might be written E(t) and referred to as a viscoelastic modulus. The form of this time
function can be complex, sometimes including strain as a factor. Without getting into the
mathematical expressions for it, nevertheless the effect of the time dependency can be
explored. One common effect can be seen in Figure 3.20, which shows the stress–strain
behavior of a thermoplastic polymer under different strain rates. At low strain rate, the
material exhibits significant viscousflow. At highstrain rate, it behavesin amuch morebrittle
fashion.
Temperatureisafactorinviscoelasticity.Astemperatureincreases,theviscousbehavior
becomes more and more prominent relative to elastic behavior. The material becomes more
like a fluid. Figure 3.21 illustrates this temperature dependence for a thermoplastic polymer.
At low temperatures, the polymer shows elastic behavior. As T increases above the glass
transition temperature Tg, the polymer becomes viscoelastic. As temperature increases
further,itbecomessoftandrubbery.Atstillhighertemperatures,itexhibitsviscouscharacter-
istics.Thetemperaturesatwhichthesemodesofbehaviorareobservedvary,dependingonthe
plastic. Also, the shapes of the modulus versus temperature curve differ according to the
FIGURE 3.19
Comparison of elastic
and viscoelastic
properties: (a) perfectly
elastic response of mate-
rial to stress applied over
time; and (b) response of a
viscoelastic material
under same conditions.
The material in (b) takes a
strain that is a function of
time and temperature.
FIGURE 3.20
Stress–strain curve of a
viscoelastic material (thermoplastic
polymer) at high and low strain rates.
Section 3.5/Viscoelastic Behavior of Polymers
61

proportions of crystalline and amorphous structures in the thermoplastic. Thermosetting
polymers and elastomers behave differently than shown in the figure; after curing, these
polymers do not soften as thermoplastics do at elevated temperatures. Instead, they degrade
(char) at high temperatures.
Viscoelastic behavior manifests itself in polymer melts in the form of shape memory.
As the thick polymer melt is transformed during processing from one shape to another, it
‘‘remembers’’ its previous shape and attempts to return to that geometry. For example, a
common problem in extrusion of polymers is die swell, in which the profile of the extruded
material grows in size, reflecting its tendency to return to its larger cross section in the
extruder barrel immediately before being squeezed through the smaller die opening. The
properties of viscosity and viscoelasticity are examined in more detail in the discussion of
plastic shaping (Chapter 13).
REFERENCES
[1] Avallone, E. A., and Baumeister III, T. (eds.). Mark’s
Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engineers,
11th ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2006.
[2] Beer, F. P., Russell, J. E., Eisenberg, E., and
Mazurek, D., Vector Mechanics for Engineers:
Statics, 9th ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2009.
[3] Black, J. T., and Kohser, R. A. DeGarmo’s Materials
and Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed. John
Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
[4] Budynas, R. G. Advanced Strength and Applied Stress
Analysis, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1998.
[5] Chandra, M., and Roy, S. K. Plastics Technology
Handbook, 4th ed. CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton,
Florida, 2006.
[6] Dieter, G. E. Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd ed.
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1986.
[7] Engineering Plastics. Engineered Materials Hand-
book, Vol. 2. ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio,
1987.
[8] Flinn, R. A., and Trojan, P. K. Engineering Materials
and Their Applications, 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons,
Hoboken, New Jersey, 1995.
[9] Kalpakjian, S., and Schmid S. R. Manufacturing
Processes
for Engineering Materials, 5th
ed.
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey,
2007.
[10] Metals Handbook, Vol. 1, Properties and Selection:
Iron, Steels, and High Performance Alloys. ASM
International, Metals Park, Ohio, 1990.
[11] Metals Handbook, Vol. 2, Properties and Selection:
Nonferrous Alloys and Special Purpose Materials,
ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio, 1991.
[12] Metals Handbook, Vol. 8, Mechanical Testing and
Evaluation, ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio,
2000.
[13] Morton-Jones, D. H. Polymer Processing. Chapman
and Hall, London, 2008.
FIGURE 3.21
Viscoelastic modulus
as a function of temperature for a
thermoplastic polymer.
62
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

[14] Schey, J. A. Introduction to Manufacturing Pro-
cesses. 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2000.
[15] Van Vlack, L. H. Elements of Materials Science and
Engineering, 6th ed. Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Massachusetts, 1991.
[16] Wick, C., and Veilleux, R. F. (eds.). Tool and Man-
ufacturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed. Vol. 3,
Materials, Finishing, and Coating. Society of Manu-
facturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1985.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
3.1.
What is the dilemma between design and manufac-
turing in terms of mechanical properties?
3.2.
What are the three types of static stresses to which
materials are subjected?
3.3.
State Hooke’s law.
3.4.
What is the difference between engineering stress
and true stress in a tensile test?
3.5.
Define tensile strength of a material.
3.6.
Define yield strength of a material.
3.7.
Why cannot a direct conversion be made between
the ductility measures of elongation and reduction
in area using the assumption of constant volume?
3.8.
What is work hardening?
3.9.
In what case does the strength coefficient have the
same value as the yield strength?
3.10.
How does the change in cross-sectional area of a
test specimen in a compression test differ from its
counterpart in a tensile test specimen?
3.11.
What is the complicating factor that occurs in a
compression test?
3.12.
Tensile testing is not appropriate for hard brittle
materials such as ceramics. What is the test com-
monly used to determine the strength properties of
such materials?
3.13.
How is the shear modulus of elasticity G related to
the tensile modulus of elasticity E, on average?
3.14.
How is shear strength S related to tensile strength
TS, on average?
3.15.
What is hardness, and how is it generally tested?
3.16.
Why are different hardness tests and scales required?
3.17.
Define the recrystallization temperature for a metal.
3.18.
Define viscosity of a fluid.
3.19.
WhatisthedefiningcharacteristicofaNewtonianfluid?
3.20.
What is viscoelasticity, as a material property?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 15 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
3.1.
Which of the following are the three basic types of
static stresses to which a material can be subjected
(three correct answers): (a) compression, (b) hard-
ness, (c) reduction in area, (d) shear, (e) tensile,
(f) true stress, and (g) yield?
3.2.
Which one of the following is the correct definition
of ultimate tensile strength, as derived from the
results of a tensile test on a metal specimen: (a) the
stress encountered when the stress–strain curve
transforms from elastic to plastic behavior, (b)
the maximum load divided by the final area of
the specimen, (c) the maximum load divided by
the original area of the specimen, or (d) the stress
observed when the specimen finally fails?
3.3.
If stress values were measured during a tensile test,
which of the following would have the higher value:
(a) engineering stress or (b) true stress?
3.4.
If strain measurements were made during a tensile-
test, which of the following would have the higher
value: (a) engineering strain, or (b) true strain?
3.5.
The plastic region of the stress–strain curve for a
metal is characterized by a proportional relation-
ship between stress and strain: (a) true or (b) false?
3.6.
Which one of the following types of stress–strain
relationship best describes the behavior of brittle
materials such as ceramics and thermosetting plas-
tics: (a) elastic and perfectly plastic, (b) elastic and
strain hardening, (c) perfectly elastic, or (d) none of
the above?
3.7.
Which one of the following types of stress–strain
relationship best describes the behavior of most
metals at room temperature: (a) elastic and per-
fectly plastic, (b) elastic and strain hardening,
(c) perfectly elastic, or (d) none of the above?
Multiple Choice Quiz
63

3.8.
Which one of the following types of stress–strain
relationship best describes the behavior of metals
at
temperatures
above
their
respective
re-
crystallization points: (a) elastic and perfectly plas-
tic, (b) elastic and strain hardening, (c) perfectly
elastic, or (d) none of the above?
3.9.
Which one of the following materials has the highest
modulus of elasticity: (a) aluminum, (b) diamond,
(c) steel, (d) titanium, or (e) tungsten?
3.10.
The shear strength of a metal is usually (a) greater
than or (b) less than its tensile strength?
3.11.
Most hardness tests involve pressing a hard object
into the surface of a test specimen and measuring
the indentation (or its effect) that results: (a) true or
(b) false?
3.12.
Which one of the following materials has the highest
hardness: (a) alumina ceramic, (b) gray cast iron,
(c) hardened tool steel, (d) high carbon steel, or
(e) polystyrene?
3.13.
Viscosity can be defined as the ease with which a
fluid flows: (a) true or (b) false?
PROBLEMS
Strength and Ductility in Tension
3.1.
A tensile test uses a test specimen that has a gage
length of 50 mm and an area ¼ 200 mm2. During
the test the specimen yields under a load of
98,000 N. The corresponding gage length ¼
50.23 mm. This is the 0.2% yield point. The
maximum load of 168,000 N is reached at a
gage length ¼ 64.2 mm. Determine (a) yield
strength, (b) modulus of elasticity, and (c) tensile
strength. (d) If fracture occurs at a gage length of
67.3 mm, determine the percent elongation. (e) If
the specimen necked to an area ¼ 92 mm2, deter-
mine the percent reduction in area.
3.2.
A test specimen in a tensile test has a gage length of
2.0 in and an area ¼ 0.5 in2. During the test the
specimen yields under a load of 32,000 lb. The
corresponding gage length ¼ 2.0083 in. This is the
0.2 percent yield point. The maximum load of
60,000 lb is reached at a gage length ¼ 2.60 in.
Determine (a) yield strength, (b) modulus of elas-
ticity, and (c) tensile strength. (d) If fracture occurs
at a gage length of 2.92 in, determine the percent
elongation. (e) If the specimen necked to an area ¼
0.25 in2, determine the percent reduction in area.
3.3.
During a tensile test in which the starting gage
length ¼ 125.0 mm and the cross-sectional area ¼
62.5 mm2, the following force and gage length data
are collected (1) 17,793 N at 125.23 mm, (2) 23,042
N at 131.25 mm, (3) 27,579 N at 140.05 mm, (4) 28,
913 N at 147.01 mm, (5) 27,578 N at 153.00 mm, and
(6) 20,462 N at 160.10 mm. The maximum load is
28,913 N and the final data point occurred immedi-
ately before failure. (a) Plot the engineering stress
strain curve. Determine (b) yield strength, (c) mod-
ulus of elasticity, and (d) tensile strength.
Flow Curve
3.4.
In Problem 3.3, determine the strength coefficient
and the strain-hardening exponent in the flow curve
equation. Be sure not to use data after the point at
which necking occurred.
3.5.
Inatensiletestonametalspecimen,truestrain¼ 0.08at
a stress ¼ 265 MPa. When true stress ¼ 325 MPa, true
strain¼ 0.27.Determinethestrengthcoefficientandthe
strain-hardening exponent in the flow curve equation.
3.6.
During a tensile test, a metal has a true strain ¼ 0.10
at a true stress ¼ 37,000 lb/in2. Later, at a true
stress ¼ 55,000 lb/in2, true strain ¼ 0.25. Determine
the strength coefficient and strain-hardening expo-
nent in the flow curve equation.
3.7.
In a tensile test a metal begins to neck at a true
strain ¼ 0.28 with a corresponding true stress ¼ 345.0
MPa. Without knowing any more about the test, can
you estimate the strength coefficient and the strain-
hardening exponent in the flow curve equation?
3.8.
A tensile test for a certain metal provides flow curve
parameters: strain-hardening exponent is 0.3 and
strength coefficient is 600 MPa. Determine (a) the
flow stress at a true strain ¼ 1.0 and (b) true strain at
a flow stress ¼ 600 MPa.
3.9.
The flow curve for a certain metal has a strain-
hardening exponent of 0.22 and strength coefficient
of 54,000 lb/in2. Determine (a) the flow stress at a
true strain ¼ 0.45 and (b) the true strain at a flow
stress ¼ 40,000 lb/in2.
3.10.
A metal is deformed in a tension test into its plastic
region. The starting specimen had a gage length ¼
2.0 in and an area ¼ 0.50 in2. At one point in the
tensile test, the gage length ¼ 2.5 in, and the
corresponding engineering stress ¼ 24,000 lb/in2;
at another point in the test before necking, the gage
length ¼ 3.2 in, and the corresponding engineering
stress ¼ 28,000 lb/in2. Determine the strength
64
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

Problems
65
coefficient and the strain-hardening exponent for
this metal.
3.11.
A tensile test specimen has a starting gage length ¼
75.0 mm. It is elongated during the test to a length ¼
110.0 mm before necking occurs. Determine (a) the
engineering strain and (b) the true strain. (c) Com-
pute and sum the engineering strains as the speci-
men elongates from: (1) 75.0 to 80.0 mm, (2) 80.0 to
85.0 mm, (3) 85.0 to 90.0 mm, (4) 90.0 to 95.0 mm,
(5) 95.0 to 100.0 mm, (6) 100.0 to 105.0 mm, and (7)
105.0 to 110.0 mm. (d) Is the result closer to the
answer to part (a) or part (b)? Does this help to
show what is meant by the term true strain?
3.12.
A tensile specimen is elongated to twice its original
length. Determine the engineering strain and true
strain for this test. If the metal had been strained
in compression, determine the final compressed
length of the specimen such that (a) the engineering
strain is equal to the same value as in tension (it will
be negative value because of compression), and (b)
the true strain would be equal to the same value as
in tension (again, it will be negative value because
of compression). Note that the answer to part (a) is
an impossible result. True strain is therefore a better
measure of strain during plastic deformation.
3.13.
Derive an expression for true strain as a function of
D and Do for a tensile test specimen of round cross
section, where D ¼ the instantaneous diameter of
the specimen and Do is its original diameter.
3.14.
Show that true strain ¼ ln(1 þ e), where e ¼
engineering strain.
3.15.
Based on results of a tensile test, the flow curve strain-
hardening exponent ¼ 0.40 and strength coefficient ¼
551.6 MPa. Based on this information, calculate the
(engineering) tensile strength for the metal.
3.16.
A copper wire of diameter 0.80 mm fails at an
engineering stress ¼ 248.2 MPa. Its ductility is
measured as 75% reduction of area. Determine
the true stress and true strain at failure.
3.17.
A steel tensile specimen with starting gage length ¼
2.0 in and cross-sectional area ¼ 0.5 in2 reaches a
maximum load of 37,000 lb. Its elongation at this
point is 24%. Determine the true stress and true
strain at this maximum load.
Compression
3.18.
A metal alloy has been tested in a tensile test with
the following results for the flow curve parameters:
strength coefficient ¼ 620.5 MPa and strain-
hardening exponent ¼ 0.26. The same metal is
now tested in a compression test in which the
starting height of the specimen ¼ 62.5 mm and its
diameter ¼ 25 mm. Assuming that the cross section
increases uniformly, determine the load required to
compress the specimen to a height of (a) 50 mm and
(b) 37.5 mm.
3.19.
The flow curve parameters for a certain stainless
steel are strength coefficient ¼ 1100 MPa and
strain-hardening exponent ¼ 0.35. A cylindrical
specimen of starting cross-sectional area ¼ 1000
mm2 and height ¼ 75 mm is compressed to a height
of 58 mm. Determine the force required to achieve
this compression, assuming that the cross section
increases uniformly.
3.20.
A steel test specimen (modulus of elasticity ¼ 30 
106 lb/in2) in a compression test has a starting
height ¼ 2.0 in and diameter ¼ 1.5 in. The metal
yields (0.2% offset) at a load ¼ 140,000 lb. At a load
of 260,000 lb, the height has been reduced to 1.6 in.
Determine (a) yield strength and (b) flow curve
parameters
(strength
coefficient
and
strain-
hardening
exponent). Assume that
the cross-
sectional area increases uniformly during the test.
Bending and Shear
3.21.
A bend test is used for a certain hard material. If the
transverse rupture strength of the material is known
to be 1000 MPa, what is the anticipated load at which
the specimen is likely to fail, given that its width ¼ 15
mm, thickness ¼ 10 mm, and length ¼ 60 mm?
3.22.
A special ceramic specimen is tested in a bend test.
Its width ¼ 0.50 in and thickness ¼ 0.25 in. The
length of the specimen between supports ¼ 2.0 in.
Determine the transverse rupture strength if failure
occurs at a load ¼ 1700 lb.
3.23.
A torsion test specimen has a radius ¼ 25 mm, wall
thickness ¼ 3 mm, and gage length ¼ 50 mm. In
testing, a torque of 900 N-m results in an angular
deflection ¼ 0.3 Determine (a) the shear stress, (b)
shear strain, and (c) shear modulus, assuming the
specimen had not yet yielded. (d) If failure of
thespecimen occurs at a torque ¼ 1200 N-m and
a corresponding angular deflection ¼ 10, what is
the shear strength of the metal?
3.24.
In a torsion test, a torque of 5000 ft-lb is applied
which causes an angular deflection ¼ 1 on a thin-
walled tubular specimen whose radius ¼ 1.5 in,
wall thickness ¼ 0.10 in, and gage length ¼ 2.0 in.
Determine (a) the shear stress, (b) shear strain, and
(c) shear modulus, assuming the specimen had not
yet yielded. (d) If the specimen fails at a torque ¼
8000 ft-lb and an angular deflection ¼ 23, calculate
the shear strength of the metal.

Hardness
3.25.
In a Brinell hardness test, a 1500-kg load is pressed
into a specimen using a 10-mm-diameter hardened
steel ball. The resulting indentation has a diameter
¼ 3.2 mm. (a) Determine the Brinell hardness
number for the metal. (b) If the specimen is steel,
estimate the tensile strength of the steel.
3.26.
One of the inspectors in the quality control depart-
ment has frequently used the Brinell and Rockwell
hardness tests, for which equipment is available in
the company. He claims that all hardness tests are
based on the same principle as the Brinell test,
which is that hardness is always measured as the
applied load divided by the area of the impressions
made by an indentor. (a) Is he correct? (b) If not,
what are some of the other principles involved in
hardness testing, and what are the associated tests?
3.27.
A batch of annealed steel has just been received
from the vendor. It is supposed to have a tensile
strength in the range 60,000 to 70,000 lb/in2. A
Brinell hardness test in the receiving department
yields a value of HB ¼ 118. (a) Does the steel meet
the specification on tensile strength? (b) Estimate
the yield strength of the material.
Viscosity of Fluids
3.28.
Two flat plates, separated by a space of 4 mm,
are moving relative to each other at a velocity of
5 m/sec. The space between them is occupied by a
fluid of unknown viscosity. The motion of the plates
is resisted by a shear stress of 10 Pa because of the
viscosity of the fluid. Assuming that the velocity
gradient of the fluid is constant, determine the
coefficient of viscosity of the fluid.
3.29.
Two parallel surfaces, separated by a space of 0.5 in
that is occupied by a fluid, are moving relative to
each other at a velocity of 25 in/sec. The motion is
resisted by a shear stress of 0.3 lb/in2 because of the
viscosity of the fluid. If the velocity gradient in the
space between the surfaces is constant, determine
the viscosity of the fluid.
3.30.
A 125.0-mm-diameter shaft rotates inside a station-
ary bushing whose inside diameter ¼ 125.6 mm and
length ¼ 50.0 mm. In the clearance between the shaft
and the bushing is a lubricating oil whose viscosity ¼
0.14 Pa-s. The shaft rotates at a velocity of 400 rev/
min; this speed and the action of the oil are sufficient
to keep the shaft centered inside the bushing. Deter-
mine the magnitude of the torque due to viscosity
that acts to resist the rotation of the shaft.
66
Chapter 3/Mechanical Properties of Materials

4
PHYSICAL
PROPERTIES
OF MATERIALS
Chapter Contents
4.1
Volumetric and Melting Properties
4.1.1
Density
4.1.2
Thermal Expansion
4.1.3
Melting Characteristics
4.2
Thermal Properties
4.2.1
Specific Heat and Thermal Conductivity
4.2.2
Thermal Properties in Manufacturing
4.3
Mass Diffusion
4.4
Electrical Properties
4.4.1
Resistivity and Conductivity
4.4.2
Classes of Materials by Electrical
Properties
4.5
Electrochemical Processes
Physical properties, as the term is used here, defines the
behavior of materials in response to physical forces other
than mechanical. They include volumetric, thermal, electrical,
andelectrochemicalproperties.Componentsinaproductmust
domorethansimplywithstandmechanical stresses. They must
conductelectricity(orpreventitsconduction),allowheattobe
transferred (or allow it to escape), transmit light (or block its
transmission), and satisfy myriad other functions.
Physical properties are important in manufacturing be-
cause they often influence the performance of the process. For
example,thermalpropertiesoftheworkmaterialinmachining
determine the cutting temperature, which affects how long the
tool can be used before it fails. In microelectronics, electrical
properties of silicon and the way in which these properties can
bealteredbyvariouschemicalandphysicalprocessescomprise
the basis of semiconductor manufacturing.
This chapter discusses the physical properties that are
most important in manufacturing—properties that will be
encountered in subsequent chapters of the book. They are
dividedintomajorcategoriessuchasvolumetric,thermal,elec-
trical, and soon. We also relate these propertiestomanufactur-
ing, aswedidinthe previouschapteronmechanical properties.
4.1
VOLUMETRIC AND
MELTING PROPERTIES
These properties are related to the volume of solids and how
they are affected by temperature. The properties include
density, thermal expansion, and melting point. They are
explained in the following, and a listing of typical values
for selected engineering materials is presented in Table 4.1.
4.1.1 DENSITY
In engineering, the density of a material is its weight per unit
volume. Its symbol is r, and typical units are g/cm3 (lb/in3).
67

The density of an element is determined by its atomic number and other factors, such as
atomic radius and atomic packing. The term specific gravity expresses the density of a
material relative to the density of water and is therefore a ratio with no units.
Density is an important consideration in the selection of a material for a given
application, but it is generally not the only property of interest. Strength is also important,
and the two properties are often related in a strength-to-weight ratio, which is the tensile
strength of the material divided by its density. The ratio is useful in comparing materials for
structural applications in aircraft, automobiles, and other products in which weight and
energy are of concern.
4.1.2 THERMAL EXPANSION
The density of a material is a function of temperature. The general relationship is that
density decreases with increasing temperature. Put another way, the volume per unit weight
increases with temperature. Thermal expansion is the name given to this effect that
temperature has on density. It is usually expressed as the coefficient of thermal expansion,
which measures the change in length per degree of temperature, as mm/mm/C (in/in/F). It
is a length ratio rather than a volume ratio because this is easier to measure and apply. It is
TABLE 4.1
Volumetric properties in U.S. customary units for selected engineering materials.
Density, r
Coefficient of Thermal
Expansion, a
Melting Point, Tm
Material
g/cm3
lb/in3
C1  106
F1  106
C
F
Metals
Aluminum
2.70
0.098
24
13.3
660
1220
Copper
8.97
0.324
17
9.4
1083
1981
Iron
7.87
0.284
12.1
6.7
1539
2802
Lead
11.35
0.410
29
16.1
327
621
Magnesium
1.74
0.063
26
14.4
650
1202
Nickel
8.92
0.322
13.3
7.4
1455
2651
Steel
7.87
0.284
12
6.7
a
a
Tin
7.31
0.264
23
12.7
232
449
Tungsten
19.30
0.697
4.0
2.2
3410
6170
Zinc
7.15
0.258
40
22.2
420
787
Ceramics
Glass
2.5
0.090
1.8–9.0
1.0–5.0
b
b
Alumina
3.8
0.137
9.0
5.0
NA
NA
Silica
2.66
0.096
NA
NA
b
b
Polymers
Phenol resins
1.3
0.047
60
33
c
c
Nylon
1.16
0.042
100
55
b
b
Teflon
2.2
0.079
100
55
b
b
Natural rubber
1.2
0.043
80
45
b
b
Polyethylene (low density)
0.92
0.033
180
100
b
b
Polystyrene
1.05
0.038
60
33
b
b
Compiled from, [2], [3], [4], and other sources.
aMelting characteristics of steel depend on composition.
bSoftens at elevated temperatures and does not have a well-defined melting point.
cChemically degrades at high temperatures. NA ¼ not available; value of property for this material could not be obtained.
68
Chapter 4/Physical Properties of Materials

consistent with the usual design situation in which dimensional changes are of greater
interest than volumetric changes. The change in length corresponding to a given tempera-
ture change is given by
L2  L1 ¼ aL1(T2  T1)
ð4:1Þ
where a ¼ coefficient of thermal expansion, C1(F1); and L1 and L2 are lengths, mm
(in), corresponding, respectively, to temperatures T1 and T2, C (F).
Values of coefficient of thermal expansion given in Table 4.1 suggest that it has a
linear relationship with temperature. This is only an approximation. Not only is length
affected by temperature, but the thermal expansion coefficient itself is also affected. For
some materials it increases with temperature; for other materials it decreases. These
changes are usually not significant enough to be of much concern, and values like those in
the table are quite useful in design calculations for the range of temperatures contemplated
in service. Changes in the coefficient are more substantial when the metal undergoes a
phase transformation, such as from solid to liquid, or from one crystal structure to another.
In manufacturing operations, thermal expansion is put to good use in shrink fit and
expansion fit assemblies (Section 32.3) inwhicha partis heated to increase itssizeor cooled
to decrease its size to permit insertion into some other part. When the part returns to
ambient temperature, a tightly fitted assembly is obtained. Thermal expansion can be a
problem in heat treatment (Chapter 27) and welding (Section 30.6) because of thermal
stresses that develop in the material during these processes.
4.1.3 MELTING CHARACTERISTICS
For a pure element, the melting point Tm is the temperature at which the material
transforms from solid to liquid state. The reverse transformation, from liquid to solid,
occurs at the same temperature and is called the freezing point. For crystalline elements,
such as metals, the melting and freezing temperatures are the same. A certain amount of
heat energy, called the heat of fusion, is required at this temperature to accomplish the
transformation from solid to liquid.
Melting of a metal element at a specific temperature, as it has been described, assumes
equilibrium conditions. Exceptions occur in nature; for example, when a molten metal is
cooled, it may remain in the liquid state below its freezing point if nucleation of crystals does
not initiate immediately. When this happens, the liquid is said to be supercooled.
There are other variations in the melting process—differences in the way melting
occurs indifferent materials. For example, unlike pure metals, most metal alloys donot have a
single melting point. Instead, melting begins at a certain temperature, called the solidus, and
continuesasthetemperatureincreasesuntilfinallyconvertingcompletelytotheliquidstateat
a temperature called the liquidus. Between the two temperatures, the alloy is a mixture of
solid and molten metals, the amounts of each being inversely proportional to their relative
distances from the liquidus and solidus. Although most alloys behave in this way, exceptions
are eutecticalloys that melt (andfreeze)ata singletemperature. These issues areexaminedin
the discussion of phase diagrams in Chapter 6.
Another difference in melting occurs with noncrystalline materials (glasses). In these
materials, there is a gradual transition from solid to liquid states. The solid material gradually
softens as temperature increases, finally becoming liquid at the melting point. During
softening, the material has a consistency of increasing plasticity (increasingly like a fluid)
as it gets closer to the melting point.
These differences in melting characteristics among pure metals, alloys, and glass are
portrayed in Figure 4.1. The plots show changes in density as a function of temperature
for three hypothetical materials: a pure metal, an alloy, and glass. Plotted in the figure is
the volumetric change, which is the reciprocal of density.
Section 4.1/Volumetric and Melting Properties
69

The importance of melting in manufacturing is obvious. In metal casting (Chapters
10 and 11), the metal is melted and then poured into a mold cavity. Metals with lower
melting points are generally easier to cast, but if the melting temperature is too low, the
metal loses its applicability as an engineering material. Melting characteristics of
polymers are important in plastic molding and other polymer shaping processes (Chap-
ter 13). Sintering of powdered metals and ceramics requires knowledge of melting points.
Sintering does not melt the materials, but the temperatures used in the process must
approach the melting point to achieve the required bonding of the powders.
4.2
THERMAL PROPERTIES
Much of the previous section is concerned with the effects of temperature on volumetric
properties of materials. Certainly, thermal expansion, melting, and heat of fusion are
thermal properties because temperature determines the thermal energy level of the
atoms, leading to the changes in the materials. The current section examines several
additional thermal properties—ones that relate to the storage and flow of heat within a
substance. The usual properties of interest are specific heat and thermal conductivity,
values of which are compiled for selected materials in Table 4.2.
4.2.1 SPECIFIC HEAT AND THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY
The specific heat C of a material is defined as the quantity of heat energy required to
increase the temperature of a unit mass of the material by one degree. Some typical values
arelistedinTable4.2.Todeterminetheamountofenergy neededtoheat acertainweightof
a metal in a furnace to a given elevated temperature, the following equation can be used
H ¼ CW(T2  T1)
ð4:2Þ
where H ¼ amount of heat energy, J (Btu); C ¼ specific heat of the material, J/kg C (Btu/lb
F); W ¼ its weight, kg (lb); and (T2  T1) ¼ change in temperature, C (F).
FIGURE 4.1
Changes in
volume per unit weight
(1/density) as a function
of temperature for a
hypothetical pure metal,
alloy, and glass; all
exhibiting similar thermal
expansion and melting
characteristics.
70
Chapter 4/Physical Properties of Materials

The volumetric heat storage capacity of a material is often of interest. This is simply
density multiplied by specific heat rC. Thus, volumetric specific heat is the heat energy
required to raise the temperature of a unit volume of material by one degree, J/mm3 C
(Btu/in3 F).
Conduction is a fundamental heat-transfer process. It involves transfer of thermal
energy within a material from molecule to molecule by purely thermal motions; no transfer
of mass occurs. Thethermal conductivityof a substanceis therefore its capabilitytotransfer
heat through itself by this physical mechanism. It is measured by the coefficient of thermal
conductivity k, which has typical units of J/s mm C (Btu/in hr F). The coefficient of
thermal conductivity is generally high in metals, low in ceramics and plastics.
The ratio of thermal conductivity to volumetric specific heat is frequently encoun-
tered in heat transfer analysis. It is called the thermal diffusivity K and is determined as
K ¼ k
rC
ð4:3Þ
It can be used to calculate cutting temperatures in machining (Section 21.5.1).
4.2.2 THERMAL PROPERTIES IN MANUFACTURING
Thermal properties play an important role in manufacturing because heat generation is
common in so many processes. In some operations heat is the energy that accomplishes
the process; in others heat is generated as a consequence of the process.
Specific heat is of interest for several reasons. In processes that require heating of the
material (e.g., casting, heat treating, and hot metal forming), specific heat determines the
amount of heat energy needed to raise the temperature to a desired level, according to
Eq. (4.2).
In many processes carried out at ambient temperature, the mechanical energy to
perform the operation is converted to heat, which raises the temperature of the workpart.
Thisiscommoninmachiningandcoldformingofmetals.Thetemperatureriseisafunctionof
the metal’s specific heat. Coolants are often used in machining to reduce these temperatures,
and here the fluid’s heat capacity is critical. Water is almost always employed as the base for
these fluids because of its high heat-carrying capacity.
TABLE 4.2
Values of common thermal properties for selected materials. Values are at room temperature, and
these values change for different temperatures.
Specific
Heat
Thermal
Conductivity
Specific
Heat
Thermal
Conductivity
Material
Cal/g Ca or
Btu/lbm F
J/s mm
C
Btu/hr
in F
Material
Cal/g Ca or
Btu/lbm F
J/s mm
C
Btu/hr
in F
Metals
Ceramics
Aluminum
0.21
0.22
9.75
Alumina
0.18
0.029
1.4
Cast iron
0.11
0.06
2.7
Concrete
0.2
0.012
0.6
Copper
0.092
0.40
18.7
Polymers
Iron
0.11
0.072
2.98
Phenolics
0.4
0.00016
0.0077
Lead
0.031
0.033
1.68
Polyethylene
0.5
0.00034
0.016
Magnesium
0.25
0.16
7.58
Teflon
0.25
0.00020
0.0096
Nickel
0.105
0.070
2.88
Natural rubber
0.48
0.00012
0.006
Steel
0.11
0.046
2.20
Other
Stainless steelb
0.11
0.014
0.67
Water (liquid)
1.00
0.0006
0.029
Tin
0.054
0.062
3.0
Ice
0.46
0.0023
0.11
Zinc
0.091
0.112
5.41
Compiled from [2], [3], [6], and other sources.
aSpecific heat has the same numerical value in Btu/lbm-F or Cal/g-C. 1.0 Calory ¼ 4.186 Joule.
bAustenitic (18-8) stainless steel.
Section 4.2/Thermal Properties
71

Thermalconductivityfunctionstodissipateheatinmanufacturingprocesses,sometimes
beneficially, sometimes not. In mechanical processes such as metal forming and machining,
muchofthepowerrequiredtooperatetheprocessisconvertedtoheat.Theabilityofthework
materialandtoolingtoconductheatawayfromitssourceishighlydesirableintheseprocesses.
Ontheotherhand, high thermal conductivityof the workmetal is undesirableinfusion
welding processes such as arc welding. In these operations, the heat input must be concen-
trated at the joint location so that the metal can be melted. For example, copper is generally
difficult to weld because its high thermal conductivity allows heat to be conducted from the
energy source into the work too rapidly, inhibiting heat buildup for melting at the joint.
4.3
MASS DIFFUSION
In addition to heat transfer in a material, there is also mass transfer. Mass diffusion involves
movement of atoms or molecules within a material or across a boundary between two
materials in contact. It is perhaps more appealing to one’s intuition that such a phenomenon
occurs in liquids and gases, but it also occurs in solids. It occurs in pure metals, in alloys, and
between materials that share a common interface. Because of thermal agitation of the
atoms in a material (solid, liquid, or gas), atoms are continuously moving about. In liquids
and gases, where the level of thermal agitation is high, it is a free-roaming movement. In
solids (metals in particular), the atomic motion is facilitated by vacancies and other
imperfections in the crystal structure.
Diffusion can be illustrated by the series of sketches in Figure 4.2 for the case of two
metals suddenly brought into intimate contact with each other. At the start, both metals
havetheirownatomicstructure;butwithtimethereisanexchangeofatoms,notonlyacross
theboundary,butwithintheseparatepieces.Givenenoughtime,theassemblyoftwopieces
will finally reach a uniform composition throughout.
Temperature is an important factor in diffusion. At higher temperatures, thermal
agitation is greater and the atoms can move about more freely. Another factor is the
concentration gradient dc=dx, which indicates the concentration of the two types of atoms
in a direction of interest defined by x. The concentration gradient is plotted in Figure 4.2(b)
to correspond to the instantaneous distribution of atoms in the assembly. The relationship
often used to describe mass diffusion is Fick’s first law:
dm ¼ D dc
dt


A dt
ð4:4Þ
where dm ¼ small amount of material transferred, D ¼ diffusion coefficient of the metal,
which increases rapidly with temperature, dc=dx ¼ concentration gradient, A ¼ area of the
boundary, and dt represents a small time increment. An alternative expression of Eq. (4.4)
gives the mass diffusion rate:
dm
dt ¼ D dc
dt


A
ð4:5Þ
Although these equations are difficult to use in calculations because of the problem
of assessing D, they are helpful in understanding diffusion and the variables on which D
depends.
Mass diffusion is used in several processes. A number of surface-hardening treatments
arebasedondiffusion(Section27.4),includingcarburizingandnitriding.Amongthewelding
processes, diffusion welding (Section 30.5.2) is used to join two components by pressing them
together and allowing diffusion to occur across the boundary to create a permanent bond.
Diffusion is also used in electronics manufacturing to alter the surface chemistry of a
semiconductor chip in very localized regions to create circuit details (Section 34.4.3).
72
Chapter 4/Physical Properties of Materials

4.4
ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES
Engineering materials exhibit a great variation in their capacity to conduct electricity. This
section defines the physical properties by which this capacity is measured.
4.4.1 RESISTIVITY AND CONDUCTIVITY
The flow of electrical current involves movement of charge carriers—infinitesimally small
particles possessing an electrical charge. In solids, these charge carriers are electrons. In a
liquid solution, charge carriers are positive and negative ions. The movement of charge
carriers is driven by the presence of an electric voltage and resisted by the inherent
characteristics of the material, such as atomic structure and bonding between atoms and
molecules. This is the familiar relationship defined by Ohm’s law
I ¼ E
R
ð4:6Þ
where I ¼ current, A; E ¼ voltage, V; and R ¼ electrical resistance, V.
Pure A
Pure B
Interface
(1)
(2)
(a)
(3)
A
B
Uniform mixture of A and B
A and B
FIGURE 4.2
Mass diffusion: (a) model of atoms in two solid blocks in contact: (1) at the start when
two pieces are brought together, they each have their individual compositions; (2) after some time,
an exchange of atoms has occurred; and (3) eventually, a condition of uniform concentration occurs.
The concentration gradient dc=dx for metal A is plotted in (b) of the ﬁgure.
Section 4.4/Electrical Properties
73

The resistance in a uniform section of material (e.g., a wire) depends on its length L,
cross-sectional area A, and the resistivity of the material r; thus,
R ¼ r L
A or r ¼ R A
L
ð4:7Þ
where resistivity has units of V-m2/m or V-m (V-in).
Resistivity is the basic property that defines a material’s capability to resist current flow.
Table 4.3 lists values of resistivity for selected materials. Resistivity is not a constant; instead
it varies, as do so many other properties, with temperature. For metals, it increases with
temperature.
It is often more convenient to consider a material as conducting electrical current
rather than resisting its flow. The conductivity of a material is simply the reciprocal of
resistivity:
Electrical conductivity ¼ 1
r
ð4:8Þ
where conductivity has units of (V-m)1 ((V-in)1).
4.4.2 CLASSES OF MATERIALS BY ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES
Metals are the best conductors of electricity, because of their metallic bonding. They have
the lowest resistivity (Table 4.3). Most ceramics and polymers, whose electrons are tightly
bound by covalent and/or ionic bonding, are poor conductors. Many of these materials are
used as insulators because they possess high resistivities.
An insulator is sometimes referred to as a dielectric, because the term dielectric
means nonconductor of direct current. It is a material that can be placed between two
electrodes without conducting current between them. However, if the voltage is high
enough, the current will suddenly pass through the material; for example, in the form of an
arc. The dielectric strength of an insulatingmaterial, then, isthe electrical potential required
to break down the insulator per unit thickness. Appropriate units are volts/m (volts/in).
In addition to conductors and insulators (or dielectrics), there are also supercon-
ductors and semiconductors. A superconductor is a material that exhibits zero resistivity. It
is a phenomenon that has been observed in certain materials at low temperatures
TABLE 4.3
Resistivity of selected materials.
Resistivity
Resistivity
Material
V-m
V-in
Material
V-m
V-in
Conductors
106 – 108
104 – 107
Conductors, continued
Aluminum
2.8  108
1.1  106
Steel, low C
17.0  108
6.7  106
Aluminum alloys
4.0  108a
1.6  106a
Steel, stainless
70.0  108a
27.6  106
Cast iron
65.0  108a
25.6  106a
Tin
11.5  108
4.5  106
Copper
1.7  108
0.67  106
Zinc
6.0  108
2.4  106
Gold
2.4  108
0.95  106
Carbon
5000  108b
2000  106b
Iron
9.5  108
3.7  106
Semiconductors
101 – 105
102 – 107
Lead
20.6  108
8.1  106
Silicon
1.0  103
Magnesium
4.5  108
1.8  106
Insulators
1012 – 1015
1013 – 1017
Nickel
6.8  108
2.7  106
Natural rubber
1.0  1012b
0.4  1014b
Silver
1.6  108
0.63  106
Polyethylene
100  1012b
40  1014b
Compiled from various standard sources.
aValue varies with alloy composition.
bValue is approximate.
74
Chapter 4/Physical Properties of Materials

approachingabsolutezero. One might expect theexistenceofthis phenomenon,because of
the significant effect that temperature has on resistivity. That these superconducting
materials exist is of great scientific interest. If materials could be developed that exhibit
this property at more normal temperatures, there would be significant practical implica-
tions in power transmission, electronic switching speeds, and magnetic field applications.
Semiconductors have already proved their practical worth: Their applications range
from mainframe computers to household appliances and automotive engine controllers. As
one would guess, a semiconductor is a material whose resistivity lies between insulators and
conductors. The typical range is shown inTable 4.3. The most commonly used semiconductor
materialtodayissilicon(Section7.5.2),largelybecauseofitsabundanceinnature,relativelow
cost,andeaseofprocessing.Whatmakessemiconductorsuniqueisthecapacitytosignificantly
alter conductivities in their surface chemistries in very localized areas to fabricate integrated
circuits (Chapter 34).
Electrical properties play an important role in various manufacturing processes.
Some of the nontraditional processes use electrical energy to remove material. Electric
discharge machining (Section 26.3.1) uses the heat generated by electrical energy in the
form of sparks to remove material from metals. Most of the important welding processes
use electrical energy to melt the joint metal. Finally, the capacity to alter the electrical
properties of semiconductor materials is the basis for microelectronics manufacturing.
4.5
ELECTROCHEMICAL PROCESSES
Electrochemistry is a field of science concerned with the relationship between electricity
and chemical changes, and with the conversion of electrical and chemical energy.
In a water solution, the molecules of an acid, base, or salt are dissociated into
positively and negatively charged ions. These ions are the charge carriers in the solution—
they allow electric current to be conducted, playing the same role that electrons play in
metallic conduction. The ionized solution is called an electrolyte; and electrolytic conduc-
tionrequiresthatcurrententerandleavethesolutionatelectrodes.Thepositiveelectrodeis
called the anode, and the negative electrode is the cathode. The whole arrangement is
called an electrolytic cell. At each electrode, some chemical reaction occurs, such as the
deposition or dissolution of material, or the decomposition of gas from the solution.
Electrolysis is the name given to these chemical changes occurring in the solution.
Consideraspecificcaseofelectrolysis:decompositionofwater,illustratedinFigure4.3.
To accelerate the process, dilute sulfuric acid (H2SO4) isused as the electrolyte, and platinum
and carbon (both chemically inert) are used as electrodes. The electrolyte dissociates in the
ions Hþ and SO4
¼. The Hþ ions are attracted to the negatively charged cathode; upon
FIGURE 4.3
Example of electrolysis:
decomposition of water.
Section 4.5/Electrochemical Processes
75

reaching it they acquire an electron and combine into molecules of hydrogen gas:
2Hþ þ 2e ! H2 (gas)
ð4:9aÞ
The SO4
¼ ions are attracted to the anode, transferring electrons to it to form additional
sulfuric acid and liberate oxygen:
2SO4
¼  4e þ 2H2O ! 2H2SO4 þ O2 (gas)
ð4:9bÞ
TheproductH2SO4isdissociatedintoionsofH+andSO4
¼ againandsotheprocesscontinues.
Inadditiontotheproductionofhydrogenandoxygengases,asillustratedbytheexample,
electrolysis is also used in several other industrial processes. Two examples are (1) electro-
plating (Section 28.3.1), an operation that adds a thin coating of one metal (e.g., chromium) to
the surface of a second metal (e.g., steel) for decorative or other purposes; and (2) electro-
chemicalmachining(Section26.2),aprocessinwhichmaterialisremovedfromthesurfaceofa
metalpart.Boththeseoperationsrelyonelectrolysistoeitheraddorremovematerialfromthe
surface of a metal part. In electroplating, the workpart is set up in the electrolytic circuit as the
cathode, so that the positive ions of the coating metal are attracted to the negatively charged
part.Inelectrochemicalmachining,theworkpartistheanode,andatoolwiththedesiredshape
isthecathode.Theactionofelectrolysisinthissetupistoremovemetalfromthepartsurfacein
regions determined by the shape of the tool as it slowly feeds into the work.
The two physical laws that determine the amount of material deposited or removed
from a metallic surface were first stated by the British scientist Michael Faraday:
1. The mass of a substance liberated in an electrolytic cell is proportional to the quantity
of electricity passing through the cell.
2. When the same quantity of electricity is passed through different electrolytic cells, the
masses of the substances liberated are proportional to their chemical equivalents.
Faraday’s laws are used in the subsequent coverage of electroplating and electro-
chemical machining.
REFERENCES
[1] Guy, A. G., and Hren, J. J. Elements of Physical
Metallurgy, 3rd ed. Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company, Reading, Massachusetts, 1974.
[2] Flinn, R. A., and Trojan, P. K. Engineering Materials
and Their Applications, 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1995.
[3] Kreith, F., and Bohn, M. S., Principles of Heat
Transfer, 6th ed. CL-Engineering, New York, 2000.
[4] Metals Handbook, 10th ed., Vol. 1, Properties and
Selection: Iron, Steel, and High Performance Alloys.
ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio, 1990.
[5] Metals Handbook, 10th ed., Vol. 2, Properties and
Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Special Purpose
Materials.ASMInternational,MetalsPark,Ohio,1990.
[6] Van Vlack, L. H. Elements of Materials Science and
Engineering, 6th ed. Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Massachusetts, 1989.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.1.
Define density as a material property.
4.2.
What is the difference in melting characteristics
between a pure metal element and an alloy metal?
4.3.
Describe the melting characteristics of a non-
crystalline material such as glass.
4.4.
Define specific heat as a material property.
4.5.
What is thermal conductivity as a material property?
4.6.
Define thermal diffusivity.
4.7.
What are the important variables that affect mass
diffusion?
4.8.
Define resistivity as a material property.
4.9.
Why are metals better conductors of electricity than
ceramics and polymers?
4.10.
What is dielectric strength as a material property?
4.11.
What is an electrolyte?
76
Chapter 4/Physical Properties of Materials

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 12 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point.
Each omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct
number of answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct
answers.
4.1.
Which one of the following metals has the lowest
density: (a) aluminum, (b) copper, (c) magnesium,
or (d) tin?
4.2.
The thermal expansion properties of polymers are
generally (a) greater than, (b) less than, or (c) the
same as those of metals?
4.3.
In the heating of most metal alloys, melting begins
at a certain temperature and concludes at a higher
temperature. In these cases, which of the following
temperatures marks the beginning of melting:
(a) liquidus or (b) solidus?
4.4.
Which one of the following materials has the highest
specific heat: (a) aluminum, (b) concrete, (c) poly-
ethylene, or (d) water?
4.5.
Copper is generally considered easy to weld be-
cause of its high thermal conductivity: (a) true or (b)
false?
4.6.
The mass diffusion rate dm=dt across a boundary
between two different metals is a function of which
of the following variables (four best answers):
(a) concentration gradient dc=dx, (b) contact
area, (c) density, (d) melting point, (e) thermal
expansion, (f) temperature, and (g) time?
4.7.
Which of the following pure metals is the best
conductor of electricity: (a) aluminum, (b) copper,
(c) gold, or (d) silver?
4.8.
A superconductor is characterized by which of the
following (one best answer): (a) high conductivity,
(b) resistivity properties between those of conduc-
tors and semiconductors, (c) very low resistivity, or
(d) zero resistivity?
4.9.
In an electrolytic cell, the anode is the electrode that
is (a) positive or (b) negative.
PROBLEMS
4.1.
The starting diameter of a shaft is 25.00 mm. This
shaft is to be inserted into a hole in an expansion fit
assembly operation. To be readily inserted, the shaft
must be reduced in diameter by cooling. Determine
the temperature to which the shaft must be reduced
from room temperature (20C) in order to reduce
its diameter to 24.98 mm. Refer to Table 4.1.
4.2.
A bridge built with steel girders is 500 m in length and
12 m in width. Expansion joints are provided to com-
pensate for the change in length in the support girders
as the temperature fluctuates. Each expansion joint
can compensate for a maximum of 40 mm of change in
length. From historical records it is estimated that the
minimum and maximum temperatures in the region
will be 35C and 38C, respectively. What is the
minimum number of expansion joints required?
4.3.
Aluminum has a density of 2.70 g/cm3 at room
temperature (20C). Determine its density at
650C, using data in Table 4.1 as a reference.
4.4.
WithreferencetoTable4.1,determinetheincreasein
length of a steel bar whose length ¼ 10.0 in, if the bar
is heated from room temperature of 70F to 500F.
4.5.
With reference to Table 4.2, determine the quantity
of heat required to increase the temperature of an
aluminum block that is 10 cm  10 cm  10 cm from
room temperature (21C) to 300C.
4.6.
What is the resistance R of a length of copper wire
whose length = 10 m and whose diameter = 0.10
mm? Use Table 4.3 as a reference.
4.7.
A 16-gage nickel wire (0.0508-in diameter) connects
a solenoid to a control circuit that is 32.8 ft away.
(a) What is the resistance of the wire? Use Table 4.3
as a reference. (b) If a current was passed through
the wire, it would heat up. How does this affect the
resistance?
4.8.
Aluminum wiring was used in many homes in the
1960s because of the high cost of copper at the time.
Aluminum wire that was 12 gauge (a measure of
cross-sectional area) was rated at 15 A of current. If
copper wire of the same gauge were used to replace
the aluminum wire, what current should the wire be
capable of carrying if all factors except resistivity
are considered equal? Assume that the resistance of
the wire is the primary factor that determines the
current it can carry and the cross-sectional area and
length are the same for the aluminum and copper
wires.
Problems
77

5
DIMENSIONS,
SURFACES,
AND THEIR
MEASUREMENT
Chapter Contents
5.1
Dimensions, Tolerances, and Related
Attributes
5.1.1
Dimensions and Tolerances
5.1.2
Other Geometric Attributes
5.2
Conventional Measuring Instruments
and Gages
5.2.1
Precision Gage Blocks
5.2.2
Measuring Instruments for Linear
Dimensions
5.2.3
Comparative Instruments
5.2.4
Fixed Gages
5.2.5
Angular Measurements
5.3
Surfaces
5.3.1
Characteristics of Surfaces
5.3.2
Surface Texture
5.3.3
Surface Integrity
5.4
Measurement of Surfaces
5.4.1
Measurement of Surface Roughness
5.4.2
Evaluation of Surface Integrity
5.5
Effect of Manufacturing Processes
In addition to mechanical and physical properties of materi-
als, other factors that determine the performance of a
manufactured product include the dimensions and surfaces
of its components. Dimensions are the linear or angular sizes
of a component specified on the part drawing. Dimensions
are important because they determine how well the compo-
nents of a product fit together during assembly. When
fabricating a given component, it is nearly impossible and
very costly to make the part to the exact dimension given on
the drawing. Instead a limited variation is allowed from the
dimension, and that allowable variation is called a tolerance.
The surfaces of a component are also important. They
affectproductperformance,assemblyfit,andaestheticappeal
that a potential customer might have for the product. A
surface istheexteriorboundaryof anobjectwithitssurround-
ings, which may be another object, a fluid, or space, or
combinations of these. The surface encloses the object’s
bulk mechanical and physical properties.
This chapter discusses dimensions, tolerances, and sur-
faces—three attributes specified by the product designer and
determined by the manufacturing processes used to make the
parts and products. It also considers how these attributes are
assessed using measuring and gaging devices. A closely related
topic is inspection, covered in Chapter 42.
5.1
DIMENSIONS, TOLERANCES,
AND RELATED ATTRIBUTES
The basic parameters used by design engineers to specify
sizes of geometric features on a part drawing are defined in
this section. The parameters include dimensions and toler-
ances, flatness, roundness, and angularity.
78

5.1.1 DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES
ANSI [3] defines a dimension as ‘‘a numerical value expressed in appropriate units of
measure and indicated on a drawing and in other documents along with lines, symbols, and
notes to define the size or geometric characteristic, or both, of a part or part feature.’’
Dimensions on part drawings represent nominal or basic sizes of the part and its features. These are
the values that the designer would like the part size to be, if the part could be made to an exact size
with no errors or variations in the fabrication process. However, there are variations in the
manufacturing process, which are manifested as variations in the part size. Tolerances are used to
deﬁne the limits of the allowed variation. Quoting again from the ANSI standard [3], a tolerance is
‘‘the total amount by which a specific dimension is permitted to vary. The tolerance is the
difference between the maximum and minimum limits.’’
Tolerances can be specified in several ways, illustrated in Figure 5.1. Probably most
common is the bilateral tolerance, in which the variation is permitted in both positive and
negative directionsfrom the nominal dimension.For example, inFigure 5.1(a),thenominal
dimension ¼ 2.500 linear units (e.g., mm, in), with an allowable variation of 0.005 units in
either direction. Parts outside these limits are unacceptable. It is possible for a bilateral
tolerance to be unbalanced; for example, 2.500 +0.010, –0.005 dimensional units. A
unilateral tolerance is one in which the variation from the specified dimension is permitted
in only one direction, either positive or negative, as in Figure 5.1(b). Limit dimensions are
an alternative method to specify the permissible variation in a part feature size; they consist
of the maximum and minimum dimensions allowed, as in Figure 5.1(c).
5.1.2 OTHER GEOMETRIC ATTRIBUTES
Dimensions and tolerances are normally expressed as linear (length) values. There are
other geometric attributes of parts that are also important, such as flatness of a surface,
roundness of a shaft or hole, parallelism between two surfaces, and so on. Definitions of
these terms are listed in Table 5.1.
5.2
CONVENTIONAL MEASURING INSTRUMENTS AND GAGES
Measurement is a procedure in which an unknown quantity is compared with a known
standard, using an accepted and consistent system of units. Two systems of units have
evolved in the world: (1) the U.S. customary system (U.S.C.S.), and (2) the International
Systemof Units(or SI, forSysteme Internationaled’Unites),more popularlyknown as the
metric system. Both systems are used in parallel throughout this book. The metric system
is widely accepted innearly everypart of the industrializedworld except the United States,
which has stubbornly clung to its U.S.C.S. Gradually, the United States is adopting SI.
Measurement provides a numerical value of the quantity of interest, within certain
limits of accuracy and precision. Accuracy is the degree to which the measured value agrees
withthetruevalueofthequantityofinterest.Ameasurementprocedureisaccuratewhenitis
FIGURE 5.1
Three
ways to specify tolerance
limits for a nominal
dimension of 2.500: (a) bi-
lateral, (b) unilateral, and
(c) limit dimensions.
Section 5.2/Conventional Measuring Instruments and Gages
79

absent of systematic errors, which are positive or negative deviations from the true value that
are consistent from one measurement to the next. Precision is the degree of repeatability in
the measurement process. Good precision means that random errors in the measurement
procedure are minimized. Random errors are usually associated with human participation in
the measurement process. Examples include variations in the setup, imprecise reading of
the scale, round-off approximations, and so on. Nonhuman contributors to random error
include temperature changes, gradual wear and/or misalignment in the working elements of
the device, and other variations.
Closely related to measurement is gaging. Gaging (also spelled gauging) determines
simply whether the part characteristic meets or does not meet the design specification. It is
usually faster than measuring, but scant information is provided about the actual value of
the characteristic of interest. The video clip on measurement and gaging illustrates some of
the topics discussed in this chapter.
VIDEO CLIP
Measurement and Gaging. This clip contains three segments: (1) precision, resolution,
and accuracy, (2) how to read a vernier caliper, and (3) how to read a micrometer.
This section considers the variety of manually operated measuring instruments and gages
used to evaluate dimensions such as length and diameter, as well as features such as angles,
straightness, and roundness. This type of equipment is found in metrology labs, inspection
departments, and tool rooms. The logical starting topic is precision gage blocks.
5.2.1 PRECISION GAGE BLOCKS
Precision gage blocks are the standards against which other dimensional measuring instru-
mentsandgagesarecompared.Gageblocksareusuallysquareorrectangular.Themeasuring
surfacesarefinishedtobedimensionallyaccurateandparalleltowithinseveralmillionthsof
an inch and are polished to a mirror finish. Several grades of precision gage blocks are
available, with closer tolerances for higher precision grades. The highest grade—the master
laboratory standard—is made to a tolerance of 0.000,03 mm (0.000,001in). Depending
TABLE 5.1
Deﬁnitions of geometric attributes of parts.
Angularity—The extent to which a part feature such
as a surface or axis is at a specified angle relative to
a reference surface. If the angle = 90, then the
attribute is called perpendicularity or squareness.
Circularity—For a surface of revolution such as a
cylinder, circular hole, or cone, circularity is the
degree to which all points on the intersection of the
surface and a plane perpendicular to the axis of
revolution are equidistant from the axis. For a
sphere, circularity is the degree to which all points
on the intersection of the surface and a plane
passing through the center are equidistant from the
center.
Concentricity—The degree to which any two (or
more) part features such as a cylindrical surface and
a circular hole have a common axis.
Cylindricity—The degree to which all points on a
surface of revolution such as a cylinder are
equidistant from the axis of revolution.
Flatness—The extent to which all points on a surface
lie in a single plane.
Parallelism—The degree to which all points on a
part feature such as a surface, line, or axis are
equidistant from a reference plane or line or axis.
Perpendicularity—The degree to which all points on
a part feature such as a surface, line, or axis are 90
from a reference plane or line or axis.
Roundness—Same as circularity.
Squareness—Same as perpendicularity.
Straightness—The degree to which a part feature
such as a line or axis is a straight line.
80
Chapter 5/Dimensions, Surfaces, and their Measurement

ondegreeofhardnessdesiredandpricetheuseriswillingtopay,gageblockscanbemadeout
ofanyofseveralhardmaterials,includingtoolsteel,chrome-platedsteel,chromiumcarbide,
or tungsten carbide.
Precision gage blocks are available in certain standard sizes or in sets, the latter
containing a variety of different-sized blocks. The sizes in a set are systematically deter-
minedsotheycanbestackedtoachievevirtuallyanydimensiondesiredtowithin0.0025mm
(0.0001 in).
For best results, gage blocks must be used on a flat reference surface, such as a surface
plate. A surface plate is a large solid block whose top surface is finished to a flat plane. Most
surface plates today are made of granite. Granite has the advantage of being hard, non-
rusting, nonmagnetic, long wearing, thermally stable, and easy to maintain.
Gage blocks and other high-precision measuring instruments must be used under
standard conditions of temperature and other factors that might adversely affect the
measurement. By international agreement, 20C (68F) has been established as the standard
temperature. Metrology labs operate at this standard. If gage blocks or other measuring
instruments are used in a factory environment in which the temperature differs from this
standard, corrections for thermal expansion or contraction may be required. Also, working
gage blocks used for inspection in the shop are subject to wear and must be calibrated
periodically against more precise laboratory gage blocks.
5.2.2 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS FOR LINEAR DIMENSIONS
Measuring instruments can be divided into two types: graduated and nongraduated.
Graduated measuring devices include a set of markings (called graduations) on a linear
or angular scale to which the object’s feature of interest can be comparedfor measurement.
Nongraduated measuring devices possess no such scale and are used to make comparisons
between dimensions or to transfer a dimension for measurement by a graduated device.
The most basic of the graduated measuring devices is the rule (made of steel, and
often called a steel rule), used to measure linear dimensions. Rules are available in various
lengths. Metric rule lengths include 150, 300, 600, and 1000 mm, with graduations of 1 or 0.5
mm. Common U.S. sizes are 6, 12, and 24 in, with graduations of 1/32, 1/64, or 1/100 in.
Calipers are available in either nongraduated or graduated styles. A nongraduated
caliper(referredtosimply as acaliper)consists of twolegs joinedbya hingemechanism, asin
Figure 5.2. The endsofthe legs aremade tocontactthe surfacesoftheobject being measured,
FIGURE 5.2
Two sizes
of outside calipers.
(Courtesy of L.S. Starrett
Co.)
Section 5.2/Conventional Measuring Instruments and Gages
81

and the hinge is designed to hold the legs in position during use. The contacts point either
inward or outward. When they point inward, as in Figure 5.2, the instrument is an outside
caliper and is used for measuring outside dimensions such as a diameter. When the contacts
point outward, it is an inside caliper, which is used to measure the distance between two
internalsurfaces.Aninstrumentsimilarinconfigurationtothecaliperisadivider,exceptthat
both legs are straight and terminate in hard, sharply pointed contacts. Dividers are used for
scaling distances between two points or lines on a surface, and for scribing circles or arcs onto
a surface.
A variety of graduated calipers are available for various measurement purposes. The
simplest is the slide caliper, which consists of a steel rule to which two jaws are added, one
fixed at the end of the rule and the other movable, shown in Figure 5.3. Slide calipers can be
used for inside or outside measurements, depending on whether the inside or outside jaw
faces are used. In use, the jaws are forced into contact with the part surfaces to be measured,
and the location of the movable jaw indicates the dimension of interest. Slide calipers permit
more accurate and precise measurements than simple rules. A refinement of the slide caliper
is the vernier caliper, shown in Figure 5.4. In this device, the movable jaw includes a vernier
scale, named after P. Vernier (1580–1637), a French mathematician who invented it. The
vernierprovidesgraduationsof0.01mmintheSI(and0.001inchintheU.S.customaryscale),
much more precise than the slide caliper.
The micrometer is a widely used and very accurate measuring device, the most
common form of which consists of a spindle and a C-shaped anvil, as in Figure 5.5. The
spindle is moved relative to the fixed anvil by means of an accurate screw thread. On a
typical U.S. micrometer, each rotation of the spindle provides 0.025 in of linear travel.
Attached tothe spindle is a thimblegraduated with25marks around its circumference, each
mark corresponding to 0.001 in. The micrometer sleeve is usually equipped with a vernier,
FIGURE 5.3
Slide
caliper, opposite sides of
instrument shown.
(Courtesy of L.S. Starrett
Co.)
82
Chapter 5/Dimensions, Surfaces, and their Measurement

allowingresolutionsascloseas0.0001in.Onamicrometerwithmetricscale,graduationsare
0.01 mm. Modern micrometers (and graduated calipers) are available with electronic
devices that display a digital readout of the measurement (as in the figure). These instru-
ments are easier to read and eliminate much of the human error associated with reading
conventional graduated devices.
The most common micrometer types are (1) external micrometer, Figure 5.5, also
called an outside micrometer, which comes in a variety of standard anvil sizes; (2) internal
micrometer, or inside micrometer, which consists of a head assembly and a set of rods
of different lengths to measure various inside dimensions that might be encountered;
and (3) depth micrometer, similar to an inside micrometer but adapted to measure hole
depths.
FIGURE 5.4
Vernier
caliper. (Courtesy of L.S.
Starrett Co.)
FIGURE 5.5
External
micrometer, standard
1-in size with digital
readout. (Courtesy of
L. S. Starrett Co.)
Section 5.2/Conventional Measuring Instruments and Gages
83

5.2.3 COMPARATIVE INSTRUMENTS
Comparative instruments are used to make dimensional comparisons between two objects,
such as a workpart and a reference surface. They are usually not capable of providing an
absolute measurement of the quantity of interest; instead, they measure the magnitude and
direction of the deviation between two objects. Instruments in this category include
mechanical and electronic gages.
Mechanical Gages: Dial Indicators
Mechanical gages are designed to mechanically
magnifythedeviation to permit observation.The mostcommon instrumentinthis category
is the dial indicator (Figure 5.6), which converts and amplifies the linear movement of a
contactpointer intorotationofadialneedle. Thedialisgraduatedinsmallunitssuch as0.01
mm (or 0.001 in). Dial indicators are used in many applications to measure straightness,
flatness, parallelism, squareness, roundness, and runout. A typical setup for measuring
runout is illustrated in Figure 5.7.
Electronic Gages
Electronic gages are a family of measuring and gaging instruments
basedontransducerscapableofconvertingalineardisplacementintoanelectricalsignal.The
electrical signal is then amplified and transformed into a suitable data format such as a digital
readout, as in Figure 5.5. Applications of electronic gages have grown rapidly in recent years,
driven by advances in microprocessor technology. They are gradually replacing many of the
conventional measuring and gaging devices. Advantages of electronic gages include (1) good
sensitivity, accuracy, precision, repeatability, and speed of response; (2) ability to sense
very small dimensions—down to 0.025 mm (1 m-in.); (3) ease of operation; (4) reduced
FIGURE 5.6
Dial
indicator: top view shows
dial and graduated face;
bottom view shows rear
of instrument with cover
plate removed. (Courtesy
of Federal Products Co.,
Providence, RI.)
FIGURE 5.7
Dial
indicator setup to
measure runout; as part
is rotated about its
center, variations in
outside surface relative
to center are indicated on
the dial.
84
Chapter 5/Dimensions, Surfaces, and their Measurement

human error; (5) electrical signal that can be displayed in various formats; and
(6) capability to be interfaced with computer systems for data processing.
5.2.4 FIXED GAGES
A fixed gage is a physical replica of the part dimension to be assessed. There are two basic
categories: mastergage andlimit gage. A mastergage isfabricatedtobeadirectreplicaofthe
nominal size of the part dimension. It is generally used for setting up a comparative
measuring instrument, such as a dial indicator; or for calibrating a measuring device.
A limit gage is fabricated to be a reverse replica of the part dimension and is designed
to check the dimension at one or more of its tolerance limits. A limit gage often consists of
two gages in one piece, the first for checking the lower limit of the tolerance on the part
dimension, and the other for checking the upper limit. These gages are popularly known as
GO/NO-GO gages, because one gage limit allows the part to be inserted, whereas the other
limit does not. The GO limit is used to check the dimension at its maximum material
condition; this is the minimum size for an internal feature such as a hole, and it is the
maximum sizeforanexternalfeature suchas anoutside diameter. TheNO-GO limit isused
to inspect the minimum material condition of the dimension in question.
Common limit gages are snap gages and ring gages for checking outside part dimen-
sions, and plug gages for checking inside dimensions. A snap gage consists of a C-shaped
frame with gaging surfaces located in the jaws of the frame, as in Figure 5.8. It has two gage
buttons, the first being the GO gage, and the second being the NO-GO gage. Snap gages are
used for checking outside dimensions such as diameter, width, thickness, and similar surfaces.
Ringgagesareusedforcheckingcylindricaldiameters.Foragivenapplication,apairof
gagesisusuallyrequired,oneGOandtheotherNO-GO.Eachgageisaringwhoseopeningis
machined to one of the tolerance limits of the part diameter. For ease of handling, the outside
of the ring is knurled. The two gages are distinguished by the presence of a groove around the
outside of the NO-GO ring.
The most common limit gage for checking hole diameter is the plug gage. The typical
gage consists of a handle to which are attached two accurately ground cylindrical pieces
(plugs) of hardened steel, as in Figure 5.9. The cylindrical plugs serve as the GO and NO-GO
FIGURE 5.9
Plug gage; difference
in diameters of GO and NO-GO plugs
is exaggerated.
FIGURE 5.8
Snap gage for
measuring diameter of a part;
difference in height of GO and NO-
GO gage buttons is exaggerated.
Section 5.2/Conventional Measuring Instruments and Gages
85

gages. Other gages similar to the plug gage include taper gages, consisting of a tapered plug
for checking tapered holes; and thread gages, in which the plug is threaded for checking
internal threads on parts.
Fixed gages are easy to use, and the time required to complete an inspection is almost
always less than when a measuring instrument isemployed. Fixed gages were a fundamental
element in the development of interchangeable parts manufacturing (Historical Note 1.1).
They provided the means by which parts could be made to tolerances that were sufficiently
close for assembly without filing and fitting. Their disadvantage is that they provide little if
any information on the actual part size; they only indicate whether the size is within
tolerance. Today, with the availability of high-speed electronic measuring instruments, and
with the need for statistical process control of part sizes, use of gages is gradually giving way
to instruments that provide actual measurements of the dimension of interest.
5.2.5 ANGULAR MEASUREMENTS
Anglescanbemeasuredusinganyofseveralstylesofprotractor.Asimpleprotractorconsists
of a blade that pivots relative to a semicircular head that is graduated in angular units (e.g.,
degrees, radians). To use, the blade is rotated to a position corresponding to some part angle
to be measured, and the angle is read off the angular scale. A bevel protractor (Figure 5.10)
consists of two straight blades that pivot relative to each other. The pivot assembly has a
protractorscalethatpermitstheangleformedbythebladestoberead.Whenequippedwitha
vernier, the bevel protractor can be read to about 5 min; without a vernier the resolution is
only about 1 degree.
High precision in angular measurements can be made using a sine bar, illustrated in
Figure 5.11. One possible setup consists of a flat steel straight edge (the sine bar), and two
precision rolls set a knowndistance apart on the bar. The straight edge is aligned with the part
angle to be measured, and gage blocks or other accurate linear measurements are made to
determine height. The procedure is carried out on a surface plate to achieve most accurate
results. This height H and the length L of the sine bar between rolls are used to calculate the
angle A using
sin A ¼ H
L
ð5:1Þ
FIGURE 5.10
Bevel
protractor with vernier
scale. (Courtesy of L.S.
Starrett Co.)
86
Chapter 5/Dimensions, Surfaces, and their Measurement

5.3
SURFACES
A surface is what one touches when holding an object, such as a manufactured part. The
designer specifies the part dimensions, relating the various surfaces to each other. These
nominalsurfaces, representingthe intendedsurface contourof the part, are definedby lines
in the engineering drawing. The nominal surfaces appear as absolutely straight lines, ideal
circles, round holes, and other edges and surfaces that are geometrically perfect. The actual
surfacesofamanufacturedpartaredeterminedbytheprocessesusedtomakeit.Thevariety
of processes available in manufacturing result in wide variations in surface characteristics,
and it is important for engineers to understand the technology of surfaces.
Surfaces are commercially and technologically important for a number of reasons,
differentreasonsfordifferentapplications:(1) Aesthetic reasons—surfaces that are smooth
and free of scratches and blemishes are more likely to give a favorable impression to the
customer. (2) Surfaces affect safety. (3) Friction and wear depend on surface character-
istics. (4) Surfaces affect mechanical and physical properties; for example, surface flaws
can be points of stress concentration. (5) Assembly of parts is affected by their surfaces; for
example, the strength of adhesively bonded joints (Section 31.3) is increased when the
surfaces are slightly rough. (6) Smooth surfaces make better electrical contacts.
Surface technology is concerned with (1) defining the characteristics of a surface,
(2) surface texture, (3) surface integrity, and (4) the relationship between manufacturing
processes and the characteristics of the resulting surface. The first three topics are covered
in this section; the final topic is presented in Section 5.5.
5.3.1 CHARACTERISTICS OF SURFACES
A microscopic view of a part’s surface reveals its irregularities and imperfections. The
features of a typical surface are illustrated in the highly magnified cross section of the surface
of a metal part in Figure 5.12. Although the discussion here is focused on metallic surfaces,
FIGURE 5.11
Setup for
using a sine bar.
FIGURE 5.12
A
magniﬁed cross section
of a typical metallic part
surface.
Section 5.3/Surfaces
87

these comments apply to ceramics and polymers, with modifications owing to differences in
structure of these materials. The bulk of the part, referred to as the substrate, has a grain
structurethat dependsonprevious processing of the metal; forexample, the metal’ssubstrate
structure is affected by its chemical composition, the casting process originally used on the
metal, and any deformation operations and heat treatments performed on the casting.
The exterior of the part is a surface whose topography is anything but straight and
smooth. In this highly magnified cross section, the surface has roughness, waviness, and
flaws. Although not shown here, it also possesses a pattern and/or direction resulting from
the mechanical process that produced it. All of these geometric features are included in the
term surface texture.
Just below the surface is a layer of metal whose structure differs from that of the
substrate. This is called the altered layer, and it is a manifestation of the actions that have
been visited upon the surface during its creation and afterward. Manufacturing processes
involve energy, usually in large amounts, which operates on the part against its surface. The
altered layer may result from work hardening (mechanical energy), heating (thermal
energy), chemical treatment, or even electrical energy. The metal in this layer is affected
by the application of energy, and its microstructure is altered accordingly. This altered layer
falls within the scope of surface integrity, which is concerned with the definition, specifica-
tion, and control of the surface layers of a material (most commonly metals) in manufactur-
ing and subsequent performance in service. The scope of surface integrity is usually
interpreted to include surface texture as well as the altered layer beneath.
In addition, most metal surfaces are coated with an oxide film, given sufficient time
after processing for the film to form. Aluminum forms a hard, dense, thin film of Al2O3 on its
surface(whichservestoprotectthesubstratefromcorrosion),andironformsoxidesofseveral
chemistries on its surface (rust, which provides virtually no protection at all). There is also
likely to be moisture, dirt, oil, adsorbed gases, and other contaminants on the part’s surface.
5.3.2 SURFACE TEXTURE
Surface texture consists of the repetitive and/or random deviations from the nominal surface
of an object; it is defined by four features: roughness, waviness, lay, and flaws, shown in
Figure 5.13. Roughness refers to the small, finely spaced deviations from the nominal surface
that are determined by the material characteristics and the process that formed the surface.
Waviness is defined as the deviations of much larger spacing; they occur because of work
FIGURE 5.13
Surface
texture features.
88
Chapter 5/Dimensions, Surfaces, and their Measurement

deflection, vibration, heat treatment, and similar factors. Roughness is superimposed on
waviness.Layisthepredominantdirectionorpatternofthesurfacetexture.Itisdeterminedby
the manufacturing method used to create the surface, usually fromthe actionof a cutting tool.
Figure5.14presentsmostofthepossiblelaysasurfacecantake,togetherwiththesymbolused
by a designer to specify them. Finally, flaws are irregularities that occur occasionally on the
surface;theseincludecracks,scratches,inclusions,andsimilardefectsinthesurface.Although
some of the flaws relate to surface texture, they also affect surface integrity (Section 5.2.3).
Surface Roughness and Surface Finish
Surface roughness is a measurable character-
istic based on the roughness deviations as defined in the preceding. Surface finish is a more
subjective term denoting smoothness and general quality of a surface. In popular usage,
surface finish is often used as a synonym for surface roughness.
The most commonly used measure of surface texture is surface roughness. With
respect to Figure 5.15, surface roughness can be defined as the average of the vertical
deviations from the nominal surface over a specified surface length. An arithmetic average
(AA) is generally used, based on the absolute values of the deviations, and this roughness
value is referred to by the name average roughness. In equation form
Ra ¼
ZLm
0
yj j
Lm
dx
ð5:2Þ
where Ra ¼ arithmetic mean value of roughness, m (in); y ¼ the vertical deviation from
nominal surface (converted to absolute value), m (in); and Lm ¼ the specified distance over
which the surface deviations are measured.
FIGURE 5.14
Possible lays of a surface. (Source: [1]).
FIGURE 5.15
Deviations from nominal
surface used in the two
deﬁnitions of surface
roughness.
Section 5.3/Surfaces
89

An approximation of Eq. (5.2), perhaps easier to comprehend, is given by
Ra ¼
X
n
i¼1
yi
j j
n
ð5:3Þ
where Ra has the same meaning as above; yi ¼ vertical deviations converted to absolute
value and identified by the subscript i, m (in); and n ¼ the number of deviations included in
Lm. The units in these equations are meters and inches.
In fact, the scale of the deviations is very small, so more appropriate units are mm
(mm ¼ m  106 ¼ mm  103) or m-in (m-in ¼ inch  106). These are the units commonly
used to express surface roughness.
The AA method is the most widely used averaging method for surface roughness
today. An alternative, sometimes used in the United States, is the root-mean-square (RMS)
average, which is the square root of the mean of the squared deviations over the measuring
length. RMS surface roughness values will almost always be greater than the AA values
because the larger deviations will figure more prominently in the calculation of the RMS
value.
Surfaceroughnesssuffersthesamekindsofdeficienciesofanysinglemeasureusedto
assess a complex physical attribute. For example, it fails to account for the lay of the surface
pattern; thus, surface roughness may vary significantly, depending on the direction in which
it is measured.
Another deficiency is that waviness can be included in the Ra computation. To deal
with this problem, a parameter called the cutoff length is used as a filter that separates the
wavinessinameasuredsurfacefromtheroughnessdeviations.Ineffect,thecutofflengthisa
sampling distance along the surface. A sampling distance shorter than the waviness width
will eliminate the vertical deviations associated with waviness and only include those
associated with roughness. The most common cutoff length used in practice is 0.8 mm (0.030
in). The measuring length Lm is normally set at about five times the cutoff length.
The limitations of surface roughness have motivated the development of additional
measuresthat more completely describe thetopography of a given surface. These measures
include three-dimensional graphical renderings of the surface, as described in [17].
Symbols for Surface Texture
Designers specify surface texture on an engineering
drawing by means of symbols as in Figure 5.16. The symbol designating surface texture
parameters is a check mark (looks like a square root sign), with entries as indicated for
average roughness, waviness, cutoff, lay, and maximum roughness spacing. The symbols
for lay are from Figure 5.14.
FIGURE 5.16
Surface texture symbols in engineering drawings: (a) the symbol, and (b) symbol with
identiﬁcation labels. Values of Ra are given in microinches; units for other measures are given in inches.
Designers do not always specify all of the parameters on engineering drawings.
90
Chapter 5/Dimensions, Surfaces, and their Measurement

5.3.3 SURFACE INTEGRITY
Surface texture alone does not completely describe a surface. There may be metallurgical or
other changes in the material immediately beneath the surface that can have a significant
effect on its mechanical properties. Surface integrity is the study and control of this
subsurface layer and any changes in it because of processing that may influence the
performance of the finished part or product. This subsurface layer was previously referred
to as the altered layer when its structure differs from the substrate, as in Figure 5.12.
The possible alterations and injuries to the subsurface layer that can occur in
manufacturing are listed in Table 5.2. The surface changes are caused by the application
of various forms of energy during processing—mechanical, thermal, chemical, and electrical.
Mechanical energy is the most common form used in manufacturing; it is applied against the
work material in operations such as metal forming (e.g., forging, extrusion), pressworking,
and machining. Although its primary function in these processes is to change the geometry of
the workpart, mechanical energy can also cause residual stresses, work hardening, and cracks
TABLE 5.2
Surface and subsurface alterations that deﬁne surface integrity.a
Absorption are impurities that are absorbed and
retained in surface layers of the base material,
possibly leading to embrittlement or other
property changes.
Alloy depletion occurs when critical alloying
elements are lost from the surface layers, with
possible loss of properties in the metal.
Cracks are narrow ruptures or separations either at
or below the surface that alter the continuity of the
material. Cracks are characterized by sharp edges
and length-to-width ratios of 4:1 or more. They are
classified as macroscopic (can be observed with
magnification of 10 or less) and microscopic
(requires magnification of more than 10).
Craters are rough surface depressions left in the
surface by short circuit discharges; associated with
electrical processing methods such as electric
discharge machining and electrochemical
machining (Chapter 26).
Hardness changes refer to hardness differences at or
near the surface.
Heat affected zone are regions of the metal that are
affected by the application of thermal energy; the
regions are not melted but are sufficiently heated
that they undergo metallurgical changes that affect
properties. Abbreviated HAZ, the effect is most
prominent in fusion welding operations
(Chapter 31).
Inclusions are small particles of material
incorporated into the surface layers during
processing; they are a discontinuity in the base
material. Their composition usually differs from
the base material.
Intergranular attack refers to various forms of
chemical reactions at the surface, including
intergranular corrosion and oxidation.
Laps, folds, seams are irregularities and defects in
the surface caused by plastic working of
overlapping surfaces.
Pits are shallow depressions with rounded edges
formed by any of several mechanisms, including
selective etching or corrosion; removal of surface
inclusions; mechanically formed dents; or
electrochemical action.
Plastic deformation refers to microstructural
changes from deforming the metal at the surface; it
results in strain hardening.
Recrystallization involves the formation of new
grains in strain hardened metals; associated with
heating of metal parts that have been deformed.
Redeposited metal is metal that is removed from the
surface in the molten state and then reattached
prior to solidification.
Resolidified metal is a portion of the surface that is
melted during processing and then solidified
without detaching from the surface. The name
remelted metal is also used for resolidified metal.
Recast metal is a term that includes both
redeposited and resolidified metal.
Residual stresses are stresses remaining in the
material after processing.
Selective etch is a form of chemical attack that
concentrates on certain components in the base
material.
aCompiled from [2].
Section 5.3/Surfaces
91

inthesurfacelayers.Table5.3indicatesthevarioustypesofsurfaceandsubsurfacealterations
that are attributable to the different forms of energy applied in manufacturing. Most of the
alterations in the table refer to metals, for which surface integrity has been most intensively
studied.
5.4
MEASUREMENT OF SURFACES
Surfaces are described as consisting of two parameters: (1) surface texture and (2) surface
integrity. This section is concerned with the measurement of these two parameters.
5.4.1 MEASUREMENT OF SURFACE ROUGHNESS
Various methods are used to assess surface roughness. They can be divided into three
categories: (1) subjective comparison with standard test surfaces, (2) stylus electronic
instruments, and (3) optical techniques.
Standard Test Surfaces
Sets of standard surface finish blocks are available, produced to
specified roughness values.1 To estimate the roughness of a given test specimen, the surface is
compared with the standard both visually and by the ‘‘fingernail test.’’ In this test, the user
gently scratches the surfaces of the specimen and the standards, judging which standard is closest to
the specimen. Standard test surfaces are a convenient way for a machine operator to obtain an
estimate of surface roughness. They are also useful for design engineers in judging what value of
surface roughness to specify on a part drawing.
Stylus Instruments
The disadvantage of the fingernail test is its subjectivity. Several
stylus-type instruments are commercially available to measure surface roughness—similar to
TABLE 5.3
Forms of energy applied in manufacturing and the resulting possible surface and subsurface
alterations that can occur.a
Mechanical
Thermal
Chemical
Electrical
Residual stresses in
subsurface layer
Metallurgical changes
(recrystallization, grain
size changes, phase
changes at surface)
Intergranular attack
Changes in conductivity
and/or magnetism
Cracks—microscopic
and macroscopic
Redeposited or
resolidified material
Chemical contamination
Craters resulting from
short circuits during
certain electrical
processing techniques
Plastic deformation
Heat-affected zone
Absorption of elements
such as H and Cl
Laps, folds, or seams
Hardness changes
Corrosion, pitting, and
etching
Voids or inclusions
Dissolving of
microconstituents
Hardness variations
(e.g., work hardening)
Alloy depletion
aBased on [2].
1In the U.S.C.S., these blocks have surfaces with roughness values of 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, or 128 microinches.
92
Chapter 5/Dimensions, Surfaces, and their Measurement

the fingernail test, but more scientific. An example is the Profilometer, shown in Figure 5.17.
In these electronic devices, a cone-shaped diamond stylus with point radius of about 0.005
mm (0.0002 in) and 90 tip angle is traversed across the test surface at a constant slow speed.
The operation is depicted in Figure 5.18. As the stylus head is traversed horizontally, it also
moves vertically to follow the surface deviations. The vertical movement is converted into an
electronic signal that represents the topographyof the surface. This can be displayed as either
a profile of the actual surface or an average roughness value. Profiling devices use a separate
flat plane as the nominal reference against which deviations are measured. The output is a
plot of the surface contour along the line traversed by the stylus. This type of system can
identify both roughness and waviness in the test surface. Averaging devices reduce the
roughness deviations to a single value Ra. They use skids riding on the actual surface to
establish the nominal reference plane. The skids act as a mechanical filter to reduce the effect
of waviness in the surface; in effect, these averaging devices electronically perform the
computations in Eq. (5.1).
Optical Techniques
Most other surface-measuring instruments employ optical tech-
niques to assess roughness. These techniques are based on light reflectance from the surface,
light scatter or diffusion, and laser technology. They are useful in applications where stylus
contact with the surface is undesirable. Some of the techniques permit very-high-speed
operation, thus making 100% inspection feasible. However, the optical techniques yield
values that do not always correlate well with roughness measurements made by stylus-type
instruments.
FIGURE 5.17
Stylus-
type instrument for
measuring surface
roughness. (Courtesy of
Giddings & Lewis,
Measurement Systems
Division.)
FIGURE 5.18
Sketch
illustrating the operation
of stylus-type instrument.
Stylus head traverses
horizontally across
surface, while stylus
moves vertically to follow
surface proﬁle. Vertical
movement is converted
into either (1) a proﬁle of
the surface or (2) the
average roughness value.
Section 5.4/Measurement of Surfaces
93

5.4.2 EVALUATION OF SURFACE INTEGRITY
Surface integrity is more difficult to assess than surface roughness. Some of the techniques
to inspect for subsurface changes are destructive to the material specimen. Evaluation
techniques for surface integrity include the following:

Surface texture. Surface roughness, designation of lay, and other measures provide
superficial data on surface integrity. This type of testing is relatively simple to perform
and is always included in the evaluation of surface integrity.

Visual examination. Visual examination can reveal various surface flaws such as
cracks,craters,laps,andseams.Thistypeofassessmentisoftenaugmentedbyfluorescent
and photographic techniques.

Microstructural examination. This involves standard metallographic techniques for
preparing cross sections and obtaining photomicrographs for examination of micro-
structure in the surface layers compared with the substrate.

Microhardness profile. Hardness differences near the surface can be detected using
microhardness measurement techniques such as Knoop and Vickers (Section 3.2.1).
The part is sectioned, and hardness is plotted against distance below the surface to
obtain a hardness profile of the cross section.

Residual stress profile. X-ray diffraction techniques can be employed to measure
residual stresses in the surface layers of a part.
5.5
EFFECT OF MANUFACTURING PROCESSES
The ability to achieve a certain tolerance or surface is a function of the manufacturing
process. This section describes the general capabilities of various processes in terms of
tolerance and surface roughness and surface integrity.
Some
manufacturing
processes
are
inherently
more
accurate
than
others.
Most machining processes are quite accurate, capable of tolerances of 0.05 mm (0.002
in) or better. By contrast, sand castings are generally inaccurate, and tolerances of 10 to
20 times those used for machined parts should be specified. Table 5.4 lists a variety of
manufacturing processes and indicates the typical tolerances for each process. Tolerances are
TABLE 5.4
Typical tolerance limits, based on process capability (Section 42.2), for various manufacturing
processes.b
Process
Typical Tolerance, mm (in)
Process
Typical Tolerance, mm (in)
Sand casting
Abrasive
Cast iron
1.3 (0.050)
Grinding
0.008 (0.0003)
Steel
1.5 (0.060)
Lapping
0.005 (0.0002)
Aluminum
0.5 (0.020)
Honing
0.005 (0.0002)
Die casting
0.12 (0.005)
Nontraditional and thermal
Plastic molding:
Chemical machining
0.08 (0.003)
Polyethylene
0.3 (0.010)
Electric discharge
0.025 (0.001)
Polystyrene
0.15 (0.006)
Electrochem. grind
0.025 (0.001)
Machining:
Electrochem. machine
0.05 (0.002)
Drilling, 6 mm (0.25 in)
0.080.03 (+0.003/0.001)
Electron beam cutting
0.08 (0.003)
Milling
0.08 (0.003)
Laser beam cutting
0.08 (0.003)
Turning
0.05 (0.002)
Plasma arc cutting
1.3 (0.050)
bCompiled from [4], [5], and other sources. For each process category, tolerances vary depending on process parameters. Also, tolerances
increase with part size.
94
Chapter 5/Dimensions, Surfaces, and their Measurement

based on the process capability for the particular manufacturing operation, as defined in
Section 42.2. The tolerance that should be specified is a function of part size; larger parts
require more generous tolerances. The tablelists tolerance for moderately sized parts ineach
processing category.
The manufacturing process determines surface finish and surface integrity. Some
processes are capable of producing better surfaces than others. In general, processing
cost increases with improvement in surface finish. This is because additional operations
and more time are usually required to obtain increasingly better surfaces. Processes noted
for providing superior finishes include honing, lapping, polishing, and superfinishing (Chap-
ter 25). Table 5.5 indicates the usual surface roughness that can be expected from various
manufacturing processes.
REFERENCES
[1] American National Standards Institute, Inc. Surface
Texture, ANSI B46.1-1978. American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, New York, 1978.
[2] American
National
Standards
Institute,
Inc.
Surface Integrity, ANSI B211.1-1986. Society of
Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan,
1986.
[3] American National Standards Institute, Inc. Dimen-
sioning
and
Tolerancing,
ANSI
Y14.5M-1982.
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New
York, 1982.
[4] Bakerjian, R. and Mitchell, P. Tool and Manufactur-
ing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol. VI, Design
for Manufacturability. Society of Manufacturing
Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1992.
[5] Brown & Sharpe. Handbook of Metrology. North
Kingston, Rhode Island, 1992.
[6] Curtis, M., Handbook of Dimensional Measure-
ment, 4th ed. Industrial Press, New York, 2007.
[7] Drozda, T. J. and Wick, C. Tool and Manufacturing
EngineersHandbook,4thed.,Vol.I,Machining.Society
ofManufacturingEngineers,Dearborn,Michigan,1983.
TABLE 5.5
Surface roughness values produced by the various manufacturing processes.a
Process
Typical
Finish
Roughness
Rangeb
Process
Typical
Finish
Roughness
Rangeb
Casting:
Abrasive:
Die casting
Good
1–2 (30–65)
Grinding
Very good
0.1–2 (5–75)
Investment
Good
1.5–3 (50–100)
Honing
Very good
0.1–1 (4–30)
Sand casting
Poor
12–25 (500–1000)
Lapping
Excellent
0.05–0.5 (2–15)
Metal forming:
Polishing
Excellent
0.1–0.5 (5–15)
Cold rolling
Good
1–3 (25–125)
Superfinish
Excellent
0.02–0.3 (1–10)
Sheet metal draw
Good
1–3 (25–125)
Nontraditional:
Cold extrusion
Good
1–4 (30–150)
Chemical milling
Medium
1.5–5 (50–200)
Hot rolling
Poor
12–25 (500–1000)
Electrochemical
Good
0.2–2 (10–100)
Machining:
Electric discharge
Medium
1.5–15 (50–500)
Boring
Good
0.5–6 (15–250)
Electron beam
Medium
1.5–15 (50–500)
Drilling
Medium
1.5–6 (60–250)
Laser beam
Medium
1.5–15 (50–500)
Milling
Good
1–6 (30–250)
Thermal:
Reaming
Good
1–3 (30–125)
Arc welding
Poor
5–25 (250–1000)
Shaping and
planing
Medium
1.5–12 (60–500)
Flame cutting
Poor
12–25 (500–1000)
Sawing
Poor
3–25 (100–1000)
Plasma arc
cutting
Poor
12–25 (500–1000)
Turning
Good
0.5–6 (15–250)
aCompiled from [1], [2], and other sources.
bRoughness range values are given, mm (m-in). Roughness can vary significantly for a given process, depending on process parameters.
References
95

[8] Farago, F. T. Handbook of Dimensional Measure-
ment, 3rd ed. Industrial Press Inc., New York, 1994.
[9] Machining Data Handbook, 3rd ed., Vol. II. Machin-
ability Data Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, 1980, Ch. 18.
[10] Mummery, L. Surface Texture Analysis—The Hand-
book. Hommelwerke Gmbh, Germany, 1990.
[11] Oberg, E., Jones, F. D., Horton, H. L., and Ryffel, H.
Machinery’s Handbook, 26th ed. Industrial Press,
New York, 2000.
[12] Schaffer, G. H.‘‘The Many Faces of Surface Tex-
ture,’’ Special Report 801, American Machinist and
Automated Manufacturing, June 1988, pp. 61–68.
[13] Sheffield Measurement, a Cross & Trecker Com-
pany, Surface Texture and Roundness Measurement
Handbook, Dayton, Ohio, 1991.
[14] Spitler, D., Lantrip, J., Nee, J., and Smith, D. A.
Fundamentals of Tool Design, 5th ed. Society of
Manufacturing
Engineers,
Dearborn,
Michigan,
2003.
[15] S. Starrett Company. Tools and Rules. Athol, Mas-
sachusetts, 1992.
[16] Wick, C., and Veilleux, R. F. Tool and Manufac-
turing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol. IV,
Quality Control and Assembly. Society of Manu-
facturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1987,
Section 1.
[17] Zecchino, M.‘‘Why Average Roughness Is Not
Enough,’’ Advanced Materials & Processes, March
2003, pp. 25–28.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
5.1.
What is a tolerance?
5.2.
What is the difference between a bilateral tolerance
and a unilateral tolerance?
5.3.
What is accuracy in measurement?
5.4.
What is precision in measurement?
5.5.
What is meant by the term graduated measuring
device?
5.6.
What are some of the reasons why surfaces are
important?
5.7.
Define nominal surface.
5.8.
Define surface texture.
5.9.
How is surface texture distinguished from surface
integrity?
5.10.
Within the scope of surface texture, how is rough-
ness distinguished from waviness?
5.11.
Surface roughness is a measurable aspect of surface
texture; what does surface roughness mean?
5.12.
Indicate some of the limitations of using surface
roughness as a measure of surface texture.
5.13.
Identify some of the changes and injuries that can
occur at or immediately below the surface of a metal.
5.14.
What causes the various types of changes that occur
in the altered layer just beneath the surface?
5.15.
What are the common methods for assessing sur-
face roughness?
5.16.
Name some manufacturing processes that produce
very poor surface finishes.
5.17.
Name some manufacturing processes that produce
very good or excellent surface finishes.
5.18.
(Video) Based on the video about vernier calipers,
are the markings on the vernier plate (moveable
scale) the same spacing, slightly closer, or slightly
further apart compared to the stationary bar?
5.19.
(Video) Based on the video about vernier calipers,
explain how to read the scale on a vernier caliper.
5.20.
(Video) Based on the video about micrometers,
explain the primary factor that makes an English
micrometer different from a metric micrometer.
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 19 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
5.1.
Atoleranceiswhichoneofthefollowing:(a)clearance
between a shaft and a mating hole, (b) measurement
error, (c) total permissible variation from a specified
dimension, or (d) variation in manufacturing?
5.2.
Which of the following two geometric terms have
the same meaning: (a) circularity, (b) concentricity,
(c) cylindricity, and (d) roundness?
5.3.
A surface plate is most typically made of which one
of the following materials: (a) aluminum oxide
ceramic, (b) cast iron, (c) granite, (d) hard polymers,
or (e) stainless steel?
5.4.
An outside micrometer would be appropriate for
measuring which of the following (two correct
answers): (a) hole depth, (b) hole diameter, (c)
96
Chapter 5/Dimensions, Surfaces, and their Measurement

part length, (d) shaft diameter, and (e) surface
roughness?
5.5.
In a GO/NO-GO gage, which one of the following
best describes the function of the GO gage: (a)
checks limit of maximum tolerance, (b) checks
maximum material condition, (c) checks maximum
size, (d) checks minimum material condition, or (e)
checks minimum size?
5.6.
Which of the following are likely to be GO/NO-GO
gages (three correct answers): (a) gage blocks, (b)
limit gage, (c) master gage, (d) plug gage, and (e)
snap gage?
5.7.
Surface texture includes which of the following
characteristics of a surface (three correct answers):
(a) deviations from the nominal surface, (b) feed
marks of the tool that produced the surface, (c)
hardness variations, (d) oil films, and (e) surface
cracks?
5.8.
Surface texture is included within the scope of
surface integrity: (a) true or (b) false?
5.9.
Thermal energy is normally associated with which
of the following changes in the altered layer (three
best answers): (a) cracks, (b) hardness variations, (c)
heat affected zone, (d) plastic deformation, (e)
recrystallization, or (f) voids?
5.10.
Which one of the following manufacturing pro-
cesses will likely result in the best surface finish:
(a) arc welding, (b) grinding, (c) machining, (d) sand
casting, or (e) sawing?
5.11.
Which one of the following manufacturing pro-
cesses will likely result in the worst surface finish:
(a) cold rolling, (b) grinding, (c) machining, (d) sand
casting, or (e) sawing?
PROBLEMS
5.1.
DesignthenominalsizesofaGO/NO-GOpluggageto
inspecta1.5000.030indiameterhole.Thereisawear
allowanceappliedonlytotheGOsideofthegage.The
wear allowance is 2% of the entire tolerance band for
the inspected feature. Determine (a) the nominal size
of the GO gage including the wear allowance and (b)
the nominal size of the NO-GO gage.
5.2.
Design the nominal sizes of a GO/NO-GO snap
gage to inspect the diameter of a shaft that is 1.500 
0.030. A wear allowance of 2% of the entire toler-
ance band is applied to the GO side. Determine (a)
the nominal size of the GO gage including the wear
allowance and (b) the nominal size of the NO-GO
gage.
5.3.
Design the nominal sizes of a GO/NO-GO plug
gage to inspect a 30.00  0.18 mm diameter hole.
There is a wear allowance applied only to the GO
side of the gage. The wear allowance is 3% of the
entire tolerance band for the inspected feature.
Determine (a) the nominal size of the GO gage
including the wear allowance and (b) the nominal
size of the NO-GO gage.
5.4.
Design the nominal sizes of a GO/NO-GO snap
gage to inspect the diameter of a shaft that is 30.00 
0.18 mm. A wear allowance of 3% of the entire
tolerance band is applied to the GO side. Deter-
mine (a) the nominal size of the GO gage including
the wear allowance and (b) the nominal size of the
NO-GO gage.
5.5.
A sine bar is used to determine the angle of a part
feature. The length of the sine bar is 6.000 in. The
rolls have a diameter of 1.000 in. All inspection is
performed on a surface plate. In order for the sine
bar to match the angle of the part, the following
gage blocks must be stacked: 2.0000, 0.5000, 0.3550.
Determine the angle of the part feature.
5.6.
A 200.00 mm sine bar is used to inspect an angle on
a part. The angle has a dimension of 35.0  1.8.
The sine bar rolls have a diameter of 30.0 mm. A
set of gage blocks is available that can form any
height from 10.0000 to 199.9975 mm in increments
of 0.0025 mm. Determine (a) the height of the gage
block stack to inspect the minimum angle, (b)
height of the gage block stack to inspect the maxi-
mum angle, and (c) smallest increment of angle that
can be setup at the nominal angle size. All inspec-
tion is performed on a surface plate.
Problems
97

Part II
Engineering Materials
6
METALS
Chapter Contents
6.1
Alloys and Phase Diagrams
6.1.1
Alloys
6.1.2
Phase Diagrams
6.2
Ferrous Metals
6.2.1
The Iron–Carbon Phase Diagram
6.2.2
Iron and Steel Production
6.2.3
Steels
6.2.4
Cast Irons
6.3
Nonferrous Metals
6.3.1
Aluminum and Its Alloys
6.3.2
Magnesium and Its Alloys
6.3.3
Copper and Its Alloys
6.3.4
Nickel and Its Alloys
6.3.5
Titanium and Its Alloys
6.3.6
Zinc and Its Alloys
6.3.7
Lead and Tin
6.3.8
Refractory Metals
6.3.9
Precious Metals
6.4
Superalloys
6.5
Guide to the Processing of Metals
Part II discusses the four types of engineering materials:
(1) metals, (2) ceramics, (3) polymers, and (4) compo-
sites. Metals are the most important engineering mate-
rials and the topic of this chapter. A metal is a category of
materials generally characterized by properties of duc-
tility, malleability, luster, and high electrical and thermal
conductivity. The category includes both metallic ele-
ments and their alloys. Metals have properties that
satisfy a wide variety of design requirements. The man-
ufacturing processes by which they are shaped into
products have been developed and refined over many
years; indeed, some of the processes date from ancient
times (Historical Note 1.2). In addition, the properties of
metals can be enhanced through heat treatment (cov-
ered in Chapter 27).
The technological and commercial importance of met-
als results from the following general properties possessed
by virtually all of the common metals:

High stiffness and strength. Metals can be alloyed
for high rigidity, strength, and hardness; thus, they
are used to provide the structural framework for
most engineered products.

Toughness. Metals have the capacity to absorb
energy better than other classes of materials.

Good electrical conductivity. Metals are conduc-
tors because of their metallic bonding that permits
the free movement of electrons as charge carriers.

Good thermal conductivity. Metallic bonding also
explains why metals generally conduct heat better
than ceramics or polymers.
98

In addition, certain metals have specific properties that make them attractive for
specialized applications. Many common metals are available at relatively low cost per
unit weight and are often the material of choice simply because of their low cost.
Metals are converted into parts and products using a variety of manufacturing
processes. The starting form of the metal differs, depending on the process. The major
categoriesare(1) cast metal, in which the initial form is a casting; (2) wrought metal, in
which the metal has been worked or can be worked (e.g., rolled or otherwise formed)
after casting; better mechanical properties are generally associated with wrought
metals compared with cast metals; and (3) powdered metal, in which the metal is
purchased in the form of very small powders for conversion into parts using powder
metallurgy techniques. Most metals are available in all three forms. The discussion in
this chapter focuses on categories (1) and (2), which are of greatest commercial and
engineering interest. Powder metallurgy techniques are examined in Chapter 16.
Metals are classified into two major groups: (1) ferrous—those based on iron; and
(2) nonferrous—all other metals. The ferrous group can be further subdivided into
steels and cast irons. Most of the discussion in the present chapter is organized around
this classification, but first the general topic of alloys and phase diagrams is examined.
6.1
ALLOYS AND PHASE DIAGRAMS
Although some metals are important as pure elements (e.g., gold, silver, copper), most
engineering applications require the improved properties obtained by alloying. Through
alloying, it is possible to enhance strength, hardness, and other properties compared with
pure metals. This section defines and classifies alloys; it then discusses phase diagrams,
which indicate the phases of an alloy system as a function of composition and temperature.
6.1.1 ALLOYS
An alloy is a metal composed of two or more elements, at least one of which is metallic. The
two main categories of alloys are (1) solid solutions and (2) intermediate phases.
Solid Solutions
Asolidsolutionisanalloyinwhichoneelementisdissolvedinanotherto
form a single-phase structure. The term phase describes any homogeneous mass of material,
such as a metal in which the grains all have the same crystal lattice structure. In a solid
solution, the solvent or base element is metallic, and the dissolved element can be either
metallic or nonmetallic. Solid solutions come in two forms, shown in Figure 6.1. The first is a
substitutional solid solution, in which atoms of the solvent element are replaced in its unit
cell by the dissolved element. Brass is an example, in which zinc is dissolved in copper. To
make the substitution, several rules must be satisfied [3], [6], [7]: (1) the atomic radii of the
two elements must be similar, usually within 15%; (2) their lattice types must be the
FIGURE 6.1
Two forms of solid solutions:
(a) substitutional solid solution, and (b) in-
terstitial solid solution.
(a)
(b)
Section 6.1/Alloys and Phase Diagrams
99

same; (3) if the elements have different valences, the lower valence metal is more
likely to be the solvent; and (4) if the elements have high chemical affinity for each
other, they are less likely to form a solid solution and more likely to form a compound.
The second type of solid solution is an interstitial solid solution, in which atoms of
the dissolving element fit into the vacant spaces between base metal atoms in the lattice
structure. It follows that the atoms fitting into these interstices must be small compared
with those of the solvent metal. The most important example of this second type is carbon
dissolved in iron to form steel.
In both forms of solid solution, the alloy structure is generally stronger and harder
than either of the component elements.
Intermediate Phases
Thereareusuallylimitstothesolubilityofoneelementinanother.
Whentheamountofthedissolvingelementinthealloyexceedsthesolidsolubilitylimitofthe
base metal, a secondphase forms inthealloy. The termintermediate phase is usedto describe
it because its chemical composition is intermediate between the two pure elements. Its
crystalline structure is also different from those of the pure metals. Depending on composi-
tion, and recognizing that many alloys consist of more than two elements, these intermediate
phasescanbeofseveraltypes,including(1) metallic compounds consisting of a metal and
nonmetal such as Fe3C; and (2) intermetallic compounds—two metals that form a
compound, such as Mg2Pb. 6pt?>The composition of the alloy is often such that the
intermediate phase is mixed with the primary solid solution to form a two-phase
structure, one phase dispersed throughout the second. These two-phase alloys are
important because they can be formulated and heat treated for significantly higher
strength than solid solutions.
6.1.2 PHASE DIAGRAMS
As the term is used in this text, a phase diagram is a graphical means of representing the
phases of a metal alloy system as a function of composition and temperature. This
discussion of the diagram will be limited to alloy systems consisting of two elements at
atmospheric pressures. This type of diagram is called a binary phase diagram. Other
forms of phase diagrams are discussed in texts on materials science, such as [6].
The Copper–Nickel Alloy System
The best way to introduce the phase diagram is by
example. Figure 6.2 presents one of the simplest cases, the Cu–Ni alloy system. Compo-
sition is plotted on the horizontal axis and temperature on the vertical axis. Thus, any
point in the diagram indicates the overall composition and the phase or phases present at
the given temperature. Pure copper melts at 1083C (1981F), and pure nickel at 1455C
(2651F). Alloy compositions between these extremes exhibit gradual melting that
commences at the solidus and concludes at the liquidus as temperature is increased.
The copper–nickel system is a solid solution alloy throughout its entire range of
compositions. Anywhere in the region below the solidus line, the alloy is a solid solution;
there are no intermediate solid phases in this system. However, there is a mixture of phases
in the region bounded by the solidus and liquidus. Recall from Chapter 4 that the solidus is
thetemperature atwhichthesolidmetal begins to melt as temperature isincreased,and the
liquidus is the temperature at which melting is completed. It can now be seen from the
phase diagram that these temperatures vary with composition. Between the solidus and
liquidus, the metal is a solid–liquid mix.
Determining Chemical Compositions of Phases
Although the overall composition
of the alloy is given by its position along the horizontal axis, the compositions of the liquid
100
Chapter 6/Metals

and solid phases are not the same. It is possible to determine these compositions from the
phase diagram by drawing a horizontal line at the temperature of interest. The points of
intersection between the horizontal line and the solidus and liquidus indicate the compo-
sitions of the solid and liquid phases present, respectively. Simply construct the vertical
projections from the intersection points to the x-axis and read the corresponding
compositions.
Example 6.1
Determining
Compositions
from the Phase
Diagram
To illustrate the procedure, suppose one wants to analyze the compositions of the
liquid and solid phases present in the copper-nickel system at an aggregate compo-
sition of 50% nickel and a temperature of 1260C (2300F).
Solution:
A horizontal line is drawn at the given temperature level as shown in
Figure 6.2. The line intersects the solidus at a composition of 62% nickel, thus
indicating the composition of the solid phase. The intersection with the liquidus occurs
at a composition of 36% Ni, corresponding to the analysis of the liquid phase.
n
As the temperature of the 50–50 Cu–Ni alloy is reduced, the solidus line is reached at
about 1221C (2230F).Applyingthesameprocedureusedintheexample,thecomposition
of the solidmetal is 50%nickel, and the composition of the last remaining liquid to freeze is
about 26% nickel. How is it, the reader might ask, that the last ounce of molten metal has a
composition so different from the solid metal into which it freezes? The answer is that the
phase diagram assumes equilibrium conditions are allowed to prevail. In fact, the binary
phase diagram is sometimes called an equilibrium diagram because of this assumption.
What it means is that enough time is permitted for the solid metal to gradually change its
composition by diffusion to achieve the composition indicated by the intersection point
along the liquidus. In practice, when an alloy freezes (e.g., a casting), segregation occurs in
the solid mass because of nonequilibrium conditions. The first liquid to solidify has a
composition that is rich in the metal element with the higher melting point. Then as
additional metal solidifies, its composition is different from that of the first metal to freeze.
As the nucleation sites grow into a solid mass, compositions are distributed within the mass,
depending on the temperature and time in the process at which freezing occurred. The
overall composition is the average of the distribution.
FIGURE 6.2
Phase
diagram for the copper–
nickel alloy system.
~~
~~
1600
1400
1200
1000
0
Cu
10
20
30
40
50
% Nickel (Ni)
60
70
80
90
100
Ni
3000
2800
2600
2400
2200
2000
1800
Temperature,∞F
Temperature,∞C
1260∞C
(2300∞F)
1083∞C
(1981∞F)
1455∞C
(2651∞F)
26%
36%
62%
S
C
L
Liquidus
Solidus
Liquid solution
Solid solution
Liquid + solid
Section 6.1/Alloys and Phase Diagrams
101

Determining Amounts of Each Phase
The amounts of each phase present at a given
temperature from the phase diagram can also be determined. This is done by the inverse
leverrule:(1)usingthesamehorizontallineasbeforethatindicatestheoverallcomposition
at a given temperature, measure the distances between the aggregate composition and the
intersection points with the liquidus and solidus, identifying the distances as CL and CS,
respectively (refer back to Figure 6.2); (2) the proportion of liquid phase present is given by
L phase proportion ¼
CS
CS þ CL
ð
Þ
ð6:1Þ
(3) the proportion of solid phase present is given by
S phase proportion ¼
CL
CS þ CL
ð
Þ
ð6:2Þ
Example 6.2
Determining
Proportions of
Each Phase
Determine the proportions of liquid and solid phases for the 50% nickel composition
of the copper–nickel system at the temperature of 1260C (2300F).
Solution:
Using the same horizontal line in Figure 6.2 as in previous Example
6.1, the distances CS and CL are measured as 10 mm and 12 mm, respectively. Thus
the proportion of the liquid phase is 10=22 ¼ 0.45 (45%), and the proportion of
solid phase is 12=22 ¼ 0.55 (55%).
n
The proportions given by Eqs. (6.1) and (6.2) are by weight, same as the phase diagram
percentages. Note that the proportions are based on the distance on the opposite side of the
phase of interest; hence the name inverse lever rule. One cansee the logicin this by taking the
extreme case when, say, CS ¼ 0; at that point, the proportion of the liquid phase is zero
because the solidus has been reached and the alloy is therefore completely solidified.
Themethodsfordeterminingchemicalcompositionsofphasesandtheamountsofeach
phase are applicable to the solid region of the phase diagram as well as the liquidus–solidus
region. Wherever there are regions in the phase diagram in which two phases are present,
these methods can be used. When only one phase is present (in Figure 6.2, this is the entire
solid region), the composition of the phase is its aggregate composition under equilibrium
conditions; and the inverse lever rule does not apply because there is only one phase.
The Tin–Lead Alloy System
A more complicated phase diagram is the Sn–Pb system,
shown in Figure 6.3. Tin–lead alloys have traditionally been used as solders for making
electrical and mechanical connections (Section 31.2).1 The phase diagram exhibits
several features not included in the previous Cu–Ni system. One feature is the presence
of two solid phases, alpha (a) and beta (b). The a phase is a solid solution of tin in lead at
the left side of the diagram, and the b phase is a solid solution of lead in tin that occurs
only at elevated temperatures around 200C (375F) at the right side of the diagram.
Between these solid solutions lies a mixture of the two solid phases, a þ b.
Another feature of interest in the tin–lead system is how melting differs for different
compositions. Pure tin melts at232C (449F),andpure lead meltsat 327C (621F). Alloys
of these elements melt at lower temperatures. The diagram shows two liquidus lines that
beginatthemeltingpointsofthepuremetals andmeet atacompositionof61.9%Sn.Thisis
the eutectic composition for the tin–lead system. In general, a eutectic alloy is a particular
composition in an alloy system for which the solidus and liquidus are at the same
temperature. The corresponding eutectic temperature, the melting point of the eutectic
1Because lead is a poisonous substance, alternative alloying elements have been substituted for lead in
many commercial solders. These are called lead-free solders.
102
Chapter 6/Metals

composition, is 183C (362F) in the present case. The eutectic temperature is always the
lowest melting point for an alloy system (eutectic is derived from the Greek word eutektos,
meaning easily melted).
Methods for determining the chemical analysis of the phases and the proportions of
phases present can be readily applied to the Sn–Pb system just as it was used in the Cu–Ni
system. In fact, these methods areapplicable in any region containing two phases, including
two solid phases. Most alloy systems are characterized by the existence of multiple solid
phases and eutectic compositions, and so the phase diagrams of these systems are often
similar to the tin–lead diagram. Of course, many alloy systems are considerably more
complex. One of these is the alloy system of iron and carbon.
6.2
FERROUS METALS
The ferrous metals are based on iron, one of the oldest metals known to humans (Historical
Note 6.1). The properties and other data relating to iron are listed in Table 6.1(a). The
ferrous metals of engineering importance are alloys of iron and carbon. These alloys divide
into two major groups: steel and cast iron. Together, they constitute approximately 85% of
the metal tonnage in the United States [6]. This discussion of the ferrous metals begins with
the iron–carbon phase diagram.
FIGURE 6.3
Phase
diagram for the tin–lead
alloy system.
300
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
200
100
0
20
40
60
% Tin (Sn)
80
Pb
Sn
Temperature ∞C
Temperature ∞F
Liquid
 + 
 + L
 + L
 
183∞C
(362∞F)
61.9% Sn
(eutectic composition)
TABLE 6.1
Basic data on the metallic elements: (a) Iron.
Symbol: Fe
Principal ore: Hematite (Fe2O3)
Atomic number: 26
Alloying elements: Carbon; also chromium, manganese,
nickel, molybdenum, vanadium, and
silicon
Specific gravity: 7.87
Crystal structure: BCC
Melting temperature: 1539C (2802F)
Typical applications: Construction, machinery,
automotive, railway tracks and
equipment
Elastic modulus: 209,000 MPa (30  106 lb/in2)
Compiled from [6], [11], [12], and other references.
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals
103

6.2.1 THE IRON–CARBON PHASE DIAGRAM
The iron–carbon phase diagram is shown in Figure 6.4. Pure iron melts at 1539C
(2802F). During the rise in temperature from ambient, it undergoes several solid phase
transformations, as indicated in the diagram. Starting at room temperature the phase is
alpha (a), also called ferrite. At 912C (1674F), ferrite transforms to gamma (g), called
austenite. This, in turn, transforms at 1394C (2541F) to delta (d), which remains until
melting occurs. The three phases are distinct; alpha and delta have BCC lattice structures
(Section 2.3.1), and between them, gamma is FCC. The video clip on heat treatment
describes the iron–carbon phase diagram and how it is used to strengthen steel.
VIDEO CLIP
Heat Treatment: View the segment on the iron–carbon phase diagram.
Iron as a commercial product is available at various levels of purity. Electrolytic iron is the
most pure, at about 99.99%, for research and other purposes where the pure metal is
required. Ingot iron, containing about 0.1% impurities (including about 0.01% carbon), is
Historical Note 6.1
Iron and steel
Iron was discovered sometime during the Bronze Age. It
was probably uncovered from ashes of ﬁres built near
iron ore deposits. Use of the metal grew, ﬁnally
surpassing bronze in importance. The Iron Age is usually
dated from about 1200 BCE, although artifacts made of
iron have been found in the Great Pyramid of Giza in
Egypt, which dates to 2900 BCE. Iron-smelting furnaces
have been discovered in Israel dating to 1300 BCE. Iron
chariots, swords, and tools were made in ancient Assyria
(northern Iraq) around 1000 BCE. The Romans inherited
ironworking from their provinces, mainly Greece, and
they developed the technology to new heights, spreading
it throughout Europe. The ancient civilizations learned
that iron was harder than bronze and that it took a
sharper, stronger edge.
During the Middle Ages in Europe, the invention of
the cannon created the ﬁrst real demand for iron; only
then did it ﬁnally exceed copper and bronze in usage.
Also, the cast iron stove, the appliance of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, signiﬁcantly increased demand
for iron (Historical Note 11.3).
In the nineteenth century, industries such as
railroads, shipbuilding, construction, machinery, and
the military created a dramatic growth in the demand
for iron and steel in Europe and America. Although
large quantities of (crude) pig iron could be produced
by blast furnaces, the subsequent processes for
producing wrought iron and steel were slow. The
necessity to improve productivity of these vital metals
was the ‘‘mother of invention.’’ Henry Bessemer in
England developed the process of blowing air up
through the molten iron that led to the Bessemer
converter (patented in 1856). Pierre and Emile Martin
in France built the ﬁrst open hearth furnace in 1864.
These methods permitted up to 15 tons of steel to be
produced in a single batch (heat), a substantial
increase from previous methods.
In the United States, expansion of the railroads after
the Civil War created a huge demand for steel. In the
1880s and 1890s, steel beams were ﬁrst used in
signiﬁcant quantities in construction. Skyscrapers came
to rely on these steel frames.
When electricity became available in abundance in
the late 1800s, this energy source was used for
steelmaking. The ﬁrst commercial electric furnace for
production of steel was operated in France in 1899. By
1920, this had become the principal process for making
alloy steels.
The use of pure oxygen in steelmaking was initiated
just before World War II in several European countries
and the United States. Work in Austria after the war
culminated in the development of the basic oxygen
furnace (BOF). This has become the leading modern
technology for producing steel, surpassing the open
hearth method around 1970. The Bessemer converter
had been surpassed by the open hearth method around
1920 and ceased to be a commercial steelmaking
process in 1971.
104
Chapter 6/Metals

used in applications in which high ductility or corrosion resistance are needed. Wrought
iron contains about 3% slag but very little carbon, and is easily shaped in hot forming
operations such as forging.
Solubility limits of carbon in iron are low in the ferrite phase—only about 0.022% at
723C (1333F). Austenite can dissolve up to about 2.1% carbon at a temperature of 1130C
(2066F). This difference in solubility between alpha and gamma leads to opportunities for
strengtheningbyheattreatment(butleavethatforChapter27).Evenwithoutheattreatment,
the strength of iron increases dramatically as carbon content increases, and the metal is called
steel.More precisely,steel is defined as an iron–carbon alloy containing from 0.02% to 2.11%
carbon.2 Of course, steels can also contain other alloying elements as well.
A eutectic composition at 4.3% carbon can be seen in the diagram. There is a similar
feature in the solid region of the diagram at 0.77% carbon and 723C (1333F). This is called
the eutectoid composition. Steels below this carbon level are known as hypoeutectoid steels,
and above this carbon level, from 0.77% to 2.1%, they are called hypereutectoid steels.
In addition to the phases mentioned, one other phase is prominent in the iron–carbon
alloy system. This is Fe3C, also known as cementite, an intermediate phase. It is a metallic
compoundofironandcarbonthatishardandbrittle.Atroomtemperatureunderequilibrium
conditions, iron–carbon alloys form a two-phase system at carbon levels even slightly above
zero. The carbon content in steel ranges between these very low levels and about 2.1% C.
Above 2.1% C, up to about 4% or 5%, the alloy is defined as cast iron.
6.2.2 IRON AND STEEL PRODUCTION
Coverage of iron and steel production begins with the iron ores and other raw materials
required. Ironmaking is then discussed, in which iron is reduced from the ores, and
2This is the conventional definition of steel, but exceptions exist. A recently developed steel for sheet-
metal forming, called interstitial-free steel, has a carbon content of only 0.005%. It is discussed in Section
6.2.3.
FIGURE 6.4
Phase
diagram for iron–carbon
system, up to about 6%
carbon.
% Carbon (C)
1800
3200
2800
2400
2000
1600
1200
800
400
1400
1000
600
200
0
Fe
1
2
3
4
5
6
C
Temperature, ∞C
Temperature, ∞F
 + 
 + Fe3C
Solid
 + L
L + Fe3C
 + Fe3C
1130∞C (2066∞F)
723∞C (1333∞F)
Liquid (L)
A1
Solid
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals
105

steelmaking, in which the iron is refined to obtain the desired purity and composition
(alloying). Thecastingprocessesthatareaccomplishedatthesteelmillare thenconsidered.
Iron Ores and Other Raw Materials
The principal ore used in the production of iron
and steel is hematite (Fe2O3). Other iron ores include magnetite (Fe3O4), siderite (FeCO3),
and limonite (Fe2O3-xH2O, in which x is typicallyaround 1.5). Iron ores contain from 50% to
around 70% iron, depending on grade (hematite is almost 70% iron). In addition, scrap iron
and steel are widely used today as raw materials in iron- and steelmaking.
Otherrawmaterialsneededtoreduceironfromtheoresarecokeandlimestone.Cokeisa
high carbon fuel produced by heating bituminous coal in a limited oxygen atmosphere for
several hours, followed by water spraying in special quenching towers. Coke serves two
functions in the reduction process: (1) it is a fuel that supplies heat for the chemical
reactions;and(2)itproducescarbonmonoxide(CO)toreducetheironore.Limestone
is a rock containing high proportions of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). The limestone is
usedintheprocessasafluxtoreactwithandremoveimpuritiesinthemoltenironasslag.
Ironmaking
To produce iron, a charge of ore, coke, and limestone are dropped into the
top of a blast furnace. A blast furnace is a refractory-lined chamber with a diameter of
about 9 to 11 m (30–35 ft) at its widest and a height of 40 m (125 ft), in which hot gases are
forced into the lower part of the chamber at high rates to accomplish combustion and
reduction of the iron. A typical blast furnace and some of its technical details are illustrated
in Figures 6.5 and 6.6. The charge slowly descends from the top of the furnace toward the
FIGURE 6.5
Cross section of
ironmaking blast furnace
showing major components.
106
Chapter 6/Metals

base and is heated to temperatures around 1650C (3000F). Burning of the coke is
accomplished by the hot gases (CO, H2, CO2, H2O, N2, O2, and fuels) as they pass upward
through the layers of charge material. The carbon monoxide is supplied as hot gas, and it is
also formed from combustion of coke. The CO gas has a reducing effect on the iron ore; the
reaction (simplified) can be written as follows (using hematite as the starting ore)
Fe2O3 þ CO ! 2FeO þ CO2
ð6:3aÞ
Carbon dioxide reacts with coke to form more carbon monoxide
CO2 þ C(coke) ! 2CO
ð6:3bÞ
which then accomplishes the final reduction of FeO to iron
FeO þ CO ! Fe þ CO2
ð6:3cÞ
The molten iron drips downward, collecting at the base of the blast furnace. This is
periodically tapped into hot iron ladle cars for transfer to subsequent steelmaking
operations.
The role played by limestone can be summarized as follows. First the limestone is
reduced to lime (CaO) by heating, as follows
CaCO3 ! CaO þ CO2
ð6:4Þ
The lime combines with impurities such as silica (SiO2), sulfur (S), and alumina (Al2O3)
in reactions that produce a molten slag that floats on top of the iron.
It is instructive to note that approximately 7 tons of raw materials are required to
produce 1 ton of iron. The ingredients are proportioned about as follows: 2.0 tons of
iron ore, 1.0 ton of coke, 0.5 ton of limestone, and (here’s the amazing statistic) 3.5 tons
of gases. A significant proportion of the byproducts are recycled.
The iron tapped from the base of the blast furnace (called pig iron) contains more
than 4% C, plus other impurities: 0.3–1.3% Si, 0.5–2.0% Mn, 0.1–1.0% P, and 0.02–0.08%
S [11]. Further refinement of the metal is required for both cast iron and steel. A furnace
called a cupola (Section 11.4.1) is commonly used for converting pig iron into gray cast
iron. For steel, compositions must be more closely controlled and impurities brought to
much lower levels.
FIGURE 6.6
Schematic
diagram indicating details
of the blast furnace
operation.
Gas to cleaning and reheating
Direction of motion of charge material
Direction of motion of hot gases
Hot blast air
Molten pig iron
Slag
Iron ore,
coke, and
limestone
200∞C (400∞ F)
Typical temperature profile
800∞C (1500∞ F)
1100∞C (2000∞ F)
1400∞C (2500∞ F)
1650∞C (3000∞ F)
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals
107

Steelmaking
Since the mid-1800s, a number of processes have been developed for
refining pig iron into steel. Today, the two most important processes are the basic oxygen
furnace (BOF) and the electric furnace. Both are used to produce carbon and alloy steels.
The basic oxygen furnace accounts for about 70% of U.S. steel production. The BOF
is an adaptation of the Bessemer converter. Whereas the Bessemer process used air blown
up through the molten pig iron to burn off impurities, the basic oxygen process uses pure
oxygen. A diagram of the conventional BOF during the middle of a heat is illustrated in
Figure6.7.ThetypicalBOFvesselisabout5m(16ft)insidediameterandcanprocess150to
200 tons in a heat.
The BOF steelmaking sequence is shown in Figure 6.8. Integrated steel mills transfer
the molten pig iron from the blast furnace to the BOF in railway cars called hot-iron ladle
cars. In modern practice, steel scrap is added to the pig iron, accounting for about 30% of a
typical BOF charge. Lime (CaO) is also added. After charging, the lance is inserted into the
vessel so that its tip is about 1.5 m (5 ft) above the surface of the molten iron. Pure O2 is
blown at high velocity through the lance, causing combustion and heating at the surface of
the molten pool. Carbon dissolved in the iron and other impurities such as silicon,
manganese, and phosphorus are oxidized. The reactions are
The CO and CO2 gases produced in the first reaction escape through the mouth of the
BOF vessel and are collected by the fume hood; the products of the other three reactions
are removed as slag, using the lime as a fluxing agent. The C content in the iron decreases
almost linearly with time during the process, thus permitting fairly predictable control
over carbon levels in the steel. After refining to the desired level, the molten steel is
tapped; alloying ingredients and other additives are poured into the heat; then the slag is
FIGURE 6.7
Basic
oxygen furnace showing
BOF vessel during
processing of a heat.
2C þ O2 ! 2CO (CO2 is also produced)
ð6:5aÞ
Si þ O2 ! SiO2
ð6:5bÞ
2Mn þ O2 ! 2MnO
ð6:5cÞ
4P þ 5O2 ! 2P2O5
ð6:5dÞ
108
Chapter 6/Metals

poured. A 200-ton heat of steel can be processed in about 20 min, although the entire
cycle time (tap-to-tap time) takes about 45 min.
Recent advances in the technology of the basic oxygen process include the use of
nozzles in the bottom of the vessel through which oxygen is injected into the molten iron.
This allows better mixing than the conventional BOF lance, resulting in shorter process-
ing times (a reduction of about 3 min), lower carbon contents, and higher yields.
The electric arc furnace accounts for about 30% of U.S. steel production. Although
pig iron was originally used as the charge in this type of furnace, scrap iron and scrap steel
are the primary raw materials today. Electric arc furnaces are available in several designs;
thedirectarctypeshowninFigure6.9iscurrentlythe mosteconomicaltype. Thesefurnaces
have removable roofsfor charging from above; tapping is accomplished by tilting the entire
furnace. Scrap iron and steel selected for their compositions, together with alloying
ingredients and limestone (flux), are charged into the furnace and heated by an electric
arc that flows between large electrodes and the charge metal. Complete melting requires
about 2 hours; tap-to-tap time is 4 hours. Capacities of electric furnaces commonly range
between25and 100tonsperheat. Electricarcfurnaces arenoted forbetter-quality steelbut
higher cost per ton, compared with theBOF. The electric arc furnace is generally associated
with production of alloy steels, tool steels, and stainless steels.
Casting of Ingots
Steels produced by BOF or electric furnace are solidified for
subsequent processing either as cast ingots or by continuous casting. Steel ingots are large
discretecastingsweighingfromlessthan1tonuptoaround300 tons(theweightofanentire
heat). Ingot molds are made of high carbon iron and are tapered at the top or bottom for
removal of the solid casting. A big-end-down mold is illustrated in Figure 6.10. The cross
FIGURE 6.8
BOF sequence during processing cycle: (1) charging of scrap and (2) pig iron; (3) blowing
(Figure 6.7); (4) tapping the molten steel; and (5) pouring off the slag.
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals
109

section may be square, rectangular, or round, and the perimeter is usually corrugated to
increasesurfaceareaforfastercooling. Themoldisplacedonaplatformcalledastool;after
solidification the mold is lifted, leaving the casting on the stool.
The solidification process for ingots as well as other castings is described in the
chapter on casting principles (Chapter 10). Because ingots are such large castings, the
time required for solidification and the associated shrinkage are significant. Porosity
caused by the reaction of carbon and oxygen to form CO during cooling and solidification
is a problem that must be addressed in ingot casting. These gases are liberated from the
molten steel because of their reduced solubility with decreasing temperature. Cast steels
are often treated to limit or prevent CO gas evolution during solidification. The
treatment involves adding elements such as Si and Al that react with the oxygen dissolved
in the molten steel, so it is not available for CO reaction. The structure of the solid steel is
thus free of pores and other defects caused by gas formation.
Continuous Casting
Continuous casting is widely applied in aluminum and copper
production, but its most noteworthy application is in steelmaking. The process is replacing
ingot casting because it dramatically increases productivity. Ingot casting is a discrete
process. Because the molds are relatively large, solidification time is significant. For a large
FIGURE 6.9
Electric arc
furnace for steelmaking.
FIGURE 6.10
A big-end-down ingot mold
typical of type used in steelmaking.
110
Chapter 6/Metals

steel ingot, it may take 10 to 12 hours for the casting to solidify. The use of continuous
casting reduces solidification time by an order of magnitude.
Thecontinuous castingprocess, alsocalled strand casting,isillustrated inFigure6.11.
Molten steel is poured from a ladle into a temporary container called a tundish, which
dispenses the metal to one or more continuous casting molds. The steel begins to solidify at
theouter regions as it travels down through thewater-cooled mold. Water sprays accelerate
the cooling process. While still hot and plastic, the metal is bent from vertical to horizontal
orientation. It is then cut into sections or fed continuously into a rolling mill (Section 19.1)
in which it is formed into plate or sheet stock or other cross sections.
6.2.3 STEELS
As defined earlier, Steel is an alloy of iron that contains carbon ranging by weight between
0.02% and 2.11% (most steels range between 0.05% and 1.1%C). It often includes other
alloying ingredients, such as manganese, chromium, nickel, and/or molybdenum (see
Table 6.2); but it is the carbon content that turns iron into steel. Hundreds of compositions
of steel are available commercially. For purposes of organization here, the vast majority of
commerciallyimportantsteelscanbegroupedintothefollowingcategories:(1) plain carbon
steels, (2) low alloy steels, (3) stainless steels, (4) tool steels, and (5) specialty steels.
Plain Carbon Steels
These steels contain carbon as the principal alloying element, with
only small amounts of other elements (about 0.4% manganese plus lesser amounts of
FIGURE 6.11
Continuous casting; steel
is poured into tundish
and distributed to a
water-cooled continuous
casting mold; it solidiﬁes
as it travels down
through the mold. The
slab thickness is
exaggerated for clarity.
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals
111

silicon, phosphorus, and sulfur). The strength of plain carbon steels increases with carbon
content. A typical plot of the relationship is illustrated in Figure 6.12. As seen in the phase
diagram for iron and carbon (Figure 6.4), steel at room temperature is a mixture of ferrite
(a) and cementite (Fe3C). The cementite particles distributed throughout the ferrite act as
TABLE 6.2
AISI-SAE designations of steels.
Nominal Chemical Analysis, %
Code
Name of Steel
Cr
Mn
Mo
Ni
V
P
S
Si
10XX
Plain carbon
0.4
0.04
0.05
11XX
Resulfurized
0.9
0.01
0.12
0.01
12XX
Resulfurized,
rephosphorized
0.9
0.10
0.22
0.01
13XX
Manganese
1.7
0.04
0.04
0.3
20XX
Nickel steels
0.5
0.6
0.04
0.04
0.2
31XX
Nickel–chrome
0.6
1.2
0.04
0.04
0.3
40XX
Molybdenum
0.8
0.25
0.04
0.04
0.2
41XX
Chrome–molybdenum
1.0
0.8
0.2
0.04
0.04
0.3
43XX
Ni–Cr–Mo
0.8
0.7
0.25
1.8
0.04
0.04
0.2
46XX
Nickel–molybdenum
0.6
0.25
1.8
0.04
0.04
0.3
47XX
Ni–Cr–Mo
0.4
0.6
0.2
1.0
0.04
0.04
0.3
48XX
Nickel–molybdenum
0.6
0.25
3.5
0.04
0.04
0.3
50XX
Chromium
0.5
0.4
0.04
0.04
0.3
52XX
Chromium
1.4
0.4
0.02
0.02
0.3
61XX
Cr–Vanadium
0.8
0.8
0.1
0.04
0.04
0.3
81XX
Ni–Cr–Mo
0.4
0.8
0.1
0.3
0.04
0.04
0.3
86XX
Ni–Cr–Mo
0.5
0.8
0.2
0.5
0.04
0.04
0.3
88XX
Ni–Cr–Mo
0.5
0.8
0.35
0.5
0.04
0.04
0.3
92XX
Silicon–Manganese
0.8
0.04
0.04
2.0
93XX
Ni–Cr–Mo
1.2
0.6
0.1
3.2
0.02
0.02
0.3
98XX
Ni–Cr–Mo
0.8
0.8
0.25
1.0
0.04
0.04
0.3
FIGURE 6.12
Tensile
strength and hardness as
a function of carbon
content in plain carbon
steel (hot-rolled, unheat-
treated).
~~
800
120
100
80
60
40
20
240
220
200
160
120
80
600
400
200
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
% Carbon (C)
0.8
1.0
Tensile strength, MPa
Hardness, HB
Tensile strength, 1000 lb/in2.
Hardness
Tensile
strength
112
Chapter 6/Metals

obstacles to the movement of dislocations during slip (Section 2.3.3); more carbon leads to
more barriers, and more barriers mean stronger and harder steel.
According to a designation scheme developed by the American Iron and Steel
Institute (AISI) and the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), plain carbon steels are
specified by a four-digit number system: 10XX, in which 10 indicates that the steel is plain
carbon, and XX indicates the percent of carbon in hundredths of percentage points. For
example, 1020 steel contains 0.20% C. The plain carbon steels are typically classified into
three groups according to their carbon content:
1. Low carbon steels contain less than 0.20% C and are by far the most widely used
steels. Typical applications are automobile sheet-metal parts, plate steel for fabri-
cation, andrailroadrails. These steels arerelatively easy toform, whichaccountsfor
their popularity where high strength is not required. Steel castings usually fall into
this carbon range, also.
2. Medium carbon steels range in carbon between 0.20% and 0.50% and are specified
for applications requiring higher strength than the low-C steels. Applications
include machinery components and engine parts such as crankshafts and connecting
rods.
3. High carbon steels contain carbon in amounts greater than 0.50%. They are
specified for still higher strength applications and where stiffness and hardness
are needed. Springs, cutting tools and blades, and wear-resistant parts are examples.
Increasing carbon content strengthens and hardens the steel, but its ductility is reduced.
Also, high carbon steels can be heat treated to form martensite, making the steel very
hard and strong (Section 27.2).
Low Alloy Steels
Low alloy steels are iron–carbon alloys that contain additional
alloying elements in amounts totaling less than about 5% by weight. Owing to these
additions, low alloy steels have mechanical properties that are superior to those of the
plain carbon steels for given applications. Superior properties usually mean higher
strength, hardness, hot hardness, wear resistance, toughness, and more desirable combi-
nations of these properties. Heat treatment is often required to achieve these improved
properties.
Common alloying elements added to steel are chromium, manganese, molybde-
num, nickel, and vanadium, sometimes individually but usually in combinations. These
elements typically form solid solutions with iron and metallic compounds with carbon
(carbides), assuming sufficient carbon is present to support a reaction. The effects of the
principal alloying ingredients can be summarized as follows:

Chromium (Cr) improves strength, hardness, wear resistance, and hot hardness.
It is one of the most effective alloying ingredients for increasing hardenability
(Section 27.2.3). In significant proportions, Cr improves corrosion resistance.

Manganese (Mn) improves the strength and hardness of steel. When the steel is
heat treated, hardenability is improved with increased manganese. Because of
these benefits, manganese is a widely used alloying ingredient in steel.

Molybdenum (Mo) increases toughness and hot hardness. It also improves
hardenability and forms carbides for wear resistance.

Nickel (Ni) improves strength and toughness. It increases hardenability but not
as much as some of the other alloying elements in steel. In significant amounts it
improves corrosion resistance and is the other major ingredient (besides chro-
mium) in certain types of stainless steel.
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals
113


Vanadium (V) inhibits grain growth during elevated temperature processing
and heat treatment, which enhances strength and toughness of steel. It also
forms carbides that increase wear resistance.
TheAISI-SAE designationsofmanyofthelow alloy steels are presented inTable6.2,
which indicates nominal chemical analysis. As before, carbon content is specified by XX in
1=100% of carbon. For completeness, plain carbon steels (10XX) have been included. To
obtain an idea of the properties possessed by some of these steels, Table 6.3 was compiled,
which lists the treatment to which the steel is subjected for strengthening and its strength
and ductility.
Low alloy steels are not easily welded, especially at medium and high carbon levels.
Since the 1960s, research has been directed at developing low carbon, low alloy steels that
have better strength-to-weight ratios than plain carbon steels but are more weldable than low
alloy steels. The products developed out of these efforts are called high-strength low-alloy
(HSLA) steels. They generally have low carbon contents (in the range 0.10%–0.30% C) plus
relativelysmallamountsofalloyingingredients(usuallyonlyabout3%totalofelementssuch
as Mn, Cu, Ni, and Cr). HSLA steels are hot-rolled under controlled conditions designed to
provide improved strength compared with plain C steels, yet with no sacrifice in formability
or weldability. Strengthening is by solid solution alloying; heat treatment is not feasible
because of low carbon content. Table 6.3 lists one HSLA steel, together with properties
(chemistry is: 0.12 C, 0.60 Mn, 1.1 Ni, 1.1 Cr, 0.35 Mo, and 0.4 Si).
Stainless Steels
Stainless steels are a group of highly alloyed steels designed to provide
high corrosion resistance. The principal alloying element in stainless steel is chromium,
usually above 15%. The chromium in the alloy forms a thin, impervious oxide film in an
TABLE 6.3
Treatments and mechanical properties of selected steels.
Tensile Strength
Code
Treatmenta
MPa
lb/in2
Elongation, %
1010
HR
304
44,000
47
1010
CD
366
53,000
12
1020
HR
380
55,000
28
1020
CD
421
61,000
15
1040
HR
517
75,000
20
1040
CD
587
85,000
10
1055
HT
897
130,000
16
1315
None
545
79,000
34
2030
None
566
82,000
32
3130
HT
697
101,000
28
4130
HT
890
129,000
17
4140
HT
918
133,000
16
4340
HT
1279
185,000
12
4815
HT
635
92,000
27
9260
HT
994
144,000
18
HSLA
None
586
85,000
20
Compiled from [6], [11], and other sources.
aHR ¼ hot-rolled; CD ¼ cold-drawn; HT ¼ heat treatment involving heating and quenching, followed by
tempering to produce tempered martensite (Section 27.2).
114
Chapter 6/Metals

oxidizing atmosphere, which protects thesurface from corrosion. Nickel is another alloying
ingredient used incertainstainless steels to increase corrosion protection.Carbon isusedto
strengthen and harden the metal; however, increasing the carbon content has the effect of
reducing corrosion protection because chromium carbide forms to reduce the amount of
free Cr available in the alloy.
In addition to corrosion resistance, stainless steels are noted for their combination
of strength and ductility. Although these properties are desirable in many applications,
they generally make these alloys difficult to work in manufacturing. Also, stainless steels
are significantly more expensive than plain C or low alloy steels.
Stainless steels are traditionally divided into three groups, named for the predomi-
nant phase present in the alloy at ambient temperature.
1. Austenitic stainless have a typical composition of around 18% Cr and 8% Ni and are
the most corrosion resistant of the three groups. Owing to this composition, they are
sometimesidentifiedas18-8stainless.Theyarenonmagneticandveryductile;butthey
show significant work hardening. The nickel has the effect of enlarging the austenite
region in the iron–carbon phase diagram, making it stable at room temperature.
Austenitic stainless steels are used to fabricate chemical and food processing equip-
ment, as well as machinery parts requiring high corrosion resistance.
2. Ferritic stainless have around 15% to 20% chromium, low carbon, and no nickel.
This provides a ferrite phase at room temperature. Ferritic stainless steels are
magnetic and are less ductile and corrosion resistant than the austenitics. Parts
made of ferritic stainless range from kitchen utensils to jet engine components.
3. Martensitic stainless have a higher carbon content than ferritic stainlesses, thus
permitting them to be strengthened by heat treatment (Section 27.2). They have
as much as 18% Cr but no Ni. They are strong, hard, and fatigue resistant, but not
generally as corrosion resistant as the other two groups. Typical products include
cutlery and surgical instruments.
Most stainless steels are designated by a three-digit AISI numbering scheme.
The first digit indicates the general type, and the last two digits give the specific grade
within the type. Table 6.4 lists the common stainless steels with typical compositions
and mechanical properties. The traditional stainless steels were developed in the
early 1900s. Since then, several additional high alloy steels have been developed that
have good corrosion resistance and other desirable properties. These are also
classified as stainless steels. Continuing the list:
4. Precipitation hardening stainless, which have a typical composition of 17% Cr
and 7%Ni, with additional small amounts of alloying elements such as aluminum,
copper, titanium, and molybdenum. Their distinguishing feature among stainl-
esses is that they can be strengthened by precipitation hardening (Section 27.3).
Strength and corrosion resistance are maintained at elevated temperatures, which
suits these alloys to aerospace applications.
5. Duplex stainless possess a structure that is a mixture of austenite and ferrite in
roughly equal amounts. Their corrosionresistance is similar to the austenitic grades,
and they show improved resistance to stress-corrosion cracking. Applications
include heat exchangers, pumps, and wastewater treatment plants.
Tool Steels
Tool steels are a class of (usually) highly alloyed steels designed for use as
industrial cutting tools, dies, and molds. To perform in these applications, they must possess
high strength, hardness, hot hardness, wear resistance, and toughness under impact. To
obtain these properties, tool steels are heat treated. Principal reasons for the high levels of
alloying elements are (1) improved hardenability, (2) reduced distortion during heat
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals
115

treatment, (3) hot hardness, (4) formation of hard metallic carbides for abrasion
resistance, and (5) enhanced toughness.
The tool steels divide into major types, according to application and composition.
The AISI uses a classification scheme that includes a prefix letter to identify the tool
steel. In the following list of tool steel types, the prefix and some typical compositions are
presented in Table 6.5:
TABLE 6.4
Compositions and mechanical properties of selected stainless steels.
Chemical Analysis, %
Tensile Strength
Type
Fe
Cr
Ni
C
Mn
Othera
MPa
lb/in2
Elongation, %
Austenitic
301
73
17
7
0.15
2
620
90,000
40
302
71
18
8
0.15
2
515
75,000
40
304
69
19
9
0.08
2
515
75,000
40
309
61
23
13
0.20
2
515
75,000
40
316
65
17
12
0.08
2
2.5 Mo
515
75,000
40
Ferritic
405
85
13
—
0.08
1
415
60,000
20
430
81
17
—
0.12
1
415
60,000
20
Martensitic
403
86
12
—
0.15
1
485
70,000
20
403b
86
12
—
0.15
1
825
120,000
12
416
85
13
—
0.15
1
485
70,000
20
416b
85
13
—
0.15
1
965
140,000
10
440
81
17
—
0.65
1
725
105,000
20
440b
81
17
—
0.65
1
1790
260,000
5
Compiled from [11].
aAll of the grades in the table contain about 1% (or less) Si plus small amounts (well below 1%) of phosphorus, sulfur, and other elements
such as aluminum.
bHeat treated.
TABLE 6.5
Tool steels by AISI preﬁx identiﬁcation, with examples of composition and typical hardness values.
Chemical Analysis, %a
Hardness,
AISI
Example
C
Cr
Mn
Mo
Ni
V
W
HRC
T
T1
0.7
4.0
1.0
18.0
65
M
M2
0.8
4.0
5.0
2.0
6.0
65
H
H11
0.4
5.0
1.5
0.4
55
D
D1
1.0
12.0
1.0
60
A
A2
1.0
5.0
1.0
60
O
O1
0.9
0.5
1.0
0.5
61
W
W1
1.0
63
S
S1
0.5
1.5
2.5
50
P
P20
0.4
1.7
0.4
40b
L
L6
0.7
0.8
0.2
1.5
45b
aPercent composition rounded to nearest tenth.
bHardness estimated.
116
Chapter 6/Metals

T, M
High-speedtool steelsareused ascuttingtoolsinmachiningprocesses(Section
23.2.1). They are formulated for high wear resistance and hot hardness. The
original high-speed steels (HSS) were developed around 1900. They permitted
dramatic increases in cutting speed compared to previously used tools; hence
their name. The two AISI designations indicate the principal alloying element:
T for tungsten and M for molybdenum.
H
Hot-working tool steels are intended for hot-working dies in forging,
extrusion, and die-casting.
D
Cold-work tool steels are die steels used for cold working operations such as
sheetmetal pressworking, cold extrusion, and certain forging operations. The
designation D stands for die. Closely related AISI designations are A and O. A
andOstandforair-andoil-hardening.Theyallprovidegoodwearresistanceand
low distortion.
W
Water-hardening tool steels have high carbon with little or no other alloying
elements. They can only be hardened by fast quenching in water. They are
widely used because of low cost, but they are limited to low temperature
applications. Cold heading dies are a typical application.
S
Shock-resistant tool steels are intended for use in applications where high
toughness is required, as in many sheetmetal shearing, punching, and bending
operations.
P
Mold steels are used to make molds for molding plastics and rubber.
L
Low-alloy tool steels are generally reserved for special applications.
Tool steels are not the only tool materials. Plain carbon, low alloy, and stainless steels
are used for many tool and die applications. Cast irons and certain nonferrous alloys are
also suitable for certain tooling applications. In addition, several ceramic materials (e.g.,
Al2O3) are used as high-speed cutting inserts, abrasives, and other tools.
Specialty Steels
To complete this survey, several specialty steels are mentioned that
are not included in the previous coverage. One of the reasons why these steels are special
is that they possess unique processing characteristics.
Maraging steels are low carbon alloys containing high amounts of nickel (15% to
25%) and lesser proportions of cobalt, molybdenum, and titanium. Chromium is also
sometimes added for corrosion resistance. Maraging steels are strengthened by precipita-
tion hardening (Section 27.3), but in the unhardened condition, they are quite processable
by forming and/or machining. They can also be readily welded. Heat treatment results in
very high strength together with good toughness. Tensile strengths of 2000 MPa (290,000lb/
in2) and 10% elongation are not unusual. Applications include parts for missiles, machin-
ery,dies,andothersituationswherethesepropertiesarerequiredandjustifythehighcostof
the alloy.
Free-machining steels are carbon steels formulated to improve machinability (Section
24.1). Alloying elements include sulfur, lead, tin, bismuth, selenium, tellurium, and/or
phosphorus.Leadisless-frequentlyusedtodaybecauseofenvironmentalandhealthconcerns.
Addedinsmallamounts,theseelementsacttolubricatethecuttingoperation,reducefriction,
and break up chips for easier disposal. Although more expensive than non-free-machining
steels, they often pay for themselves in higher production rates and longer tool lives.
Because of their good ductility, low-carbon sheet steels are widely used in sheet-metal
forming operations. Further improvements in formability have been achieved using a new
class of sheet steel product called interstitial-free steels. These steels have extremely low
carbon levels (0.005% C), which result from the use of alloying elements such as niobium and
titanium that combine with C and leave the steel virtually free of interstitial atoms. The result
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals
117

is excellent ductility, even greater than low-C steels. Applications include deep-drawing
operations in the automotive industry.
6.2.4 CAST IRONS
Cast iron is an iron alloy containing from 2.1% to about 4% carbon and from 1% to 3%
silicon. Its composition makes it highly suitable as a casting metal. In fact, the tonnage of
cast iron castings is several times that of all other cast metal parts combined (excluding
cast ingots made during steelmaking, which are subsequently rolled into bars, plates, and
similar stock). The overall tonnage of cast iron is second only to steel among metals.
There are several types of cast iron, the most important being gray cast iron. Other
types include ductile iron, white cast iron, malleable iron, and various alloy cast irons.
Typical chemical compositions of gray and white cast irons are shown in Figure 6.13,
indicating their relationship with cast steel. Ductile and malleable irons possess chemis-
tries similar to the gray and white cast irons, respectively, but result from special
treatments to be described in the following. Table 6.6 presents a listing of chemistries
for the principal types together with mechanical properties.
Gray Cast Iron
Graycastironaccountsforthelargesttonnageamongthecastirons.Ithasa
compositionintherange2.5%to4%carbonand1%to3%silicon.Thischemistryresultsinthe
formation of graphite (carbon) flakes distributed throughout the cast product upon solidifi-
cation.Thestructurecausesthesurfaceofthemetaltohaveagraycolorwhenfractured;hence
the name gray cast iron. The dispersion of graphite flakes accounts for two attractive
properties: (1) good vibration damping, which is desirable in engines and other machin-
ery; and (2) internal lubricating qualities, which makes the cast metal machinable.
The strength of gray cast iron spans a significant range. The American Society for
Testing of Materials (ASTM) uses a classification method for gray cast iron that is intended
to provide a minimum tensile strength (TS) specification for the various classes: Class 20
gray cast iron has a TS of 20,000 lb=in2, Class 30 has a TS of 30,000 lb/in2, and so forth, up to
around 70,000 lb=in2 (see Table 6.6 for equivalent TS in metric units). The compressive
strength of gray cast iron is significantly greater than its tensile strength. Properties of the
casting can be controlled to some extent by heat treatment. Ductility of gray cast iron is very
low; it is a relatively brittle material. Products made from gray cast iron include automotive
engine blocks and heads, motor housings, and machine tool bases.
FIGURE 6.13
Carbon and silicon
compositions for cast irons, with
comparison to steels (most steels
have relatively low silicon
contents—cast steels have the
higher Si content). Ductile iron is
formed by special melting and
pouring treatment of gray cast iron,
and malleable iron is formed by heat
treatment of white cast iron.
118
Chapter 6/Metals

Ductile Iron
This is an iron with the composition of gray iron in which the molten
metal is chemically treated before pouring to cause the formation of graphite spheroids
rather than flakes. This results in a stronger and more ductile iron, hence its name.
Applications include machinery components requiring high strength and good wear
resistance.
White Cast Iron
This cast iron has less carbon and silicon than gray cast iron. It is
formed by more rapid cooling of the molten metal after pouring, thus causing the carbon
to remain chemically combined with iron in the form of cementite (Fe3C), rather than
precipitating out of solution in the form of flakes. When fractured, the surface has a
white crystalline appearance that gives the iron its name. Owing to the cementite, white
cast iron is hard and brittle, and its wear resistance is excellent. Strength is good, with TS
of 276 MPa (40,000 lb/in2) being typical. These properties make white cast iron suitable
for applications in which wear resistance is required. Railway brake shoes are an
example.
Malleable Iron
When castings of white cast iron are heat treated to separate the carbon
out of solution and form graphite aggregates, the resulting metal is called malleable iron.
The new microstructure can possess substantial ductility (up to 20% elongation)—a
significant difference from the metal out of which it was transformed. Typical products
made of malleable cast iron include pipe fittings and flanges, certain machine components,
and railroad equipment parts.
Alloy Cast Irons
Cast irons can be alloyed for special properties and applications.
These alloy cast irons are classified as follows: (1) heat-treatable types that can be
hardened by martensite formation; (2) corrosion-resistant types, whose alloying
elements include nickel and chromium; and (3) heat-resistant types containing
high proportions of nickel for hot hardness and resistance to high temperature
oxidation.
TABLE 6.6
Compositions and mechanical properties of selected cast irons.
Typical Composition, %
Tensile Strength
Type
Fe
C
Si
Mn
Othera
MPa
lb/in2
Elongation, %
Gray cast irons
ASTM Class 20
93.0
3.5
2.5
0.65
138
20,000
0.6
ASTM Class 30
93.6
3.2
2.1
0.75
207
30,000
0.6
ASTM Class 40
93.8
3.1
1.9
0.85
276
40,000
0.6
ASTM Class 50
93.5
3.0
1.6
1.0
0.67 Mo
345
50,000
0.6
Ductile irons
ASTM A395
94.4
3.0
2.5
414
60,000
18
ASTM A476
93.8
3.0
3.0
552
80,000
3
White cast iron
Low-C
92.5
2.5
1.3
0.4
1.5Ni, 1Cr, 0.5Mo
276
40,000
0
Malleable irons
Ferritic
95.3
2.6
1.4
0.4
345
50,000
10
Pearlitic
95.1
2.4
1.4
0.8
414
60,000
10
Compiled from [11]. Cast irons are identified by various systems. This table attempts to indicate the particular cast iron grade using the
most common identification for each type.
aCast irons also contain phosphorus and sulfur usually totaling less than 0.3%.
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals
119

6.3
NONFERROUS METALS
The nonferrous metals include metal elements and alloys not based on iron. The most
important engineering metals in the nonferrous group are aluminum, copper, magne-
sium, nickel, titanium, and zinc, and their alloys.
Although the nonferrous metals as a group cannot match the strength of the steels,
certain nonferrous alloys have corrosion resistance and/or strength-to-weight ratios that
make them competitive with steels in moderate-to-high stress applications. In addition,
many of the nonferrous metals have properties other than mechanical that make them
ideal for applications in which steel would be quite unsuitable. For example, copper has
one of the lowest electrical resistivities among metals and is widely used for electrical
wire. Aluminum is an excellent thermal conductor, and its applications include heat
exchangers and cooking pans. It is also one of the most readily formed metals, and is
valued for that reason also. Zinc has a relatively low melting point, so zinc is widely used
in die casting operations. The common nonferrous metals have their own combination of
properties that make them attractive in a variety of applications. The following nine
sections discuss the nonferrous metals that are the most commercially and technologi-
cally important.
6.3.1 ALUMINUM AND ITS ALLOYS
Aluminum and magnesium are light metals, and they are often specified in engineering
applications for this feature. Both elements are abundant on Earth, aluminum on land
and magnesium in the sea, although neither is easily extracted from their natural states.
Properties and other data on aluminum are listed in Table 6.1(b). Among the major
metals, it is a relative newcomer, dating only to the late 1800s (Historical Note 6.2). The
coverage in this section includes (1) a brief description of how aluminum is produced
and (2) a discussion of the properties and the designation system for the metal and its
alloys.
Aluminum Production
The principal aluminum ore is bauxite, which consists largely
of hydrated aluminum oxide (Al2O3-H2O) and other oxides. Extraction of the aluminum
frombauxitecanbesummarizedinthreesteps:(1) washingandcrushingthe oreinto fine
powders; (2) the Bayer process, in which the bauxite is converted to pure alumina
(Al2O3); and (3) electrolysis, in which the alumina is separated into aluminum and
TABLE 6.1
(continued): (b) Aluminum.
Symbol: Al
Principal ore: Bauxite (impure mix of Al2O3 and
Al(OH)3)
Atomic number: 13
Specific gravity: 2.7
Alloying elements: Copper, magnesium, manganese,
silicon, and zinc
Crystal structure: FCC
Melting temperature: 660C (1220F)
Typical applications: Containers (aluminum cans),
wrapping foil, electrical conductors,
pots and pans, parts for construction,
aerospace, automotive, and other
uses in which light weight is
important
Elastic modulus: 69,000 MPa (10  106 lb/in2)
120
Chapter 6/Metals

oxygengas(O2). TheBayer process,namedaftertheGermanchemist whodeveloped
it, involves solution of bauxite powders in aqueous caustic soda (NaOH) under
pressure, followed by precipitation of pure Al2O3 from solution. Alumina is commer-
cially important in its own right as an engineering ceramic (Chapter 7).
Electrolysis to separate Al2O3 into its constituent elements requires dissolving the
precipitate in a molten bath of cryolite (Na3AlF6) and subjecting the solution to direct
current between the plates of an electrolytic furnace. The electrolyte dissociates to form
aluminum at the cathode and oxygen gas at the anode.
Properties and Designation Scheme
Aluminum has high electrical and thermal
conductivity, and its resistance to corrosion is excellent because of the formation of a
hard, thin oxide surface film. It is a very ductile metal and is noted for its formability.
Pure aluminum is relatively low in strength, but it can be alloyed and heat treated to
compete with some steels, especially when weight is an important consideration.
The designation system for aluminum alloys is a four-digit code number. The system
has two parts, one for wrought aluminums and the other for cast aluminums. The difference
is that a decimal point is used after the third digit for cast aluminums. The designations are
presented in Table 6.7(a).
Historical Note 6.2
Aluminum
In 1807, the English chemist Humphrey Davy, believing
that the mineral alumina (Al2O3) had a metallic base,
attempted to extract the metal. He did not succeed, but
was sufﬁciently convinced that he proceeded to name
the metal anyway: alumium, later changing the name to
aluminum. In 1825, the Danish physicist/chemist Hans
Orsted ﬁnally succeeded in separating the metal. He
noted that it ‘‘resembles tin.’’ In 1845, the German
physicist Friedrich Wohler was the ﬁrst to determine the
speciﬁc gravity, ductility, and various other properties of
aluminum.
The modern electrolytic process for producing
aluminum was based on the concurrent but
independent work of Charles Hall in the United States
and Paul Heroult in France around 1886. In 1888,
Hall and a group of businessmen started the Pittsburgh
Reduction Co. The ﬁrst ingot of aluminum was
produced by the electrolytic smelting process that
same year. Demand for aluminum grew. The need for
large amounts of electricity in the production process
led the company to relocate in Niagara Falls in 1895,
where hydroelectric power was becoming available at
very low cost. In 1907, the company changed its
name to the Aluminum Company of America (Alcoa).
It was the sole producer of aluminum in the United
States until World War II.
TABLE 6.7(a)
Designations of wrought and cast aluminum alloys.
Alloy Group
Wrought Code
Cast Code
Aluminum, 99.0% or higher purity
1XXX
1XX.X
Aluminum alloys, by major element(s):
Copper
2XXX
2XX.X
Manganese
3XXX
Silicon + copper and/or magnesium
3XX.X
Silicon
4XXX
4XX.X
Magnesium
5XXX
5XX.X
Magnesium and silicon
6XXX
Zinc
7XXX
7XX.X
Tin
8XX.X
Other
8XXX
9XX.X
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals
121

Because properties of aluminum alloys are so influenced by work hardening and heat
treatment, the temper (strengthening treatment, if any) must be designated in addition to the
composition code. The principal temper designations are presented in Table 6.7(b). This
designation is attached to the preceding four-digit number, separated from it by a hyphen, to
indicate the treatment or absence thereof; for example, 2024-T3. Of course, temper treat-
ments that specify strain hardening do not apply to the cast alloys. Some examples of the
remarkable differences in the mechanical properties of aluminum alloys that result from the
different treatments are presented in Table 6.8.
6.3.2 MAGNESIUM AND ITS ALLOYS
Magnesium (Mg) is the lightest of the structural metals. Its specific gravity and other basic
dataarepresentedinTable6.1(c).Magnesiumanditsalloysareavailableinbothwroughtand
cast forms. It is relatively easy to machine. However, in all processing of magnesium, small
TABLE 6.7(b)
Temper designations for aluminum alloys.
Temper
Description
F
As fabricated—no special treatment.
H
Strain hardened (wrought aluminums). H is followed by two digits, the first indicating a heat treatment,
if any; and the second indicating the degree of work hardening remaining; for example:
H1X No heat treatment after strain hardening, and X ¼ 1 to 9, indicating degree of work hardening.
H2X Partially annealed, and X ¼ degree of work hardening remaining in product.
H3X Stabilized, and X ¼ degree of work hardening remaining. Stabilized means heating to slightly
above service temperature anticipated.
O
Annealed to relieve strain hardening and improve ductility; reduces strength to lowest level.
T
Thermal treatment to produce stable tempers other than F, H, or O. It is followed by a digit to indicate
specific treatments; for example:
T1 ¼ cooled from elevated temperature, naturally aged.
T2 ¼ cooled from elevated temperature, cold worked, naturally aged.
T3 ¼ solution heat treated, cold worked, naturally aged.
T4 ¼ solution heat treated and naturally aged.
T5 ¼ cooled from elevated temperature, artificially aged.
T6 ¼ solution heat treated and artificially aged.
T7 ¼ solution heat treated and overaged or stabilized.
T8 ¼ solution heat treated, cold worked, artificially aged.
T9 ¼ solution heat treated, artificially aged, and cold worked.
T10 ¼ cooled from elevated temperature, cold worked, and artificially aged.
W
Solution heat treatment, applied to alloys that age harden in service; it is an unstable temper.
TABLE 6.1
(continued): (c) Magnesium.
Symbol: Mg
Extracted from: MgCl2 in sea water by electrolysis
Atomic number: 12
Alloying elements: See Table 6.9
Specific gravity: 1.74
Typical applications: Aerospace, missiles, bicycles, chain
saw housings, luggage, and other
applications in which light weight is
a primary requirement
Crystal structure: HCP
Melting temperature: 650C (1202F)
Elastic modulus: 48,000 MPa (7  106 lb/in2)
122
Chapter 6/Metals

particles of the metal (such as small metal cutting chips) oxidize rapidly, and care must be
taken to avoid fire hazards.
Magnesium Production
Sea water contains about 0.13% MgCl2, and this is the source
of most commercially produced magnesium. To extract Mg, a batch of sea water is mixed
with milk of lime–calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2). The resulting reaction precipitates
magnesium hydroxide (Mg(OH)2) that settles and is removed as a slurry. The slurry is
then filtered to increase Mg(OH)2 content and then mixed with hydrochloric acid (HCl),
which reacts with the hydroxide to form concentrated MgCl2—much more concentrated
than the original sea water. Electrolysis is used to decompose the salt into magnesium (Mg)
and chlorine gas (Cl2). The magnesium is then cast into ingots for subsequent processing.
The chlorine is recycled to form more MgCl2.
Properties and Designation Scheme
As a pure metal, magnesium is relatively soft
and lacks sufficient strength for most engineering applications. However, it can be alloyed
and heat treated to achieve strengths comparable to aluminum alloys. In particular, its
strength-to-weight ratio is an advantage in aircraft and missile components.
The designation scheme for magnesium alloys uses a three-to-five character alphanu-
meric code. The first two characters are letters that identify the principal alloying elements
(up to two elements can be specified in the code, in order of decreasing percentages, or
alphabetically if equal percentages). These code letters are listed in Table 6.9. The letters are
followed by a two-digit number that indicates, respectively, the amounts of the two alloying
ingredients to the nearest percent. Finally, the last symbol is a letter that indicates some
variation in composition, or simply the chronological order in which it was standardized for
commercial availability. Magnesium alloys also require specification of a temper, and the
same basic scheme presented in Table 6.7(b) for aluminum is used for magnesium alloys.
Some examples of magnesium alloys, illustrating the designation scheme and
indicating tensile strength and ductility of these alloys, are presented in Table 6.10.
TABLE 6.8
Compositions and mechanical properties of selected aluminum alloys.
Typical Composition, %
a
Tensile Strength
Code
Al
Cu
Fe
Mg
Mn
Si
Temper
MPa
lb/in2
Elongation
1050
99.5
0.4
0.3
O
76
11,000
39
H18
159
23,000
7
1100
99.0
0.6
0.3
O
90
13,000
40
H18
165
24,000
10
2024
93.5
4.4
0.5
1.5
0.6
0.5
O
185
27,000
20
T3
485
70,000
18
3004
96.5
0.3
0.7
1.0
1.2
0.3
O
180
26,000
22
H36
260
38,000
7
4043
93.5
0.3
0.8
5.2
O
130
19,000
25
H18
285
41,000
1
5050
96.9
0.2
0.7
1.4
0.1
0.4
O
125
18,000
18
H38
200
29,000
3
6063
98.5
0.3
0.7
0.4
O
90
13,000
25
T4
172
25,000
20
Compiled from [12].
aIn addition to elements listed, alloy may contain trace amounts of other elements such as copper, magnesium, manganese, vanadium,
and zinc.
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals
123

6.3.3 COPPER AND ITS ALLOYS
Copper (Cu) is one of the oldest metals known (Historical Note 6.3). Basic data on the
element copper are presented in Table 6.1(d).
Copper Production
In ancient times, copper was available in nature as a free element.
Today these natural deposits are more difficult to find, and copper isnow extracted from ores
that are mostly sulfides, such as chalcopyrite (CuFeS2). The ore is crushed (Section 17.1.1),
concentrated by flotation, and then smelted (melted or fused, often with an associated
chemical reaction to separate a metal from its ore). The resulting copper is called blister
copper, which is between 98% and 99% pure. Electrolysis is used to obtain higher purity
levels suitable for commercial use.
Properties and Designation Scheme
Purecopperhasadistinctivereddish-pinkcolor,
butitsmostdistinguishingengineeringpropertyisitslowelectricalresistivity—oneofthelowest
TABLE 6.9
Code letters used to identify alloying elements in magnesium alloys.
A
Aluminum (Al)
H
Thorium (Th)
M
Manganese (Mn)
Q
Silver (Ag)
T
Tin (Sn)
E
Rate earth metals
K
Zirconium (Zr)
P
Lead (Pb)
S
Silicon (Si)
Z
Zinc (Zn)
TABLE 6.10
Compositions and mechanical properties of selected magnesium alloys.
Typical Composition, %
Tensile Strength
Code
Mg
Al
Mn
Si
Zn
Other
Process
MPa
lb/in2
Elongation
AZ10A
98.0
1.3
0.2
0.1
0.4
Wrought
240
35,000
10
AZ80A
91.0
8.5
0.5
Forged
330
48,000
11
HM31A
95.8
1.2
3.0 Th
Wrought
283
41,000
10
ZK21A
97.1
2.3
6 Zr
Wrought
260
38,000
4
AM60
92.8
6.0
0.1
0.5
0.2
0.3 Cu
Cast
220
32,000
6
AZ63A
91.0
6.0
3.0
Cast
200
29,000
6
Compiled from [12].
Historical Note 6.3
Copper
Copper was one of the ﬁrst metals used by human
cultures (gold was the other). Discovery of the metal was
probably around 6000 BCE. At that time, copper was
found in the free metallic state. Ancient peoples
fashioned implements and weapons out of it by hitting
the metal (cold forging). Pounding copper made it harder
(strain hardening); this and its attractive reddish color
made it valuable in early civilizations.
Around 4000 BCE, it was discovered that copper could
be melted and cast into useful shapes. It was later found
that copper mixed with tin could be more readily cast
and worked than the pure metal. This led to the
widespread use of bronze and the subsequent naming of
the Bronze Age, dated from about 2000 BCE to the time of
Christ.
To the ancient Romans, the island of Cyprus was
almost the only source of copper. They called the metal
aes cyprium (ore of Cyprus). This was shortened to
Cyprium and subsequently renamed Cuprium. From this
derives the chemical symbol Cu.
124
Chapter 6/Metals

ofallelements.Becauseofthisproperty,anditsrelativeabundanceinnature,commerciallypure
copperiswidelyusedasanelectricalconductor.(Notethattheconductivityofcopperdecreases
significantlyasalloyingelementsareadded.)Cuisalsoanexcellentthermalconductor.Copper
isoneofthenoblemetals(goldandsilverarealsonoblemetals),soitiscorrosionresistant.Allof
these properties combine to make copper one of the most important metals.
On the downside, the strength and hardness of copper are relatively low, especially
when weight is taken into account. Accordingly, to improve strength (as well as for other
reasons), copper is frequently alloyed. Bronze is an alloy of copper and tin (typically about
90% Cu and 10% Sn), still widely used today despite its ancient ancestry. Additional bronze
alloys have been developed, based on other elements than tin; these include aluminum
bronzes, and silicon bronzes. Brass is another familiar copper alloy, composed of copper and
zinc (typically around 65% Cu and 35% Zn). The highest strength alloy of copper is
beryllium-copper (only about 2% Be). It can be heat treated to tensile strengths of 1035
MPa (150,000 lb/in2). Be-Cu alloys are used for springs.
The designation of copper alloys is based on the Unified Numbering System for
Metals and Alloys (UNS), which uses a five-digit number preceded by the letter C (C for
copper). The alloys are processed in wrought and cast forms, and the designation system
includes both. Some copper alloys with compositions and mechanical properties are
presented in Table 6.11.
6.3.4 NICKEL AND ITS ALLOYS
Nickel (Ni) is similar to iron in many respects. It is magnetic, and its modulus of elasticity
is virtually the same as that of iron and steel. However, it is much more corrosion
resistant, and the high temperature properties of its alloys are generally superior.
Because of its corrosion-resistant characteristics, it is widely used as an alloying element
in steel, such as stainless steel, and as a plating metal on other metals such as plain carbon
steel.
TABLE 6.1
(continued): (d) Copper.
Symbol: Cu
Ore extracted from: Several: e.g., chalcopyrite (CuFeS2).
Atomic number: 29
Alloying elements: Tin (bronze), zinc (brass),
aluminum, silicon, nickel, and
beryllium.
Specific gravity: 8.96
Crystal structure: FCC
Typical applications:
Electrical conductors and
components, ammunition (brass),
pots and pans, jewelry, plumbing,
marine applications, heat
exchangers, springs (Be-Cu).
Melting temperature: 1083C (1981F)
Elastic modulus: 110,000 MPa (16  106 lb/in2)
TABLE 6.1
(continued): (e) Nickel.
Symbol: Ni
Ore extracted from: Pentlandite ((Fe, Ni)9S8)
Atomic number: 28
Alloying elements: Copper, chromium, iron, aluminum.
Specific gravity: 8.90
Typical applications: Stainless steel alloying ingredient,
plating metal for steel, applications
requiring high temperature and
corrosion resistance.
Crystal structure: FCC
Melting temperature: 1453C (2647F)
Elastic Modulus: 209,000 MPa (30  106 lb/in2)
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals
125

Nickel Production
The most important ore of nickel is pentlandite ((Ni, Fe)9S8). To
extractthenickel,theoreisfirstcrushedandgroundwithwater.Flotationtechniquesareused
to separate the sulfides from other minerals mixed with the ore. The nickel sulfide is then
heatedtoburnoffsomeofthesulfur,followedbysmeltingtoremoveironandsilicon.Further
refinement is accomplished in a Bessemer-style converter to yield high-concentration nickel
sulfide(NiS).Electrolysisisthenusedtorecoverhigh-puritynickelfromthecompound.Ores
of nickel are sometimes mixed with copper ores, and the recovery technique described here
also yields copper in these cases.
Nickel Alloys
Alloys of nickel are commercially important in their own right and are
noted for corrosion resistance and high temperature performance. Composition, tensile
strength, and ductility of some of the nickel alloys are given in Table 6.12. In addition, a
number of superalloys are based on nickel (Section 6.4).
6.3.5 TITANIUM AND ITS ALLOYS
Titanium(Ti)isfairlyabundantinnature,constitutingabout1%ofEarth’scrust(aluminum,
the most abundant, is about 8%). The densityof Ti isbetween aluminum and iron; these and
other data are presented in Table 6.1(f). Its importance has grown in recent decades due to
TABLE 6.11
Compositions and mechanical properties of selected copper alloys.
Typical Composition, %
Tensile Strength
Code
Cu
Be
Ni
Sn
Zn
MPa
lb/in2
Elongation, %
C10100
99.99
235
34,000
45
C11000
99.95
220
32,000
45
C17000
98.0
1.7
a
500
70,000
45
C24000
80.0
20.0
290
42,000
52
C26000
70.0
30.0
300
44,000
68
C52100
92.0
8.0
380
55,000
70
C71500
70.0
30.0
380
55,000
45
C71500b
70.0
30.0
580
84,000
3
Compiled from [12].
aSmall amounts of Ni and Fe þ 0.3 Co.
bHeat treated for high strength.
TABLE 6.12
Compositions and mechanical properties of selected nickel alloys.
Typical Composition, %
Tensile Strength
Code
Ni
Cr
Cu
Fe
Mn
Si
Other
MPa
lb/in2
Elongation, %
270
99.9
a
a
345
50,000
50
200
99.0
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.2
C, S
462
67,000
47
400
66.8
30.0
2.5
0.2
0.5
C
550
80,000
40
600
74.0
16.0
0.5
8.0
1.0
0.5
655
95,000
40
230
52.8
22.0
3.0
0.4
0.4
b
860
125,000
47
Compiled from [12].
aTrace amounts.
bOther alloying ingredients in Grade 230: 5% Co, 2% Mo, 14% W, 0.3% Al, 0.1% C.
126
Chapter 6/Metals

its aerospace applications, in which its light weight and good strength-to-weight ratio are
exploited.
Titanium Production
The principal ores of titanium are rutile, which is 98% to 99%
TiO2, and ilmenite, which is a combination of FeO and TiO2. Rutile is preferred as an ore
because of its higher Ti content. In recovery of the metal from its ores, the TiO2 is converted
to titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4) by reacting the compound with chlorine gas. This is
followed by a sequence of distillation steps to remove impurities. The highly concentrated
TiCl4 is then reduced to metallic titanium by reaction with magnesium; this is known as the
Kroll process. Sodium can also be used as a reducing agent. In either case, an inert
atmosphere must be maintained to prevent O2, N2, or H2 from contaminating the Ti,
owing to its chemical affinity for these gases. The resulting metal is used to cast ingots of
titanium and its alloys.
Properties of Titanium
Ti’s coefficient of thermal expansion is relatively low among
metals. It is stiffer and stronger than aluminum, and it retains good strength at elevated
temperatures. Pure titanium is reactive, which presents problems in processing, especially
in the molten state. However, at room temperature it forms a thin adherent oxide coating
(TiO2) that provides excellent corrosion resistance.
These properties give rise to two principal application areas for titanium: (1) in the
commercially pure state, Ti is used for corrosion resistant components, such as marine
components and prosthetic implants; and (2) titanium alloys are used as high-strength
components in temperatures ranging from ambient to above 550C (1000F),
especially where its excellent strength-to-weight ratio is exploited.
These latter
applications include aircraft and missile components. Some of the alloying elements
used with titanium include aluminum, manganese, tin, and vanadium. Some compo-
sitions and mechanical properties for several alloys are presented in Table 6.13.
TABLE 6.1
(continued): (f) Titanium.
Symbol: Ti
Ores extracted from: Rutile (TiO2) and Ilmenite (FeTiO3)
Atomic number: 22
Alloying elements: Aluminum, tin, vanadium, copper,
and magnesium
Specific gravity: 4.51
Crystal structure: HCP
Typical applications: Jet engine components, other
aerospace applications, prosthetic
implants
Melting temperature: 1668C (3034F)
Elastic modulus: 117,000 MPa (17  106 lb/in2)
TABLE 6.13
Compositions and mechanical properties of selected titanium alloys.
Typical Composition, %
Tensile Strength
Codea
Ti
Al
Cu
Fe
V
Other
MPa
lb/in2
Elongation, %
R50250
99.8
0.2
240
35,000
24
R56400
89.6
6.0
0.3
4.0
b
1000
145,000
12
R54810
90.0
8.0
1.0
1 Mob
985
143,000
15
R56620
84.3
6.0
0.8
0.8
6.0
2 Snb
1030
150,000
14
Compiled from [1] and [12].
aUnited Numbering System (UNS).
bTraces of C, H, O.
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals
127

6.3.6 ZINC AND ITS ALLOYS
Table 6.1(g) lists basic data on zinc. Its low melting point makes it attractive as a casting
metal. It also provides corrosion protection when coated onto steel or iron; galvanized
steel is steel that has been coated with zinc.
Production of Zinc
Zinc blende or sphalerite is the principal ore of zinc; it contains
zinc sulfide (ZnS). Other important ores include smithsonite, which is zinc carbonate
(ZnCO3), and hemimorphate, which is hydrous zinc silicate (Zn4Si2O7OH-H2O).
Sphalerite must be concentrated (beneficiated, as it is called) because of the small
fraction of zinc sulfide present in the ore. This is accomplished by first crushing the ore, then
grinding with water in a ball mill (Section 17.1.1) to create a slurry. In the presence of a
frothing agent, the slurry is agitated so that the mineral particles float to the top and can be
skimmedoff(separatedfromthelower-grademinerals).Theconcentratedzincsulfideisthen
roasted at around 1260C (2300F), so that zinc oxide (ZnO) is formed from the reaction.
Therearevariousthermochemicalprocessesforrecoveringzincfromthisoxide, allof
which reduce zinc oxide by means of carbon. The carbon combines with oxygen in ZnO to
form CO and/or CO2, thus freeing Zn in the form of vapor that is condensed to yield the
desired metal.
An electrolytic process is also widely used, accounting for about half the world’s
production of zinc. This process also begins with the preparation of ZnO, which is mixed
with dilute sulfuric acid (H2SO4), followed by electrolysis to separate the resulting zinc
sulfate (ZnSO4) solution to yield the pure metal.
Zinc Alloys and Applications
Several alloys of zinc are listed in Table 6.14, with data
on composition, tensile strength, and applications. Zinc alloys arewidely used in die casting
to mass produce components for the automotive and appliance industries. Another major
application of zinc is in galvanized steel. As the name suggests, a galvanic cell is created in
TABLE 6.1
(continued): (g) Zinc.
Symbol: Zn
Elastic modulus: 90,000 MPa (13  106 lb/in2)a
Atomic number: 30
Ore extracted from: Sphalerite (ZnS)
Specific gravity: 7.13
Alloying elements: Aluminum, magnesium, copper
Crystal structure: HCP
Typical applications: Galvanized steel and iron, die
castings, alloying element in brass
Melting temperature: 419C (786F)
aZinc creeps, which makes it difficult to measure modulus of elasticity; some tables of properties omit E for zinc for this reason.
TABLE 6.14
Compositions, tensile strength, and applications of selected zinc alloys.
Typical Composition, %
Tensile Strength
Code
Zn
Al
Cu
Mg
Fe
MPa
lb/in2
Application
Z33520
95.6
4.0
0.25
0.04
0.1
283
41,000
Die casting
Z35540
93.4
4.0
2.5
0.04
0.1
359
52,000
Die casting
Z35635
91.0
8.0
1.0
0.02
0.06
374
54,000
Foundry alloy
Z35840
70.9
27.0
2.0
0.02
0.07
425
62,000
Foundry alloy
Z45330
98.9
1.0
0.01
227
33,000
Rolled alloy
Compiled from [12].
a UNS, Unified Numbering System for metals.
128
Chapter 6/Metals

galvanized steel (Zn is the anode and steel is the cathode) that protects the steel from
corrosive attack. A third important use of zinc is in brass. As previously indicated in the
discussion of copper, this alloy consists of copper and zinc, in the ratio of about 2/3 Cu to 1/3
Zn. Finally, readers maybe interested to knowthat theU.S. one cent coin ismostly zinc. The
penny is coined out of zinc and then electroplated with copper, so that the final proportions
are 97.5% Zn and 2.5% Cu. It costs the U.S. Mint about 1.5 cents to produce each penny.
6.3.7 LEAD AND TIN
Lead (Pb) and tin (Sn) are often considered together because of their low melting
temperatures, and because they are used in soldering alloys to make electrical connections.
The phasediagram for thetin–lead alloy system is depicted in Figure 6.3. Basic data forlead
and tin are presented in Table 6.1(h).
Lead is a dense metal with a low melting point; other properties include low strength,
low hardness (the word ‘‘soft’’ is appropriate), high ductility, and good corrosion resistance.
In addition to its use in solder, applications of lead and its alloys include ammunition, type
metals, x-ray shielding, storage batteries, bearings, and vibration damping. It has also been
widely used in chemicals and paints. Principal alloying elements with lead are tin and
antimony.
Tin has an even lower melting point than lead; other properties include low strength,
low hardness, and good ductility. The earliest use of tin was in bronze, the alloy consisting of
copper and tin developed around 3000 BCE in Mesopotamia and Egypt. Bronze is still an
important commercial alloy (although its relative importance has declined during 5000
years). Other uses of tin include tin-coated sheet steel containers (‘‘tin cans’’) for storing
food and, of course, solder metal.
6.3.8 REFRACTORY METALS
The refractory metals are metals capable of enduring high temperatures. The most
important metals in this group are molybdenum and tungsten; see Table 6.1(i). Other
refractory metals arecolumbium (Cb) and tantalum (Ta).In general,these metals and their
alloys are capable of maintaining high strength and hardness at elevated temperatures.
Molybdenum has a high melting point and is relatively dense, stiff, and strong. It is
used both as a pure metal (99.9+% Mo) and as an alloy. The principal alloy is TZM, which
contains small amounts of titanium and zirconium (less than 1% total). Mo and its alloys
possess good high temperature strength, and this accounts for many of its applications,
which includeheatshields, heatingelements, electrodesforresistancewelding, diesforhigh
TABLE 6.1
(continued): (h) Lead and tin
Lead
Tin
Symbol:
Pb
Sn
Atomic number:
82
50
Specific gravity:
11.35
7.30
Crystal structure:
FCC
HCP
Melting temperature:
327C (621F)
232C (449F)
Modulus of elasticity:
21,000 MPa (3  106 lb/in2)
42,000 MPa (6  106 lb/in2)
Ore from which extracted:
Galena (PbS)
Cassiterite (SnO2)
Typical alloying elements:
Tin, antimony
Lead, copper
Typical applications:
See text
Bronze, solder, tin cans
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals
129

temperature work (e.g., die casting molds), and parts for rocket and jet engines. In addition
to these applications, molybdenum is also widely used as an alloying ingredient in other
metals, such as steels and superalloys.
Tungsten (W) has the highest melting point among metals and is one of the densest.
It is also the stiffest and hardest of all pure metals. Its most familiar application is filament
wire in incandescent light bulbs. Applications of tungsten are typically characterized by
high operating temperatures, such as parts for rocket and jet engines and electrodes for
arc welding. W is also widely used as an element in tool steels, heat resistant alloys, and
tungsten carbide (Section 7.3.2).
A major disadvantage of both Mo and W is their propensity to oxidize at high
temperatures, above about 600C (1000F), thus detracting from their high temperature
properties. To overcome this deficiency, either protective coatings must be used on these
metals in high temperature applications or the metal parts must operate in a vacuum. For
example, the tungsten filament must be energized in a vacuum inside the glass light bulb.
6.3.9 PRECIOUS METALS
The precious metals, also called the noble metals because they are chemically inactive,
include silver, gold, and platinum. They are attractive metals, available in limited supply,
and have been used throughout civilized history for coinage and to underwrite paper
TABLE 6.1
(continued): (i) Refractory metals.
Molybdenum
Tungsten
Symbol:
Mo
W
Atomic number:
42
74
Specific gravity:
10.2
19.3
Crystal structure:
BCC
BCC
Melting point:
2619C (4730F)
3400C (6150F)
Elastic modulus:
324,000 MPa (47  106 lb/in2)
407,000 MPa (59  106 lb/in3)
Principal ores:
Molybdenite (MoS2)
Scheelite (CaWO4), Wolframite
((Fe,Mn)WO4)
Alloying elements:
See text
a
Applications:
See text
Light filaments, rocket engine
parts, WC tools.
aTungsten is used as a pure metal and as an alloying ingredient, but few alloys are based on W.
TABLE 6.1
(continued): ( j) The precious metals.
Gold
Platinum
Silver
Symbol:
Au
Pt
Ag
Atomic number:
79
78
47
Specific gravity:
19.3
21.5
10.5
Crystal structure:
FCC
FCC
FCC
Melting temperature:
1063C (1945F)
1769C (3216F)
961C (1762F)
Principal ores:
a
a
a
Applications:
See text
See text
See text
aAll three precious metals are mined from deposits in which the pure metal is mixed with other ores and
metals. Silver is also mined from the ore Argentite (Ag2S).
130
Chapter 6/Metals

currency. They are also widely used in jewelry and similar applications that exploit their
high value. As a group, these precious metals possess high density, good ductility, high
electrical conductivity, and good corrosion resistance; see Table 6.1(j).
Silver (Ag) is less expensive per unit weight than gold or platinum. Nevertheless, its
attractive ‘‘silvery’’ luster makes it a highly valued metal in coins, jewelry, and tableware
(which even assumes the name of the metal: ‘‘silverware’’). It is also used for fillings in
dental work. Silver has the highest electrical conductivity of any metal, which makes it
useful for contacts in electronics applications. Finally, it should be mentioned that light-
sensitive silver chloride and other silver halides are the basis for photography.
Gold (Au) is one of the heaviest metals; it is soft and easily formed, and possesses a
distinctive yellow color that adds to its value. In addition to currency and jewelry, its
applications include electrical contacts (owing to its good electrical conductivity and
corrosion resistance), dental work, and plating onto other metals for decorative purposes.
Platinum (Pt) is also used in jewelry and is in fact more expensive than gold. It is the
most important of six precious metals known as the platinum group metals, which consists
of Ruthenium (Ru), Rhodium (Rh), Palladium (Pd), Osmium (Os), and Iridium (Ir), in
addition to Pt. They are clustered in a rectangle in the periodic table (Figure 2.1). Osmium,
Iridium, and Platinum are all denser than gold (Ir is the densest material known, at 22.65 g/
cm3). Because the platinum group metals are all scarce and very expensive, their appli-
cations are generally limited to situations in which only small amounts are needed and their
unique properties are required (e.g., high melting temperatures, corrosion resistance,
and catalytic characteristics). The applications include thermocouples, electrical contacts,
spark plugs, corrosion resistant devices, and catalytic pollution control equipment for
automobiles.
6.4
SUPERALLOYS
Superalloys constitute a category that straddles the ferrous and nonferrous metals. Some
of them are based on iron, whereas others are based on nickel and cobalt. In fact, many of
the superalloys contain substantial amounts of three or more metals, rather than
consisting of one base metal plus alloying elements. Although the tonnage of these
metals is not significant compared with most of the other metals discussed in this chapter,
they are nevertheless commercially important because they are very expensive; and they
are technologically important because of what they can do.
The superalloys are a group of high-performance alloys designed to meet very
demanding requirements for strength and resistance to surface degradation (corrosion and
oxidation) at high service temperatures. Conventional room temperature strength is
usually not the important criterion for these metals, and most of them possess room
temperature strength properties that are good but not outstanding. Their high temperature
performance is what distinguishes them; tensile strength, hot hardness, creep resistance,
and corrosion resistance at very elevated temperatures are the mechanical properties of
interest. Operating temperatures are often in the vicinity of 1100C (2000F). These metals
are widely used in gas turbines—jet and rocket engines, steam turbines, and nuclear power
plants—systems in which operating efficiency increases with higher temperatures.
The superalloys are usually divided into three groups, according to their principal
constituent: iron, nickel, or cobalt:

Iron-based alloys have iron as the main ingredient, although in some cases the
iron is less than 50% of the total composition.

Nickel-based alloys generally have better high temperature strength than alloy
steels. Nickel is the base metal. The principal alloying elements are chromium and
Section 6.4/Superalloys
131

cobalt; lesser elements include aluminum, titanium, molybdenum, niobium (Nb),
andiron.SomefamiliarnamesinthisgroupincludeInconel,Hastelloy,andRene41.

Cobalt-based alloys consist of cobalt (around 40%) and chromium (perhaps
20%) as their main components. Other alloying elements include nickel,
molybdenum, and tungsten.
In virtually all of the superalloys, including those based on iron, strengthening is
accomplished byprecipitation hardening. Theiron-basedsuperalloys donot usemartensite
formation for strengthening. Typical compositions and strength properties at room tem-
perature and elevated temperature for some of the alloys are presented in Table 6.15.
6.5
GUIDE TO THE PROCESSING OF METALS
A wide variety of manufacturing processes are available to shape metals, enhance their
properties, assemble them, and finish them for appearance and protection.
Shaping, Assembly, and Finishing Processes
Metals are shaped by all of the basic
processes, including casting, powder metallurgy, deformation processes, and material
removal. In addition, metal parts are joined to form assemblies by welding, brazing,
soldering,andmechanicalfastening;andfinishingprocessesarecommonlyusedtoimprove
the appearance of metal parts and/or to provide corrosion protection. These finishing
operations include electroplating and painting.
Enhancement of Mechanical Properties in Metals
Mechanical properties of
metals can be altered by a number of techniques. Some of these techniques have
TABLE 6.15
Some typical superalloy compositions together with strength properties at room temperature and
elevated temperature.
Chemical Analysis, %
a
Tensile Strength
at
Room
Temperature
Tensile Strength
at 870C
(1600F)
Superalloy
Fe
Ni
Co
Cr
Mo
W
Otherb
MPa
lb/in2
MPa
lb/in2
Iron-based
Incoloy 802
46
32
21
<2
690
100,000
195
28,000
Haynes 556
29
20
20
22
3
6
815
118,000
330
48,000
Nickel-based
Incoloy 718
18
53
19
3
6
1435
208,000
340
49,000
Rene 41
55
11
19
1
5
1420
206,000
620
90,000
Hastelloy S
1
67
16
15
1
845
130,000
340
50,000
Nimonic 75
3
76
20
<2
745
108,000
150
22,000
Cobalt-based
Stellite 6B
3
3
53
30
2
5
4
1010
146,000
385
56,000
Haynes 188
3
22
39
22
14
960
139,000
420
61,000
L-605
10
53
20
15
2
1005
146,000
325
47,000
Compiled from [11] and [12].
aCompositions to nearest percent.
bOther elements include carbon, niobium, titanium, tungsten, manganese, and silicon.
132
Chapter 6/Metals

been referred to in the discussion of the various metals. Methods for enhancing
mechanical properties of metals can be grouped into three categories: (1) alloying,
(2) cold working, and (3) heat treatment. Alloying has been discussed throughout
the present chapter and is an important technique for strengthening metals. Cold
working has previously been referred to as strain hardening; its effect is to increase
strength and reduce ductility. The degree to which these mechanical properties are
affected depends on the amount of strain and the strain hardening exponent in the
flow curve, Eq. (3.10). Cold working can be used on both pure metals and alloys. It is
accomplished during deformation of the workpart by one of the shape forming
processes, such as rolling, forging, or extrusion. Strengthening of the metal therefore
occurs as a by-product of the shaping operation.
Heat treatment refers to several types of heating and cooling cycles performed on a
metal to beneficially change its properties. They operate by altering the basic micro-
structure of the metal, which in turn determines mechanical properties. Some heat
treatment operations are applicable only to certain types of metals; for example, the heat
treatment of steel to form martensite is somewhat specialized because martensite is
unique to steel. Heat treatments for steels and other metals are discussed in Chapter 27.
REFERENCES
[1] Bauccio. M. (ed.). ASM Metals Reference Book, 3rd
ed. ASM International, Materials Park, Ohio, 1993.
[2] Black, J, and Kohser, R. DeGarmo’s Materials and
Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed., John Wiley &
Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
[3] Brick, R. M., Pense, A. W., and Gordon, R. B.
Structure and Properties of Engineering Materials,
4th ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1977.
[4] Carnes, R., and Maddock, G., ‘‘Tool Steel Selection,’’
AdvancedMaterials&Processes,June2004,pp.37–40.
[5] Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. 21, Macropaedia.
Encyclopaedia Britannica, Chicago, 1990, under sec-
tion: Industries, Extraction and Processing.
[6] Flinn, R. A., and Trojan, P. K. Engineering Materials
and Their Applications, 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1995.
[7] Guy, A. G., and Hren, J. J. Elements of Physical
Metallurgy, 3rd ed. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mas-
sachusetts, 1974.
[8] Hume-Rothery, W., Smallman, R. E., and Haworth,
C. W. The Structure of Metals and Alloys. Institute
of Materials, London, 1988.
[9] Keefe, J.‘‘A Brief Introduction to Precious Metals,’’
The AMMTIAC Quarterly, Vol. 2, No. 1, 2007.
[10] Lankford, W. T., Jr., Samways, N. L., Craven, R. F.,
and McGannon, H. E. The Making, Shaping, and
Treating of Steel, 10th ed. United States Steel Co.,
Pittsburgh, 1985.
[11] Metals Handbook, Vol. 1, Properties and Selection:
Iron, Steels, and High Performance Alloys. ASM
International, Metals Park, Ohio, 1990.
[12] Metals Handbook, Vol. 2, Properties and Selec-
tion: Nonferrous Alloys and Special Purpose
Materials,
ASM
International,
Metals
Park,
Ohio, 1990.
[13] Moore, C., and Marshall, R. I. Steelmaking. The
Institute for Metals, The Bourne Press, Ltd., Bourne-
mouth, U.K., 1991.
[14] Wick, C., and Veilleux, R. F. (eds.). Tool and Man-
ufacturing Engineers Handbook, 4, Vol. 3, Materials,
Finishing, and Coating. Society of Manufacturing
Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1985.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
6.1.
What are some of the general properties that dis-
tinguish metals from ceramics and polymers?
6.2.
What are the two major groups of metals? Define
them.
6.3.
What is an alloy?
6.4.
What is a solid solution in the context of alloys?
6.5.
Distinguish between a substitutional solid solution
and an interstitial solid solution.
6.6.
What is an intermediate phase in the context of
alloys?
Review Questions
133

6.7.
The copper-nickel system is a simple alloy system,
as indicated by its phase diagram. Why is it so
simple?
6.8.
What is the range of carbon percentages that de-
fines an iron–carbon alloy as a steel?
6.9.
What is the range of carbon percentages that de-
fines an iron–carbon alloy as cast iron?
6.10.
Identify some of the common alloying elements
other than carbon in low alloy steels.
6.11.
What are some of the mechanisms by which the
alloying elements other than carbon strengthen
steel?
6.12.
What is the predominant alloying element in all of
the stainless steels?
6.13.
Why is austenitic stainless steel called by that
name?
6.14.
Besides high carbon content, what other alloying
element is characteristic of the cast irons?
6.15.
Identify some of the properties for which aluminum
is noted.
6.16.
What are some of the noteworthy properties of
magnesium?
6.17.
What is the most important engineering property of
copper that determines most of its applications?
6.18.
What elements are traditionally alloyed with copper
to form (a) bronze and (b) brass?
6.19.
What are some of the important applications of
nickel?
6.20.
What are the noteworthy properties of titanium?
6.21.
Identify some of the important applications of zinc.
6.22.
What important alloy is formed from lead and tin?
6.23.
(a) Name the important refractory metals. (b) What
does the term refractory mean?
6.24.
(a) Name the four principal noble metals. (b) Why
are they called noble metals?
6.25.
The superalloys divide into three basic groups,
according to the base metal used in the alloy.
Name the three groups.
6.26.
What is so special about the superalloys? What
distinguishes them from other alloys?
6.27.
What are the three basic methods by which metals
can be strengthened?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 20 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
6.1.
Which of the following properties or characteristics
are inconsistent with the metals (two correct
answers): (a) good thermal conductivity, (b) high
strength, (c) high electrical resistivity, (d) high stiff-
ness, and (e) ionic bonding?
6.2.
Which one of the metallic elements is the most
abundant on the earth: (a) aluminum, (b) copper,
(c) iron, (d) magnesium, or (e) silicon?
6.3.
The predominant phase in the iron–carbon alloy sys-
tem for a composition with 99% Fe at room tempera-
ture is which one of the following: (a) austenite,
(b) cementite, (c) delta, (d) ferrite, or (e) gamma?
6.4.
A steel with 1.0% carbon is known as which one of
the following: (a) eutectoid, (b) hypoeutectoid,
(c) hypereutectoid, or (d) wrought iron?
6.5.
The strength and hardness of steel increases as
carbon content (a) increases or (b) decreases?
6.6.
Plain carbon steels are designated in the AISI code
system by which of the following: (a) 01XX,
(b) 10XX, (c) 11XX, (d) 12XX, or (e) 30XX?
6.7.
Which one of the following elements is the most
important alloying ingredient in steel: (a) carbon,
(b) chromium, (c) nickel, (d) molybdenum, or
(e) vanadium?
6.8.
Which one of the following is not a common alloy-
ing ingredient in steel: (a) chromium, (b) manga-
nese, (c) nickel, (d) vanadium, (e) zinc?
6.9.
Solid solution alloying is the principal strengthening
mechanism in high-strength low-alloy (HSLA)
steels: (a) true or (b) false?
6.10.
Which of the following alloying elements are most
commonly associated with stainless steel (two best
answers): (a) chromium, (b) manganese, (c) molyb-
denum, (d) nickel, and (e) tungsten?
6.11.
Which of the following is the most important cast
iron commercially: (a) ductile cast iron, (b) gray
cast iron, (c) malleable iron, or (d) white cast iron?
6.12.
Which one of the following metals has the lowest
density: (a) aluminum, (b) magnesium, (c) tin, or
(d) titanium?
6.13.
Which of the following metals has the highest den-
sity: (a) gold, (b) lead, (c) platinum, (d) silver, or
(e) tungsten?
6.14.
From which of the following ores is aluminum
derived: (a) alumina, (b) bauxite, (c) cementite,
(d) hematite, or (e) scheelite?
134
Chapter 6/Metals

6.15.
Which of the following metals is noted for its good
electrical conductivity (one best answer): (a) cop-
per, (b) gold, (c) iron, (d) nickel, or (e) tungsten?
6.16.
Traditional brass is an alloy of which of the follow-
ing
metallic
elements
(two
correct
answers):
(a) aluminum, (b) copper, (c) gold, (d) tin, and
(e) zinc?
6.17.
Which one of the following metals has the lowest
melting point: (a) aluminum, (b) lead, (c) magne-
sium, (d) tin, or (e) zinc?
PROBLEMS
6.1.
For the copper-nickel phase diagram in Figure 6.2,
find the compositions of the liquid and solid phases
for a nominal composition of 70% Ni and 30% Cu at
1371C (2500F).
6.2.
For the preceding problem, use the inverse lever
rule to determine the proportions of liquid and solid
phases present in the alloy.
6.3.
Using the lead–tin phase diagram in Figure 6.3,
determine the liquid and solid phase compositions
for a nominal composition of 40% Sn and 60% Pb at
204C (400F).
6.4.
For the preceding problem, use the inverse lever
rule to determine the proportions of liquid and solid
phases present in the alloy.
6.5.
Using the lead–tin phase diagram in Figure 6.3,
determine the liquid and solid phase compositions
for a nominal composition of 90% Sn and 10% Pb at
204C (400F).
6.6.
For the preceding problem, use the inverse lever
rule to determine the proportions of liquid and solid
phases present in the alloy.
6.7.
In the iron–iron carbide phase diagram of Figure
6.4, identify the phase or phases present at the
following temperatures and nominal compositions:
(a) 650C (1200F) and 2% Fe3C, (b) 760C
(1400F) and 2% Fe3C, and (c) 1095C (2000F)
and 1% Fe3C.
Problems
135

7
CERAMICS
Chapter Contents
7.1
Structure and Properties of Ceramics
7.1.1
Mechanical Properties
7.1.2
Physical Properties
7.2
Traditional Ceramics
7.2.1
Raw Materials
7.2.2
Traditional Ceramic Products
7.3
New Ceramics
7.3.1
Oxide Ceramics
7.3.2
Carbides
7.3.3
Nitrides
7.4
Glass
7.4.1
Chemistry and Properties of Glass
7.4.2
Glass Products
7.4.3
Glass-Ceramics
7.5
Some Important Elements Related to Ceramics
7.5.1
Carbon
7.5.2
Silicon
7.5.3
Boron
7.6
Guide to Processing Ceramics
We usually consider metals to be the most important class of
engineering materials. However, it is of interest to note that
ceramic materials are actually more abundant and widely
used. Included in this category are clay products (e.g., bricks
and pottery), glass, cement, and more modern ceramic
materials such as tungsten carbide and cubic boron nitride.
This istheclassofmaterials discussedinthis chapter. We also
include coverage of several elements related to ceramics
because they are sometimes used in similar applications.
These elements are carbon, silicon, and boron.
The importance of ceramics as engineering materials
derives from their abundance in nature and their mechanical
andphysicalproperties,whicharequitedifferentfromthoseof
metals. A ceramic material is an inorganic compound consist-
ing of a metal (or semimetal) and one or more nonmetals. The
word ceramic traces from the Greek keramos meaning pot-
ter’sclayorwaresmadefromfiredclay.Importantexamplesof
ceramicmaterialsaresilica,orsilicondioxide(SiO2),themain
ingredientinmostglassproducts;alumina,oraluminumoxide
(Al2O3), used in applications ranging from abrasives to artifi-
cial bones; and more complex compounds such as hydrous
aluminum silicate (Al2Si2O5(OH)4), known as kaolinite, the
principal ingredient in most clay products. The elements in
these compounds are the most common in Earth’s crust; see
Table 7.1. The group includes many additional compounds,
some of which occur naturally whileothers are manufactured.
The general properties that make ceramics useful in
engineered products are high hardness, good electrical and
thermal insulating characteristics, chemical stability, and high
melting temperatures. Some ceramics are translucent—win-
dow glass being the clearest example. They are also brittle and
possess virtually no ductility, which can cause problems in
both processing and performance of ceramic products.
The commercial and technological importance of
ceramics is best demonstrated by the variety of products
and applications that are based on this class of material. The
list includes:
136


Clay construction products, such as bricks, clay pipe, and building tile

Refractory ceramics, which are capable of high temperature applications such as
furnace walls, crucibles, and molds

Cement used in concrete, used for construction and roads (concrete is a composite
material, but its components are ceramics)

Whiteware products, including pottery, stoneware, fine china, porcelain, and other
tableware, based on mixtures of clay and other minerals

Glass used in bottles, glasses, lenses, window panes, and light bulbs

Glass fibers for thermal insulating wool, reinforced plastics (fiberglass), and fiber
optics communications lines

Abrasives, such as aluminum oxide and silicon carbide

Cutting tool materials, including tungsten carbide, aluminum oxide, and cubic boron
nitride

Ceramic insulators, which are used in applications such as electrical transmission
components, spark plugs, and microelectronic chip substrates

Magnetic ceramics, for example, in computer memories

Nuclear fuels based on uranium oxide (UO2)

Bioceramics, which include materials used in artificial teeth and bones
For purposes of organization, we classify ceramic materials into three basic types:
(1) traditional ceramics—silicates used for clay products such as pottery and bricks,
common abrasives, and cement; (2) new ceramics—more recently developed ceramics
based on nonsilicates such as oxides and carbides, and generally possessing mechanical or
physical properties that are superior or unique compared to traditional ceramics; and
(3) glasses—based primarily on silica and distinguished from the other ceramics by their
noncrystalline structure. In addition to the three basic types, we have glass ceramics—
glasses that have been transformed into a largely crystalline structure by heat treatment.
7.1
STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF CERAMICS
Ceramic compounds are characterized by covalent and ionic bonding. These bonds are
stronger than metallic bonding in metals, which accounts for the high hardness and stiffness
but low ductility of ceramic materials. Just as the presence of free electrons in the metallic
bond explains why metals are good conductors of heat and electricity, the presence of
tightly held electrons in ceramic molecules explains why these materials are poor conduc-
tors. The strong bonding also provides these materials with high melting temperatures,
although some ceramics decompose, rather than melt, at elevated temperatures.
Most ceramics take a crystalline structure. The structures are generally more complex
thanthoseofmostmetals.Thereareseveralreasonsforthis.First,ceramicmoleculesusually
consist of atoms that are significantly different in size. Second, the ion charges are often
different, as in many of the common ceramics such as SiO2 and Al2O3. Both of these factors
tend to force a more complicated physical arrangement of the atoms in the molecule and in
the resulting crystal structure. In addition, many ceramic materials consist of more than two
TABLE 7.1
Most common elements in the Earth’s crust, with approximate percentages.
Oxygen
Silicon
Aluminum
Iron
Calcium
Sodium
Potassium
Magnesium
50%
26%
7.6%
4.7%
3.5%
2.7%
2.6%
2.0%
Compiled from [6].
Section 7.1/Structure and Properties of Ceramics
137

elements, such as (Al2Si2O5(OH)4), also leading to further complexity in the molecular
structure. Crystalline ceramics can be single crystals or polycrystalline substances. In the
more common second form, mechanical and physical properties are affected by grain size;
higher strength and toughness are achieved in the finer-grained materials.
Some ceramic materials tend to assume an amorphous structure or glassy phase,
rather than a crystalline form. The most familiar example is, of course, glass. Chemically,
mostglassesconsistoffusedsilica.Variationsinpropertiesandcolorsareobtainedbyadding
other glassy ceramic materials such as oxides of aluminum, boron, calcium, and magnesium.
In addition to these pure glasses, many ceramics that have a crystal structure use the glassy
phase as a binder for their crystalline phase.
7.1.1 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES
Basic mechanical properties of ceramics are presented in Chapter 3. Ceramic materials are
rigid and brittle, exhibiting a stress-strain behavior best characterized as perfectly elastic
(see Figure 3.6). As seen in Table 7.2, hardness and elastic modulus for many of the new
ceramics are greater than those of metals (see Tables 3.1, 3.6, and 3.7). Stiffness and
hardness of traditional ceramics and glasses are significantly less than for new ceramics.
Theoretically, the strength of ceramicsshould be higher than that of metals because of
their atomic bonding. The covalent and ionic bonding types are stronger than metallic
bonding. However, metallic bonding has the advantage that it allows for slip, the basic
mechanism by which metals deform plastically when subjected to high stresses. Bonding in
ceramics is more rigid and does not permit slip under stress. The inability to slip makes it
much more difficult for ceramics to absorb stresses. Yet ceramics contain the same
imperfections in their crystal structure as metals—vacancies, interstitialcies, displaced
atoms, and microscopic cracks. These internal flaws tend to concentrate the stresses,
especially when a tensile, bending, or impact loading is involved. As a result of these factors,
ceramics fail by brittle fracture under applied stress much more readily than metals. Their
TABLE 7.2
Selected mechanical and physical properties of ceramic materials.
Elastic modulus, E
Melting Temperature
Material
Hardness
(Vickers)
Gpa
(lb/in2)
Specific
Gravity
C
F
Traditional ceramics
Brick-fireclay
NA
95
14  106
2.3
NA
NA
Cement, Portland
NA
50
7  106
2.4
NA
NA
Silicon carbide (SiC)
2600 HV
460
68  106
3.2
27,007a
48,927a
New ceramics
Alumina (Al2O3)
2200 HV
345
50  106
3.8
2054
3729
Cubic boron nitride (cBN)
6000 HV
NA
NA
2.3
30,007a
54,307a
Titanium carbide (TiC)
3200 HV
300
45  106
4.9
3250
5880
Tungsten carbide (WC)
2600 HV
700
100  106
15.6
2870
5198
Glass
Silica glass (SiO2)
500 HV
69
10  106
2.2
7b
7b
NA ¼ Not available or not applicable.
aThe ceramic material chemically dissociates or, in the case of diamond and graphite, sublimes (vaporizes), rather than melts.
bGlass, being noncrystalline, does not melt at a specific melting point. Instead, it gradually exhibits fluid properties with increasing
temperature. It becomes liquid at around 1400C (2550F).
Compiled from [3], [4], [5], [6], [9], [10], and other sources.
138
Chapter 7/Ceramics

tensile strength and toughness are relatively low. Also, their performance is much less
predictable due to the random nature of the imperfections and the influence of processing
variations, especially in products made of traditional ceramics.
The frailties that limit the tensile strength of ceramic materials are not nearly so
operative when compressive stresses are applied. Ceramics are substantially stronger in
compression than in tension. For engineering and structural applications, designers have
learned to use ceramic components so that they are loaded in compression rather than
tension or bending.
Various methods have been developed to strengthen ceramics, nearly all of which have
as their fundamental approach the minimization of surface and internal flaws and their
effects. These methods include [7]: (1) making the starting materials more uniform;
(2) decreasing grain size in polycrystalline ceramic products; (3) minimizing porosity;
(4) introducing compressive surface stresses, for example, through application of glazes
with low thermal expansions, so that the body of the product contracts after firing more
than the glaze, thus putting the glaze in compression; (5) using fiber reinforcement; and
(6) heat treatments, such as quenching alumina from temperatures in the slightly plastic
region to strengthen it.
7.1.2 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
Several of the physical properties of ceramics are presented in Table 7.2. Most ceramic
materials are lighter than metals and heavier than polymers (see Table 4.1). Melting
temperatures are higher than for most metals, some ceramics preferring to decompose
rather than melt.
Electrical and thermal conductivities of most ceramics are lower than for metals; but
therangeofvaluesisgreater, permittingsomeceramicstobeusedasinsulatorswhile others
are electrical conductors. Thermal expansion coefficients are somewhat less than for the
metals, but the effects are more damaging in ceramics because of their brittleness. Ceramic
materials with relatively high thermal expansions and low thermal conductivities are
especially susceptible to failures of this type, which result from significant temperature
gradients and associated volumetric changes in different regions of the same part. The
terms thermal shock and thermal cracking are used in connection with such failures.
Certain glasses (for example, those containing high proportions of SiO2) and glass ceramics
are noted for their low thermal expansion and are particularly resistant to these thermal
failures (Pyrex is a familiar example).
7.2
TRADITIONAL CERAMICS
These materials are based on mineral silicates, silica, and mineral oxides. The primary
products are fired clay (pottery, tableware, brick, and tile), cement, and natural abrasives
suchasalumina. Theseproducts, andtheprocesses usedtomakethem,datebackthousands
of years (see Historical Note 7.1). Glass is also a silicate ceramic material and is often
included within the traditional ceramics group [5], [6]. We cover glass in a later section
becauseitis distinguishedfrom theabovecrystalline materialsbyitsamorphousorvitreous
structure (the term vitreous means glassy, or possessing the characteristics of glass).
7.2.1 RAW MATERIALS
Mineral silicates, such as clays of various compositions, and silica, such as quartz, are among
the most abundant substances in nature and constitute the principal raw materials for
Section 7.2/Traditional Ceramics
139

traditional ceramics. These solid crystalline compounds have been formed and mixed in the
Earth’s crust over billions of years by complex geological processes.
The clays are the raw materials used most widely in ceramics. They consist of fine
particles of hydrous aluminum silicate that become a plastic substance that is formable and
moldable when mixed with water. The most common clays are based on the mineral
kaolinite (Al2Si2O5(OH)4). Other clay minerals vary in composition, both in terms of
proportions of the basic ingredients and through additions of other elements such as
magnesium, sodium, and potassium.
Besides its plasticity when mixed with water, a second characteristic of clay that
makes it so useful is that it fuses into a dense, strong material when heated to a sufficiently
elevated temperature. The heat treatment is known as firing. Suitable firing temperatures
depend on clay composition. Thus, clay can be shaped while wet and soft, and then fired to
obtain the final hard ceramic product.
Silica (SiO2) is another major raw material for the traditional ceramics. It is the
principal component in glass, and an important ingredient in other ceramic products
including whiteware, refractories, and abrasives. Silica is available naturally in various
forms, the most important of which is quartz. The main source of quartz is sandstone. The
abundance of sandstone and its relative ease of processing means that silica is low in cost; it
is also hard and chemically stable. These features account for its widespread use in ceramic
products. It is generally mixed in various proportions with clay and other minerals to
achieve the appropriate characteristics in the final product. Feldspar is one of the other
minerals often used. Feldspar refers to any of several crystalline minerals that consist of
aluminum silicate combined with either potassium, sodium, calcium, or barium. The
potassium blend, for example, has the chemical composition KAlSi3O8. Mixtures of
clay, silica, and feldspar are used to make stoneware, china, and other tableware.
Still another important raw material for traditional ceramics is alumina. Most alumina
is processed from the mineral bauxite, which is an impure mixture of hydrous aluminum
oxide and aluminum hydroxide plus similar compounds of iron or manganese. Bauxite isalso
the principal ore in the production of aluminum metal. A purer but less common form of
Al2O3 is the mineral corundum, which contains alumina in massive amounts. Slightly impure
formsof corundumcrystalsare the coloredgemstones sapphireandruby. Alumina ceramic is
used as an abrasive in grinding wheels and as a refractory brick in furnaces.
Silicon carbide, also used as an abrasive, does not occur as a mineral. Instead, it is
produced by heating mixtures of sand (source of silicon) and coke (carbon) to a tempera-
ture of around 2200C (4000F), so that the resulting chemical reaction forms SiC and
carbon monoxide.
Historical Note 7.1
Ancient pottery ceramics
Making pottery has been an art since the earliest
civilizations. Archeologists examine ancient pottery and
similar artifacts to study the cultures of the ancient world.
Ceramic pottery does not corrode or disintegrate with age
nearly as rapidly as artifacts made of wood, metal, or cloth.
Somehow, early tribes discovered that clay is
transformed into a hard solid when placed near an open
ﬁre. Burnt clay articles have been found in the Middle
East that date back nearly 10,000 years. Earthenware pots
and similar products became an established commercial
trade in Egypt by around 4000 BCE.
The greatest advances in pottery making were made
in China, where ﬁne white stoneware was ﬁrst crafted as
early as 1400 BCE. By the ninth century, the Chinese were
making articles of porcelain, which was ﬁred at higher
temperatures than earthenware or stoneware to partially
vitrify the more complex mixture of raw materials and
produce translucency in the ﬁnal product. Dinnerware
made of Chinese porcelain was highly valued in Europe;
it was called ‘‘china.’’ It contributed signiﬁcantly to trade
between China and Europe and inﬂuenced the
development of European culture.
140
Chapter 7/Ceramics

7.2.2 TRADITIONAL CERAMIC PRODUCTS
The minerals discussed above are the ingredients for a variety of ceramic products. We
organize our coverage here by major categories of traditional ceramic products. A summary
of these products, and the raw materials and ceramics out of which they are made, is
presented in Table 7.3. We limit our coverage to materials commonly in with manufactured
products, thus omitting certain commercially important ceramics such as cement.
Pottery and Tableware
This category is one of the oldest, dating back thousands of
years; yet it is still one of the most important. It includes tableware products that we all use:
earthenware, stoneware, and china. The raw materials for these products are clay usually
combined with other minerals such as silica and feldspar. The wetted mixture is shaped and
then fired to produce the finished piece.
Earthenware is the least refined of the group; it includes pottery and similar articles
made in ancient times. Earthenware is relatively porous and is often glazed. Glazing
involves application of a surface coating, usually a mixture of oxides such as silica and
alumina, to make the product less pervious to moisture and more attractive to the eye.
Stoneware has lower porosity than earthenware, resulting from closer control of ingredients
and higher firing temperatures. China is fired at even higher temperatures, which produces
the translucence inthe finished pieces thatcharacterize theirfine quality. The reasonfor this
isthatmuch of the ceramicmaterial hasbeen converted tothe glassy (vitrified) phase, which
is relatively transparent compared to the polycrystalline form. Modern porcelain is nearly
the same as china and is produced by firing the components, mainly clay, silica, and feldspar,
atstillhighertemperaturestoachieve averyhard,dense,glassymaterial.Porcelainisusedin
a variety of products ranging from electrical insulation to bathtub coatings.
Brick and Tile
Building brick, clay pipe, unglazed roof tile, and drain tile are made from
various low-cost clays containing silica and gritty matter widely available in natural deposits.
These products are shaped by pressing (molding) and firing at relatively low temperatures.
Refractories
Refractory ceramics, often in the form of bricks, are critical in many
industrial processes that require furnaces and crucibles to heat and/or melt materials.
The useful properties of refractory materials are high temperature resistance, thermal
insulation, and resistance to chemical reaction with the materials (usually molten metals)
being heated. Aswehavementioned,alumina isoftenusedasa refractory ceramic, together
with silica. Other refractory materials include magnesium oxide (MgO) and calcium oxide
(CaO). The refractory lining often contains two layers, the outside layer being more porous
because this increases the insulation properties.
Abrasives
Traditional ceramics used for abrasive products, such as grinding wheels and
sandpaper, are alumina and silicon carbide. Although SiC is the harder material (hardness
of SiC is 2600 HV vs. 2200 HV for alumina), the majority of grinding wheels are based on
TABLE 7.3
Summary of traditional ceramic products.
Product
Principal Chemistry
Minerals and Raw Materials
Pottery, tableware
Al2Si2O5(OH)4, SiO2, KAlSi3O8
Clay + silica + feldspar
Porcelain
Al2Si2O5(OH)4, SiO2, KAlSi3O8
Clay + silica + feldspar
Brick, tile
Al2 Si2O5(OH)4, SiO2 plus fine stones
Clay + silica + other
Refractory
Al2O3, SiO2 Others: MgO, CaO
Alumina and silica
Abrasive: silicon carbide
SiC
Silica + coke
Abrasive: aluminum oxide
Al2O3
Bauxite or alumina
Section 7.2/Traditional Ceramics
141

7.3.2 CARBIDES
The carbide ceramics include silicon carbide (SiC), tungsten carbide (WC), titanium carbide
(TiC), tantalum carbide (TaC), and chromium carbide (Cr3C2). Silicon carbide was discussed
previously. Although it is a man-made ceramic, the methods for its production were
developed a century ago, and therefore it is generally included in the traditional ceramics
group. In addition to its use as an abrasive, other SiC applications include resistance heating
elements and additives in steelmaking.
WC, TiC, and TaC are valued for their hardness and wear resistance in cutting tools
and other applications requiring these properties. Tungsten carbide was the first to be
developed (Historical Note 7.2) and is the most important and widely used material in the
group. WC is typically produced by carburizing tungsten powders that have been reduced
from tungsten ores such as wolframite (FeMnWO4) and scheelite (CaWO4). Titanium
carbide is produced by carburizing the minerals rutile (TiO2) or ilmenite (FeTiO3). And
tantalum carbide is made by carburizing either pure tantalum powders or tantalum
pentoxide (Ta2O5) [11]. Chromium carbide is more suited to applications where chemical
stability and oxidationresistanceare important.Cr3C2 ispreparedby carburizing chromium
oxide (Cr2O3) as the starting compound. Carbon black is the usual source of carbon in all of
these reactions.
Except for SiC, each carbide discussed here must be combined with a metallic binder
such as cobalt or nickel in order to fabricate a useful solid product. In effect, the carbide
powders bonded in a metal framework creates what is known as a cemented carbide—a
composite material, specifically a cermet (reduced from ceramic and metal). We examine
cemented carbides and other cermets in Section 9.2.1. The carbides have little engineering
value except as constituents in a composite system.
Historical Note 7.2
Tungsten carbide
The compound WC does not occur in nature. It was ﬁrst
fabricated in the late 1890s by the Frenchman Henri
Moissan. However, the technological and commercial
importance of the development was not recognized for
two decades.
Tungsten became an important metal for incandescent
lamp ﬁlaments in the early 1900s. Wire drawing was
required to produce the ﬁlaments. The traditional tool
steel draw dies of the period were unsatisfactory for
drawing tungsten wire due to excessive wear. There was a
need for a much harder material. The compound WC was
known to possess such hardness. In 1914 in Germany,
H. Voigtlander and H. Lohmann developed a fabrication
process for hard carbide draw dies by sintering parts
pressed from powders of tungsten carbide and/or
molybdenum carbide. Lohmann is credited with the ﬁrst
commercial production of sintered carbides.
The breakthrough leading to the modern technology
of cemented carbides is linked to the work of K. Schroter
in Germany in the early and mid-1920s. He used WC
powders mixed with about 10% of a metal from the iron
group, ﬁnally settling on cobalt as the best binder, and
sintering the mixture at a temperature close to the
melting point of the metal. The hard material was ﬁrst
marketed in Germany as ‘‘Widia’’ in 1926. The Schroter
patents were assigned to the General Electric Company
under the trade name ‘‘Carboloy’’—ﬁrst produced in the
United States around 1928.
Widia and Carboloy were used as cutting tool
materials, with cobalt content in the range 4% to 13%.
They were effective in the machining of cast iron and
many nonferrous metals, but not in the cutting of steel.
When steel was machined, the tools would wear rapidly
by cratering. In the early 1930s, carbide cutting tool
grades with WC and TiC were developed for steel
cutting. In 1931, the German ﬁrm Krupp started
production of Widia X, which had a composition 84%
WC, 10% TiC, and 6% cobalt (Co). And Carboloy Grade
831 was introduced in the United States in 1932; it
contained 69% WC, 21% TiC, and 10% Co.
Section 7.3/New Ceramics
143

7.3.3 NITRIDES
The important nitride ceramics are silicon nitride (Si3N4), boron nitride (BN), and titanium
nitride (TiN). As a group, the nitride ceramics are hard and brittle, and they melt at high
temperatures (but not generally as high as the carbides). They are usually electrically
insulating, except for TiN.
Silicon nitride shows promise in high temperature structural applications. Si3N4
oxidizes at about 1200C (2200F) and chemically decomposes at around 1900C (3400F).
It has low thermal expansion, good resistance to thermal shock and creep, and resists
corrosion by molten nonferrousmetals. Theseproperties haveprovided applications for this
ceramic in gas turbines, rocket engines, and melting crucibles.
Boron nitride exists in several structures, similar to carbon. The important forms of BN
are (1) hexagonal, similar to graphite; and (2) cubic, same as diamond; in fact, its hardness is
comparable to that of diamond. This latter structure goes by the names cubic boron nitride
and borazon, symbolized cBN, and is produced by heating hexagonal BN under very high
pressures.Owingtoitsextremehardness,theprincipalapplicationsofcBNareincuttingtools
(Section 23.2.5) and abrasive wheels (Section 25.1.1). Interestingly, it does not compete with
diamond cutting tools and grinding wheels. Diamond is suited to nonsteel machining and
grinding, while cBN is appropriate for steel.
Titanium nitride has properties similar to those of other nitrides in this group, except
for its electrical conductivity; it is a conductor. TiN has high hardness, good wear resistance,
and a low coefficient of friction with the ferrous metals. This combination of properties
makesTiNan idealmaterial as a surfacecoating on cutting tools. The coating is onlyaround
0.006 mm (0.00024 in) thick, so the amounts of material used in this application are low.
A new ceramic material related to the nitride group, and also to the oxides, is the
oxynitride ceramic called sialon. It consists of the elements silicon, aluminum, oxygen, and
nitrogen; and its name derives from these ingredients: Si-Al-O-N. Its chemical composition
is variable, a typical composition being Si4Al2O2N6. Properties of sialon are similar to those
of silicon nitride, but it has better resistance to oxidation at high temperatures than Si3N4.
Its principal application is for cutting tools, but its properties may make it suitable for other
high temperature applications in the future.
7.4
GLASS
The term glass is somewhat confusing because it describes a state of matter as well as a type
of ceramic. As a state of matter, the term refers to an amorphous, or noncrystalline,
structure of a solid material. The glassy state occurs in a material when insufficient time is
allowed during cooling from the molten condition for the crystalline structure to form. It
turns out that all threecategories of engineering materials (metals, ceramics, and polymers)
can assume the glassy state, although the circumstances for metals to do so are quite rare.
As a type of ceramic, glass is an inorganic, nonmetallic compound (or mixture of
compounds) that cools to a rigid condition without crystallizing; it is a ceramic that is in
the glassy state as a solid material. This is the material we shall discuss in this section—a
material that dates back 4500 years (Historical Note 7.3).
7.4.1 CHEMISTRY AND PROPERTIES OF GLASS
Theprincipalingredient invirtuallyallglassesissilica, most commonly found as the mineral
quartz in sandstone and silica sand. Quartz occurs naturally as a crystalline substance; but
when melted and then cooled, it forms vitreous silica. Silica glass has a very low thermal
expansion coefficient and is therefore quite resistant to thermal shock. These properties are
144
Chapter 7/Ceramics

ideal for elevated temperature applications; accordingly, Pyrex and chemical glassware
designed for heating are made with high proportions of silica glass.
In order to reduce the melting point of glass for easier processing, and to control
properties, the composition of most commercial glasses includes other oxides as well as
silica. Silica remains as the main component in these glass products, usually comprising
50% to 75% of total chemistry. The reason SiO2 is used so widely in these compositions is
because it is the best glass former. It naturally transforms into a glassy state upon cooling
from the liquid, whereas most ceramics crystallize upon solidification. Table 7.4 lists typical
Historical Note 7.3
History of glass
The oldest glass specimens, dating from around 2500
BCE, are glass beads and other simple shapes found in
Mesopotamia and ancient Egypt. These were made by
painstakingly sculpturing glass solids, rather than by
molding or shaping molten glass. It was a thousand years
before the ancient cultures exploited the ﬂuid properties
of hot glass, by pouring it in successive layers over a sand
core until sufﬁcient thickness and rigidity had been
attained in the product, a cup-shaped vessel. This
pouring technique was used until around 200 BCE, when
a simple tool was developed that revolutionized
glassworking—the blowpipe.
Glassblowing was probably ﬁrst accomplished in
Babylon and later by the Romans. It was performed using
an iron tube several feet long, with a mouthpiece on one
end and a ﬁxture for holding the molten glass on the
other. A blob of hot glass in the required initial shape and
viscosity was attached to the end of the iron tube, and
then blown into shape by an artisan either freely in air or
into a mold cavity. Other simple tools were utilized to
add the stem and/or base to the object.
The ancient Romans showed great skill in their use
of various metallic oxides to color glass. Their
technology is evident in the stained glass windows of
cathedrals and churches of the Middle Ages in Italy
and the rest of Europe. The art of glassblowing is still
practiced today for certain consumer glassware; and
automated versions of glassblowing are used for mass-
produced glass products such as bottles and light
bulbs (Chapter 12).
TABLE 7.4
Typical compositions of selected glass products.
Chemical Composition (by weight to nearest %)
Product
SiO2
Na2O
CaO
Al2O3
MgO
K2O
PbO
B2O3
Other
Soda-lime glass
71
14
13
2
Window glass
72
15
8
1
4
Container glass
72
13
10
2a
2
1
Light bulb glass
73
17
5
1
4
Laboratory glass
Vycor
96
1
3
Pyrex
81
4
2
13
E-glass (fibers)
54
1
17
15
4
9
S-glass (fibers)
64
26
10
Optical glasses
Crown glass
67
8
12
12
ZnO
Flint glass
46
3
6
45
Compiled from [4], [5] and [10], and other sources.
aMay include Fe2O3 with Al2O3
Section 7.4/Glass
145

chemistries for some common glasses. The additional ingredients are contained in a solid
solution with SiO2, and each has a function: (1) acting as flux (promoting fusion) during
heating; (2) increasing fluidity in the molten glass for processing; (3) retarding de-
vitrification—the tendency to crystallize from the glassy state; (4) reducing thermal
expansion in the final product; (5) improving the chemical resistance against attack by
acids, basic substances, or water; (6) adding color to the glass; and (7) altering the index of
refraction for optical applications (e.g., lenses).
7.4.2 GLASS PRODUCTS
Following is a list of the major categories of glass products. We examine the roles played
by the different ingredients in Table 7.4 as we discuss these products.
Window Glass
This glass is represented by two chemistries in Table 7.4: (1) soda-lime
glass and (2) window glass. The soda-lime formula dates back to the glass-blowing industry
of the 1800s and earlier. It was (and is) made by mixing soda (Na2O) and lime (CaO) with
silica (SiO2) as the major ingredient. The blending of ingredients has evolved empirically to
achieve a balance between avoiding crystallization during cooling and achieving chemical
durability of the final product. Modern window glass and the techniques for making it have
required slight adjustments in composition and closer control over its variation. Magnesia
(MgO) has been added to help reduce devitrification.
Containers
In previous times, the same basic soda-lime composition was used for manual
glass-blowing to make bottles and other containers. Modern processes for shaping glass
containers cool the glass more rapidly than older methods. Also, the importance of chemical
stability in container glass is better understood today. Resulting changes in composition have
attempted to optimize the proportions of lime (CaO) and soda (Na2O3). Lime promotes
fluidity. It also increases devitrification, but since cooling is more rapid, this effect is not as
important as in prior processing techniques with slower cooling rates. Soda reduces chemical
instability and solubility of the container glass.
Light Bulb Glass
Glass used in light bulbs and other thin glass items (e.g., drinking
glasses, Christmas ornaments)is high insoda andlow inlime;it also contains small amounts
of magnesia and alumina. The chemistry is dictated largely by the economics of large
volumes involved in light bulb manufacture. The raw materials are inexpensive and suited
to the continuous melting furnaces used today.
Laboratory Glassware
These products include containers for chemicals (e.g., flasks,
beakers, glass tubing). The glass must be resistant to chemical attack and thermal shock.
Glass that is high in silica is suitable because of its low thermal expansion. The trade name
‘‘Vicor’’ is used for this high-silica glass. This product is very insoluble in water and acids.
Additions of boric oxide also produce a glass with low coefﬁcient of thermal expansion, so some
glassforlaboratorywarecontainsB2O3inamountsofaround13%.Thetradename‘‘Pyrex’’isused
for the borosilicateglassdevelopedbythe CorningGlassWorks. BothVicorandPyrexare included
in our listing as examples of this product category.
Glass Fibers
Glass fibers are manufactured for a number of important applications,
including fiberglass reinforced plastics, insulation wool, and fiber optics. The compositions
vary according to function. The most commonly used glass reinforcing fibers in plastics are
E-glass. It is high in CaO and Al2O3 content, it is economical, and it possesses good tensile
strength in fiber form. Another glass fiber material is S-glass, which has higher strength but
is not as economical as E-glass. Compositions are indicated in our table.
146
Chapter 7/Ceramics

Insulating fiberglass wool can be manufactured from regular soda-lime-silica
glasses. The glass product for fiber optics consists of a long, continuous core of glass
with high refractive index surrounded by a sheath of lower refractive glass. The inside
glass must have a very high transmittance for light in order to accomplish long distance
communication.
Optical Glasses
Applications for these glasses include lenses for eyeglasses and optical
instruments such as cameras, microscopes, and telescopes. To achieve their function, the
glasses must have different refractive indices, but each lens must be homogenous in
composition. Optical glasses are generally divided into: crowns and flints. Crown glass
has a low index of refraction, while flint glass contains lead oxide (PbO) that gives it a
high index of refraction.
7.4.3 GLASS-CERAMICS
Glass-ceramics are a class of ceramic material produced by conversion of glass into a
polycrystalline structure through heat treatment. The proportion of crystalline phase in the
finalproducttypicallyrangesbetween90%and98%,withtheremainderbeingunconverted
vitreous material. Grain size is usually between 0.1 and 1.0 mm (4 and 40 m-in), significantly
smaller than the grain size of conventional ceramics. This fine crystal microstructure makes
glass-ceramics much stronger than the glasses from which they are derived. Also, due to
their crystal structure, glass-ceramics are opaque (usually gray or white) rather than clear.
The processing sequence for glass-ceramics is as follows: (1) The first step involves
heating and forming operations used in glassworking (Section 12.2) to create the desired
product geometry. Glass shaping methods are generally more economical than pressing
and sintering to shape traditional and new ceramics madefrom powders. (2)The product is
cooled. (3) The glass is reheated to a temperature sufficient to cause a dense network of
crystal nuclei to form throughout the material. It is the high density of nucleation sites that
inhibits grain growth of individual crystals, thus leading ultimately to the fine grain size in
the glass-ceramic material. The key to the propensity for nucleation is the presence of
small amounts of nucleating agents in the glass composition. Common nucleating agents
are TiO2, P2O5, and ZrO2. (4) Once nucleation is initiated, the heat treatment is continued
at a higher temperature to cause growth of the crystalline phases.
Several examples of glass-ceramic systems and typical compositions are listed in
Table 7.5. The Li2O-Al2O3-SiO2 system is the most important commercially; it includes
Corning Ware (Pyroceram), the familiar product of the Corning Glass Works.
The significant advantages of glass-ceramics include (1) efficiency of processing in
the glassy state, (2) close dimensional control over the final product shape, and (3) good
mechanical and physical properties. Properties include high strength (stronger than glass),
absence of porosity, low coefficient of thermal expansion, and high resistance to thermal
TABLE 7.5
Several glass-ceramic systems.
Typical Composition (to nearest %)
Glass-Ceramic System
Li2O
MgO
Na2O
BaO
Al2O3
SiO2
TiO2
Li2O–Al2O3–SiO2
3
18
70
5
MgO–Al2O3–SiO2
13
30
47
10
Na2O–BaO–Al2O3–SiO2
13
9
29
41
7
Compiled from [5], [6], and [10].
Section 7.4/Glass
147

shock. These properties have resulted in applications in cooking ware, heat exchangers,
and missile radomes. Certain systems (e.g., MgO-Al2O3-SiO2 system) are also charac-
terized by high electrical resistance, suitable for electrical and electronics applications.
7.5
SOME IMPORTANT ELEMENTS RELATED TO CERAMICS
In this section, several elements of engineering importance are discussed: carbon, silicon,
and boron. We encounter these materials on occasion in subsequent chapters. Although
they are not ceramic materials according to our definition, they sometimes compete for
applications with ceramics. And they have important applications of their own. Basic data
on these elements are presented in Table 7.6.
7.5.1 CARBON
Carbonoccursintwoalternativeformsofengineeringandcommercialimportance:graphite
and diamond. They compete with ceramics in various applications: graphite in situations
where its refractory properties are important, and diamond in industrial applications where
hardness is the critical factor (such as cutting and grinding tools).
Graphite
Graphite has a high content of crystalline carbon in the form of layers. Bonding
between atoms in the layers is covalent and therefore strong, but the parallel layers are
bonded to each other by weak van der Waals forces. This structure makes graphite quite
anisotropic; strength and other properties vary significantly with direction. It explains why
graphite can be used both as a lubricant and as a fiber in advanced composite materials. In
powder form, graphite possesses low frictional characteristics due to the ease with which it
shears between the layers; in this form, graphite is valued as a lubricant. In fiber form,
graphiteisoriented inthehexagonal planar directiontoproducea filament material ofvery
high strength and elastic modulus. These graphite fibers are used in structural composites
ranging from tennis rackets to fighter aircraft components.
Graphite exhibits certain high temperature properties that are both useful and
unusual. It is resistant to thermal shock, and its strength actually increases with tempera-
ture. Tensilestrength atroomtemperature isabout100MPa (14,500lb/in2),but increases to
about twice this value at 2500C (4500F) [5]. Theoretical density of carbon is 2.22 g/cm3,
but apparent density of bulk graphite is lower due to porosity (around 1.7 g/cm3). This is
TABLE 7.6
Some basic data and properties of carbon, silicon, and boron.
Carbon
Silicon
Boron
Symbol
C
Si
B
Atomic number
6
14
5
Specific gravity
2.25
2.42
2.34
Melting temperature
3727Ca (6740F)
1410C (2570F)
2030C (3686F)
Elastic modulus, GPa
(lb/in2)
240b (35  106)c 10357c (150
 106)c
NA
393 (57  106)
Hardness (Mohs scale)
1b, 10c
7
9.3
NA = not available.
aCarbon sublimes (vaporizes) rather than melt.
bCarbon in the form of graphite (typical value given).
cCarbon in the form of diamond.
148
Chapter 7/Ceramics

7.5.2 SILICON
Silicon is a semimetallic element in the same group in the periodic table as carbon (Figure
2.1). Silicon is one of the most abundant elements in the Earth’s crust, comprising about
26% by weight (Table 7.1). It occurs naturally only as a chemical compound—in rocks,
sand, clay, and soil—either as silicon dioxide or as more complex silicate compounds. As
an element it has the same crystalline structure as diamond, but its hardness is lower. It is
hard but brittle, lightweight, chemically inactive at room temperature, and is classified as
a semiconductor.
The greatest amounts of silicon in manufacturing are in ceramic compounds (SiO2 in
glass and silicates in clays) and alloying elements in steel, aluminum, and copper alloys. It is
also used as a reducing agentincertainmetallurgical processes. Of significant technological
importance is pure silicon as the base material in semiconductor manufacturing in
electronics. The vast majority of integrated circuits produced today are made from silicon
(Chapter 34).
7.5.3 BORON
Boron is a semimetallic element in the same periodic group as aluminum. It is only about
0.001% of the Earth’s crust by weight, commonly occurring as the minerals borax
(Na2B4O7–10H2O) and kernite (Na2B4O7–4H2O). Boron is lightweight and very stiff
(high modulus of elasticity) in fiber form. In terms of electrical properties, it is classified
as a semiconductor (its conductivity varies with temperature; it is an insulator at low
temperatures but a conductor at high temperatures).
As a material of industrial significance, boron is usually found in compound form. As
such, it is used as a solution in nickel electroplating operations, an ingredient (B2O3) in
certain glass compositions, a catalyst in organic chemical reactions, and as a nitride (cubic
boron nitride) for cutting tools. In nearly pure form it is used as a fiber in composite
materials (Sections 9.4.1 and 15.1.2).
7.6
GUIDE TO PROCESSING CERAMICS
The processing of ceramics can be divided into two basic categories: molten ceramics and
particulate ceramics. The major category of molten ceramics is glassworking (Chapter
12). Particulate ceramics include traditional and new ceramics; their processing methods
constitute most of the rest of the shaping technologies for ceramics (Chapter 17).
Cermets, such as cemented carbides, are a special case because they are metal matrix
composites (Section 17.3). Table 7.7 provides a guide to the processing of ceramic
materials and the elements carbon, silicon, and boron.
TABLE 7.7
Guide to the processing of ceramic materials and the elements carbon, silicon, and boron.
Material
Chapter or Section
Material
Chapter or Section
Glass
Chapter 12
Synthetic diamonds
Section 23.2.6
Glass fibers
Section 12.2.3
Silicon
Section 35.2
Particulate ceramics
Chapter 17
Carbon fibers
Section 15.1.2
Cermets
Section 17.3
Boron fibers
Section 15.1.2
150
Chapter 7/Ceramics

REFERENCES
[1] Carter, C. B., and Norton, M. G. Ceramic Materials:
Science and Engineering. Springer, New York, 2007.
[2] Chiang, Y-M., Birnie, III, D. P., and Kingery, W. D.
Physical Ceramics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New
York, 1997.
[3] Engineered Materials Handbook, Vol. 4, Ceramics
and Glasses. ASM International, Materials Park,
Ohio, 1991.
[4] Flinn, R. A., and Trojan, P. K. Engineering Materials
and Their Applications, 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., New York, 1995.
[5] Hlavac, J. The Technology of Glass and Ceramics.
Elsevier Scientific Publishing Company, New York,
1983.
[6] Kingery, W. D., Bowen, H. K., and Uhlmann, D. R.
Introduction to Ceramics, 2nd ed. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., New York, 1995.
[7] Kirchner, H. P. Strengthening of Ceramics. Marcel
Dekker, Inc., New York, 1979.
[8] Richerson, D. W. Ceramics—Applications in Man-
ufacturing. Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
Dearborn, Michigan, 1989.
[9] Richerson, D. W. Modern Ceramic Engineering:
Properties, Processing, and Use in Design, 3rd ed.
CRC Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2006.
[10] Scholes, S. R., and Greene, C. H. Modern Glass
Practice, 7th ed. CBI Publishing Company, Boston,
1993.
[11] Schwarzkopf, P., and Kieffer, R. Cemented Carbides.
The Macmillan Company, New York, 1960.
[12] Singer, F., and Singer, S. S. Industrial Ceramics.
Chemical Publishing Company, New York, 1963.
[13] Somiya, S. (ed.). Advanced Technical Ceramics.
Academic Press, San Diego, California,1989.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
7.1.
What is a ceramic?
7.2.
What are the four most common elements in the
Earth’s crust?
7.3.
What is the difference between the traditional
ceramics and the new ceramics?
7.4.
What is the feature that distinguishes glass from the
traditional and new ceramics?
7.5.
What are the general mechanical properties of
ceramic materials?
7.6.
What are the general physical properties of ceramic
materials?
7.7.
What type of atomic bonding characterizes the
ceramics?
7.8.
What do bauxite and corundum have in common?
7.9.
What is clay, as used in making ceramic products?
7.10.
What is glazing, as applied to ceramics?
7.11.
What does the term refractory mean?
7.12.
What are some of the principal applications of
cemented carbides, such as WC–Co?
7.13.
What is one of the important applications of tita-
nium nitride, as mentioned in the text?
7.14.
What are the elements in the ceramic material
Sialon?
7.15.
Define glass.
7.16.
What is the primary mineral in glass products?
7.17.
What are some of the functions of the ingredients
that are added to glass in addition to silica? Name at
least three.
7.18.
What does the term devitrification mean?
7.19.
What is graphite?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 17 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
7.1.
Which one of the following is the most common
element
in
the
Earth’s
crust:
(a)
aluminum,
(b) calcium, (c) iron, (d) oxygen, or (e) silicon?
7.2.
Glass products are based primarily on which one of
the following minerals: (a) alumina, (b) corundum,
(c) feldspar, (d) kaolinite, or (e) silica?
7.3.
Which ofthe following contains significant amounts of
aluminum oxide (three correct answers): (a) alumina,
(b) bauxite, (c) corundum, (d) feldspar, (e) kaolinite,
(f) quartz, (g) sandstone, and (h) silica?
7.4.
Which of the following ceramics are commonly used
as abrasives in grinding wheels (two best answers):
Multiple Choice Quiz
151

(a) aluminum oxide, (b) calcium oxide, (c) carbon
monoxide, (d) silicon carbide, and (e) silicon
dioxide?
7.5.
Which one of the following is generally the
most porous of the clay-based pottery ware:
(a)
china,
(b)
earthenware,
(c) porcelain,
or
(d) stoneware?
7.6.
Which one of the following is fired at the highest
temperatures: (a) china, (b) earthenware, (c) por-
celain, or (d) stoneware?
7.7.
Which one of the following comes closest to express-
ing the chemical composition of clay: (a) Al2O3,
(b)
Al2(Si2O5)(OH)4,
(c)
3AL2O3–2SiO2,
(d)
MgO, or (e) SiO2?
7.8.
Glass ceramics are polycrystalline ceramic struc-
tures that have been transformed into the glassy
state: (a) true or (b) false?
7.9.
Which one of the following materials is closest to
diamond in hardness: (a) aluminum oxide, (b) car-
bon dioxide, (c) cubic boron nitride, (d) silicon
dioxide, or (e) tungsten carbide?
7.10.
Which of the following best characterizes the struc-
ture of glass-ceramics: (a) 95% polycrystalline,
(b) 95% vitreous, or (c) 50% polycrystalline?
7.11.
Properties and characteristics of the glass-ceramics
include which of the following (two best answers):
(a) efficiency in processing, (b) electrical conductor,
(c) high-thermal expansion, and (d) strong, relative
to other glasses?
7.12.
Diamond is the hardest material known: (a) true or
(b) false?
7.13.
Synthetic diamonds date to (a) ancient times,
(b) 1800s, (c) 1950s, or (d) 1980.
152
Chapter 7/Ceramics

8
POLYMERS
Chapter Contents
8.1
Fundamentals of Polymer Science and
Technology
8.1.1
Polymerization
8.1.2
Polymer Structures and Copolymers
8.1.3
Crystallinity
8.1.4
Thermal Behavior of Polymers
8.1.5
Additives
8.2
Thermoplastic Polymers
8.2.1 Properties of Thermoplastic Polymers
8.2.2 Important Commercial Thermoplastics
8.3
Thermosetting Polymers
8.3.1
General Properties and Characteristics
8.3.2
Important Thermosetting Polymers
8.4
Elastomers
8.4.1
Characteristics of Elastomers
8.4.2
Natural Rubber
8.4.3
Synthetic Rubbers
8.5
Polymer Recycling and Biodegradability
8.5.1
Polymer Recycling
8.5.2
Biodegradable Polymers
8.6
Guide to the Processing of Polymers
Of the three basic types of materials, polymers are the newest
and at the same time the oldest known to man. Polymers form
the living organisms and vital processes of all life on Earth. To
ancient man, biological polymers were the source of food,
shelter, and many of his implements. However, our interest in
this chapter is in polymers other than biological. With the
exception of natural rubber, nearly all of the polymeric
materials used in engineering today are synthetic. The mate-
rialsthemselvesare madebychemicalprocessing, andmostof
the products are made by solidification processes.
A polymer is a compound consisting of long-chain
molecules, each molecule made up of repeating units con-
nected together. There may be thousands, even millions of
units in a single polymer molecule. The word is derived from
the Greek words poly, meaning many, andmeros (reduced to
mer), meaning part. Most polymers are based on carbon and
are therefore considered organic chemicals.
Polymers can be separated into plastics and rubbers. As
engineering materials, they are relatively new compared to
metals and ceramics, dating only from around the mid-1800s
(Historical Note 8.1). For our purposes in covering polymers
as a technical subject, it is appropriate to divide them into the
following three categories, where (1) and (2) are plastics and
(3) is the rubber category:
1. Thermoplastic polymers, also called thermoplastics (TP),
are solid materials at room temperature, but they become
viscous liquids when heated to temperatures of only a few
hundred degrees. This characteristic allows them to be
easily and economically shaped into products. They can be
subjected to this heating and cooling cycle repeatedly
without significant degradation of the polymer.
2. Thermosetting polymers, or thermosets (TS), cannot toler-
ate repeated heating cycles as thermoplastics can. When
initially heated, they soften and flow for molding, but the
elevated temperatures also produce a chemical reaction
153

that hardens the material into an infusible solid. If reheated, thermosetting polymers
degrade and char rather than soften.
3. Elastomers are the rubbers. Elastomers (E) are polymers that exhibit extreme elastic
extensibility when subjected to relatively low mechanical stress. Some elastomers can
be stretched by a factor of 10 and yet completely recover to their original shape.
Although their properties are quite different from thermosets, they have a similar
molecular structure that is different from the thermoplastics.
Thermoplastics are commercially the most important of the three types, constituting
around 70% of the tonnage of all synthetic polymers produced. Thermosets and elastomers
share the remaining 30% about evenly, with a slight edge for the former. Common TP
polymers include polyethylene, polyvinylchloride, polypropylene, polystyrene, and nylon.
Examples of TS polymers are phenolics, epoxies, and certain polyesters. The most common
example given for elastomers is natural (vulcanized) rubber; however, synthetic rubbers
exceed the tonnage of natural rubber.
Historical Note 8.1
History of polymers
Certainly one of the milestones in the history of
polymers was Charles Goodyear’s discovery of vulcan-
ization of rubber in 1839 (Historical Note 8.2). In 1851,
his brother Nelson patented hard rubber, called ebonite,
which in reality is a thermosetting polymer. It was used
for many years for combs, battery cases, and dental
prostheses.
At the 1862 International Exhibition in London, an
English chemist Alexander Parkes demonstrated the
possibilities of the ﬁrst thermoplastic, a form of cellulose
nitrate (cellulose is a natural polymer in wood and
cotton). He called it Parkesine and described it as a
replacement for ivory and tortoiseshell. The material
became commercially important due to the efforts of
American John W. Hyatt, Jr., who combined cellulose
nitrate and camphor (which acts as a plasticizer) together
with heat and pressure to form the product he called
Celluloid. His patent was issued in 1870. Celluloid
plastic was transparent, and the applications
subsequently developed for it included photographic
and motion picture ﬁlm and windshields for carriages
and early motorcars.
Several additional products based on cellulose were
developed around the turn of the last century. Cellulose
ﬁbers, called Rayon, were ﬁrst produced around 1890.
Packaging ﬁlm, called Cellophane, was ﬁrst marketed
around 1910. Cellulose acetate was adopted as the base
for photographic ﬁlm around the same time. This
material was to become an important thermoplastic for
injection molding during the next several decades.
The ﬁrst synthetic plastic was developed in the early
1900s by the Belgian-born American chemist L. H.
Baekeland. It involved the reaction and polymerization
of phenol and formaldehyde to form what its inventor
called Bakelite. This thermosetting resin is still
commercially important today. It was followed by other
similar polymers: urea-formaldehyde in 1918 and
melamineformaldehyde in 1939.
The late 1920s and 1930s saw the development of a
number of thermoplastics of major importance today.
A Russian I. Ostromislensky had patented polyvinyl-
chloride in 1912, but it was ﬁrst commercialized in 1927
as a wall covering. Around the same time, polystyrene
was ﬁrst produced in Germany. In England, fundamental
research was started in 1932 that led to the synthesis of
polyethylene; the ﬁrst production plant came on line just
before the outbreak of World War II. This was low
density polyethylene. Finally, a major research program
initiated in 1928 under the direction of W. Carothers at
DuPont in the United States led to the synthesis of the
polyamide nylon; it was commercialized in the late
1930s. Its initial use was in ladies’ hosiery; subsequent
applications during the war included low-friction
bearings and wire insulation. Similar efforts in Germany
provided an alternative form of nylon in 1939.
Several important special-purpose polymers were
developed in the 1940s: ﬂuorocarbons (Teﬂon),
silicones, and polyurethanes in 1943; epoxy resins in
1947, and acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene copolymer
(ABS) in 1948. During the 1950s: polyester ﬁbers in
1950; and polypropylene, polycarbonate, and high-
density polyethylene in 1957. Thermoplastic elastomers
were ﬁrst developed in the 1960s. The ensuing years
have witnessed a tremendous growth in the use of
plastics.
154
Chapter 8/Polymers

Although the classification of polymers into the TP, TS, and E categories suits our
purposes for organizing the topic in this chapter, we should note that the three types
sometimes overlap. Certain polymers that are normally thermoplastic can be made into
thermosets. Some polymers can be either thermosets or elastomers (we indicated that their
molecular structures are similar). And some elastomers are thermoplastic. However, these
are exceptions to the general classification scheme.
The growth in applications of synthetic polymers is truly impressive. On a
volumetric basis, current annual usage of polymers exceeds that of metals. There are
several reasons for the commercial and technological importance of polymers:

Plastics can be formed by molding into intricate part geometries, usually with no
further processing required. They are very compatible with net shape processing.

Plastics possess an attractive list of properties for many engineering applications where
strength is not a factor: (1) low density relative to metals and ceramics; (2) good
strength-to-weight ratios for certain (but not all) polymers; (3) high corrosion resist-
ance; and (4) low electrical and thermal conductivity.

On a volumetric basis, polymers are cost-competitive with metals.

On a volumetric basis, polymers generally require less energy to produce than metals.
This is generally true because the temperatures for working these materials are much
lower than for metals.

Certain plastics are translucent and/or transparent, which makes them competitive
with glass in some applications.

Polymers are widely used in composite materials (Chapter 9).
On the negative side, polymers in general have the following limitations: (1) strength
islow relativetometalsand ceramics;(2) modulus of elasticityorstiffness isalso low—inthe
case of elastomers, of course, this may be a desirable characteristic; (3) service temperatures
are limited to only a few hundred degrees because of the softening of thermoplastic
polymers or degradation of thermosetting polymers and elastomers; (4) some polymers
degrade when subjected to sunlight and other forms of radiation; and (5) plastics exhibit
viscoelastic properties (Section 3.5), which can be a distinct limitation in load bearing
applications.
In this chapter we examine the technology of polymeric materials. The first section is
devoted to an introductory discussion of polymer science and technology. Subsequent
sections survey the three basic categories of polymers: thermoplastics, thermosets, and
elastomers.
8.1
FUNDAMENTALS OF POLYMER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Polymers are synthesized by joining many small molecules together to form very large
molecules, called macromolecules, that possess a chain-like structure. The small units,
called monomers, are generally simple unsaturated organic molecules such as ethylene
(C2H4).Theatoms inthesemoleculesare heldtogether bycovalentbonds;andwhenjoined
to form the polymer, the same covalent bonding holds the links of the chain together. Thus,
each large molecule is characterized by strong primary bonding. Synthesis of the poly-
ethylene molecule is depicted in Figure 8.1. As we have described its structure here,
polyethylene is a linear polymer; its mers form one long chain.
A mass of polymer material consists of many macromolecules; the analogy of a bowl
of just-cooked spaghetti (without sauce) is sometimes used to visualize the relationship of
the individual molecules to the bulk material. Entanglement among the long strands helps
Section 8.1/Fundamentals of Polymer Science and Technology
155

to hold the mass together, but atomic bonding is more significant. The bonding between
macromolecules in the mass is due to van der Waals and other secondary bonding types.
Thus, the aggregate polymer material is held together by forces that are substantially
weaker than the primary bonds holding the molecules together. This explains why plastics
in general are not nearly as stiff and strong as metals or ceramics.
When a thermoplastic polymer is heated, it softens. The heat energy causes the
macromolecules to become thermally agitated, exciting them to move relative to each
other within the polymer mass (here, the wet spaghetti analogy loses its appeal). The
material begins to behave like a viscous liquid, viscosity decreasing (fluidity increasing)
with rising temperature.
Let us expand on these opening remarks, tracing how polymers are synthesized and
examining the characteristics of the materials that result from the synthesis.
8.1.1 POLYMERIZATION
As a chemical process, the synthesis of polymers can occur by either of two methods:
(1) addition polymerization and (2) step polymerization. Production of a given polymer is
generally associated with one method or the other.
Addition Polymerization
Inthisprocess,exemplifiedbypolyethylene,thedoublebonds
between carbon atoms in the ethylene monomers are induced to open so that they join with
other monomer molecules. The connections occur on both ends of the expanding macro-
molecule, developing long chains of repeating mers. Because of the way the molecules are
formed, the process is also known as chain polymerization. It is initiated using a chemical
catalyst (called an initiator) to open the carbon double bond in some of the monomers.
These monomers, which are now highly reactive because of their unpaired electrons, then
capture other monomers to begin forming chains that arereactive. The chains propagate by
capturingstillothermonomers,one ata time, untillargemoleculeshavebeenproducedand
the reaction is terminated. The process proceeds as indicated in Figure 8.2. The entire
polymerization reaction takes only seconds for any given macromolecule. However, in the
industrial process, it may take many minutes or even hours to complete the polymerization
of a given batch, since all of the chain reactions do not occur simultaneously in the mixture.
FIGURE 8.1
Synthesis of
polyethylene from
ethylene monomers:
(1) n ethylene monomers
yields (2a) polyethylene of
chain length n; (2b) concise
notation for depicting the
polymer structure of chain
length n.
C
H
H
C
n
n
n
(2b)
(1)
(2a)
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H
H
C
H
H
C
FIGURE 8.2
Model of
addition (chain)
polymerization:
(1) initiation, (2) rapid
addition of monomers,
and (3) resulting long-
chain polymer molecule
with n mers at
termination of reaction.
Initiation
Monomers
Mers
(3)
(2)
(1)
156
Chapter 8/Polymers

Other polymers typically formed by addition polymerization are presented in Fig-
ure 8.3, along with the starting monomer and the repeating mer. Note that the chemical
formula for the monomer is the same as that of the mer in the polymer. This is a characteristic
of this method of polymerization. Note also that many of the common polymers involve
substitution of some alternative atom or molecule in place of one of the H atoms in
polyethylene. Polypropylene, polyvinylchloride, and polystyrene are examples of this substi-
tution. Polytetrafluoroethylene replaces all four H atoms in the structure with atoms of
fluorine (F). Most addition polymers are thermoplastics. The exception in Figure 8.3 is
polyisoprene, the polymer of natural rubber. Although formed by addition polymerization, it
is an elastomer.
Step Polymerization
In this form of polymerization, two reacting monomers are brought
together to form a new molecule of the desired compound. In most (but not all) step
polymerization processes, a byproduct of the reaction is also produced. The byproduct is
typically water, which condenses; hence, the term condensation polymerization is often used
for processes that yield the condensate. As the reaction continues, more molecules of the
reactants combine with the molecules first synthesized to form polymers of length n ¼ 2, then
polymers of length n ¼ 3, and so on. Polymers of increasing n are created in a slow, stepwise
fashion. In addition to this gradual elongation of the molecules, intermediate polymers of
length n1 and n2 also combine to form molecules of length n ¼ n1 + n2, so that two types of
reactions are proceeding simultaneously once the process is under way, as illustrated in
Figure 8.4. Accordingly, at any point in the process, the batch contains polymers of various
lengths. Only after sufficient time has elapsed are molecules of adequate length formed.
FIGURE 8.3
Some
typical polymers formed
by addition (chain)
polymerization.
(C3H6)n
(C8H8)n
(C2F4)n
(C5H8)n
(C2H3Cl)n
Polypropylene
Polyvinyl chloride
Polystyrene
Polytetrafluoroethylene
(Teflon)
Polyisoprene
(natural rubber)
Polymer
Monomer
Repeating mer
Chemical formula
H
CH3
C
H
H
C
H
Cl
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
CH3
C
H
C6H5
C
H
H
C
F
F
C
F
F
C
C
n
n
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
CH3
C
H
C6H5
C
H
H
C
n
F
F
C
F
F
C
n
H
H
C
Cl
H
H
CH3
C
H
H
C
n
Section 8.1/Fundamentals of Polymer Science and Technology
157

It should be noted that water is not always the byproduct of the reaction; for
example, ammonia (NH3) is another simple compound produced in some reactions.
Nevertheless, the term condensation polymerization is still used. It should also be noted
that although most step polymerization processes involve condensation of a byproduct,
some do not. Examples of commercial polymers produced by step (condensation)
polymerization are given in Figure 8.5. Both thermoplastic and thermosetting polymers
are synthesized by this method; nylon-6,6 and polycarbonate are TP polymers, while
phenol formaldehyde and urea formaldehyde are TS polymers.
Degree of Polymerization and Molecular Weight
A macromolecule produced by
polymerization consists of n repeating mers. Since molecules in a given batch of polymerized
Monomer
(1)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(2)
(n + 1)-mer
(n1 + n2)-mer
n1-mer
n2-mer
n-mer
FIGURE 8.4
Model of step polymerization showing the two types of reactions occurring: (a) n-mer attaching a
single monomer to form a (n + 1) -mer; and (b) n1-mer combining with n2-mer to form a (n1 + n2) -mer. Sequence is
shown by (1) and (2).
H2O
H2O
H2O
HCl
Nylon-6, 6
Polycarbonate
Phenol formaldehyde
Urea formaldehyde
Polymer
Repeating unit
Condensate
Chemical formula
H
N
O
C
H
H 6
H 4
C
H
N
n
H
C
O
C
[(CH2)6 (CONH)2 (CH2)4]n
(C3H6 (C6H4)2CO3)n
[(C6H4)CH2OH]n
(CO(NH)2 CH2)n
[ (C6H4)
[  C6H4
[
(C6H4)
C
C
O
O
O
CH3
CH3
]n
]n
]n
OH
H
H
C
C
C
O
NH
H
H
NH
FIGURE 8.5
Some typical polymers formed by step (condensation) polymerization (simpliﬁed expression of
structure and formula; ends of polymer chain are not shown).
158
Chapter 8/Polymers

material vary in length, n for the batch is an average; its statistical distribution is normal. The
mean value of n is called the degree of polymerization (DP) for the batch. The degree of
polymerization affects the properties of the polymer: higher DP increases mechanical
strength but also increases viscosity in the fluid state, which makes processing more difficult.
The molecular weight (MW) of a polymer is the sum of the molecular weights of
the mers in the molecule; it is n times the molecular weight of each repeating unit. Since n
varies for different molecules in a batch, the molecule weight must be interpreted as an
average. Typical values of DP and MW for selected polymers are presented in Table 8.1.
8.1.2 POLYMER STRUCTURES AND COPOLYMERS
There are structural differences among polymer molecules, even molecules of the same
polymer. In this section we examine three aspects of molecular structure: (1) stereo-
regularity, (2) branching and cross-linking, and (3) copolymers.
Stereoregularity
Stereoregularity isconcerned with the spatial arrangement of the atoms
and groups of atoms in the repeating units of the polymer molecule. An important aspect of
stereoregularity is the way the atom groups are located along the chain for a polymer that has
one of the H atoms in its mers replaced by some other atom or atom group. Polypropylene is
an example; it is similar to polyethylene except that CH3 is substituted for one of the four H
atoms in the mer. Three tactic arrangements are possible, illustrated in Figure 8.6:
(a) isotactic, in which the odd atom groups are all on the same side; (b) syndiotactic, in
which the atom groups alternate on opposite sides; and (c) atactic, in which the groups are
randomly along either side.
The tactic structure is important in determining the properties of the polymer. It
also influences the tendency of a polymer to crystallize (Section 8.1.3). Continuing with
TABLE 8.1
Typical values of degree of polymerization and molecular
weight for selected thermoplastic polymers.
Polymer
Degree of Polymerization (n)
Molecular Weight
Polyethylene
10,000
300,000
Polystyrene
3,000
300,000
Polyvinylchloride
1,500
100,000
Nylon
120
15,000
Polycarbonate
200
40,000
Compiled from [7].
FIGURE 8.6
Possible
arrangement of atom
groups in polypropylene:
(a) isotactic,
(b) syndiotactic, and
(c) atactic.
(a)
H
H
C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
H
C
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
H
C
(c)
H
H
C
H
H
CH3
H
CH3
C
H
H
C
CH3
C
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
CH3
C
(b)
H
H
C
CH3
H
CH3
H
H
C
H
H
C
CH3
C
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
CH3
C
Section 8.1/Fundamentals of Polymer Science and Technology
159

our polypropylene example, this polymer can be synthesized in any of the three tactic
structures. In its isotactic form, it is strong and melts at 175C (347F); the syndiotactic
structure is also strong, but melts at 131C (268F); but atactic polypropylene is soft and
melts at around 75C (167F) and has little commercial use [6], [9].
Linear, Branched, and Cross-Linked Polymers
We have described the polymerization
process as yielding macromolecules of a chain-like structure, called a linear polymer. This is
the characteristic structure of a thermoplastic polymer. Other structures are possible, as
portrayedinFigure8.7. One possibility isfor side branchestoformalong the chain, resulting
in the branched polymer shown in Figure 8.7(b). In polyethylene, this occurs because
hydrogen atoms are replaced by carbon atoms at random points along the chain, initiating
the growth of a branch chain at each location. For certain polymers, primary bonding occurs
between branches and other molecules at certain connection points to form cross-linked
polymers as pictured in Figure 8.7(c) and (d). Cross-linking occurs because a certain
proportion of the monomers used to form the polymer are capable of bonding to adjacent
monomers on more than two sides, thus allowing branches from other molecules to attach.
Lightly cross-linked structures are characteristic of elastomers. When the polymer is highly
cross-linked we refer to it as having a network structure, as in (d); in effect, the entire mass is
one gigantic macromolecule. Thermosetting plastics take this structure after curing.
The presence of branching and cross-linking in polymers has a significant effect on
properties. It is the basis of the difference between the three categories of polymers: TP, TS,
and E. Thermoplastic polymers always possess linear or branched structures, or a mixture of
the two. Branching increases entanglement among the molecules, usually making the
polymer stronger in the solid state and more viscous at a given temperature in the plastic
or liquid state.
Thermosetting plastics and elastomers are cross-linked polymers. Cross-linking
causes the polymer to become chemically set; the reaction cannot be reversed. The effect
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 8.7
Various structures of polymer molecules: (a) linear, characteristic of thermoplastics; (b) branched;
(c) loosely cross-linked as in an elastomer; and (d) tightly cross-linked or networked structure as in a thermoset.
160
Chapter 8/Polymers

is to permanently change the structure of the polymer; upon heating, it degrades or burns
rather than melts. Thermosets possess a high degree of cross-linking, while elastomers
possess a low degree of cross-linking. Thermosets are hard and brittle, while elastomers are
elastic and resilient.
Copolymers
Polyethylene is a homopolymer; so are polypropylene, polystyrene, and
many other common plastics; theirmolecules consist of repeating mers that areall the same
type. Copolymers are polymers whose molecules are made of repeating units of two
different types. An example is the copolymer synthesized from ethylene and propylene to
produce a copolymer with elastomeric properties. The ethylene-propylene copolymer can
be represented as follows:
(C2H4)n(C3H6)m
where n and m range between 10 and 20, and the proportions of the two constituents are
around 50% each. We find in Section 8.4.3 that the combination of polyethylene and
polypropylene with small amounts of diene is an important synthetic rubber.
Copolymers can possess different arrangements of their constituent mers. The
possibilities are shown in Figure 8.8: (a) alternating copolymer, in which the mers repeat
every other place; (b) random, in which the mers are in random order, the frequency
depending on the relative proportions of the starting monomers; (c) block, in which mers of
thesame type tend to group themselves into long segmentsalong the chain; and (d) graft, in
which mers of one type are attached as branches to a main backbone of mers of the other
type. The ethylene–propylene diene rubber, mentioned previously, is a block type.
Synthesis of copolymers is analogous to alloying of metals to form solid solutions.
As with metallic alloys, differences in the ingredients and structure of copolymers can
have a substantial effect on properties. An example is the polyethylene–polypropylene
mixture we have been discussing. Each of these polymers alone is fairly stiff; yet a 50–50
mixture forms a copolymer of random structure that is rubbery.
It is also possible to synthesize ternary polymers, or terpolymers, which consist of
mers of three different types. An example is the plastic ABS (acrylonitrile–butadiene–
styrene—no wonder they call it ABS).
8.1.3 CRYSTALLINITY
Both amorphous and crystalline structures are possible with polymers, although the
tendency to crystallize is much less than for metals or nonglass ceramics. Not all polymers
can form crystals. For those that can, the degree of crystallinity (the proportion of
FIGURE 8.8
Various
structures of copolymers:
(a) alternating, (b) random,
(c) block, and (d) graft.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Section 8.1/Fundamentals of Polymer Science and Technology
161

crystallized material in the mass) is always less than 100%. As crystallinity is increased in a
polymer, so are (1) density, (2) stiffness, strength, and toughness, and (3) heat resistance. In
addition, (4) if the polymer is transparent in the amorphous state, it becomes opaque when
partially crystallized. Many polymers are transparent, but only in the amorphous (glassy)
state. Some of these effects can be illustrated by the differences between low-density and
high-density polyethylene, presented in Table 8.2. The underlying reason for the property
differences between these materials is the degree of crystallinity.
Linear polymers consist of long molecules with thousands of repeated mers. Crys-
tallization in these polymers involves the folding back and forth of the long chains upon
themselves to achieve a very regular arrangement of the mers, as pictured in Figure 8.9(a).
The crystallized regions are called crystallites. Owing to the tremendous length of a single
molecule (on an atomic scale), it may participate in more than one crystallite. Also, more
than one molecule may becombined ina singlecrystalregion.Thecrystallites takethe form
of lamellae, as pictured in Figure 8.9(b), that are randomly mixed in with the amorphous
material. Thus, a polymer that crystallizes is a two-phase system—crystallites interspersed
throughout an amorphous matrix.
A number of factors determine the capacity and/or tendency of a polymer to form
crystalline regions within the material. The factors can be summarized as follows: (1) as a
general rule, only linear polymers can form crystals; (2) stereoregularity of the molecule is
critical [15]: isotactic polymers always form crystals; syndiotacticpolymers sometimes form
TABLE 8.2
Comparison of low-density polyethylene and high-density polyethylene.
Polyethylene Type
Low Density
High Density
Degree of crystallinity
55%
92%
Specific gravity
0.92
0.96
Modulus of elasticity
140 MPa (20,305 lb/in2)
700 MPa (101,530 lb/in2)
Melting temperature
115C (239F)
135C (275F)
Compiled from [6]. Values given are typical.
FIGURE 8.9
Crystallized regions in a polymer: (a) long molecules forming crystals randomly mixed in with the
amorphous material; and (b) folded chain lamella, the typical form of a crystallized region.
162
Chapter 8/Polymers

crystals; atactic polymers never form crystals; (3) copolymers, due to their molecular
irregularity, rarely form crystals; (4) slower cooling promotes crystal formation and growth,
as it does in metals and ceramics; (5) mechanical deformation, as in the stretching of a
heated thermoplastic, tends to align the structure and increase crystallization; and (6)
plasticizers (chemicals added to a polymer to soften it) reduce the degree of crystallinity.
8.1.4 THERMAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS
The thermal behavior of polymers with crystalline structures is different from that of
amorphous polymers (Section 2.4). The effect of structure can be observed on a plot of
specificvolume (reciprocalof density) as a function of temperature, asplottedin Figure 8.10.
A highlycrystalline polymerhas a melting point Tm at which its volume undergoes an abrupt
change. Also, at temperatures above Tm, the thermal expansion of the molten material is
greater than for the solid material below Tm. An amorphous polymer does not undergo the
same abrupt changes at Tm. As it is cooled from the liquid, its coefficient of thermal
expansion continues to decline along the same trajectory as when it was molten, and it
becomes increasingly viscous with decreasing temperature. During cooling below Tm, the
polymer changes from liquid to rubbery. As temperature continues to drop, a point is finally
reachedatwhichthethermalexpansionoftheamorphouspolymersuddenlybecomeslower.
This is the glass-transition temperature, Tg (Section 3.5), seen as the change in slope. Below
Tg, the material is hard and brittle.
A partially crystallized polymer lies between these two extremes, as indicated in
Figure 8.10. It is an average of the amorphous and crystalline states, the average depending
on the degree of crystallinity. Above Tm it exhibits the viscous characteristics of a liquid;
between Tm and Tg it has viscoelastic properties; and below Tg it has the conventional
elastic properties of a solid.
What we have described in this section applies to thermoplastic materials, which
can move up and down the curve of Figure 8.10 multiple times. The manner in which they
are heated and cooled may change the path that is followed. For example, fast cooling
rates may inhibit crystal formation and increase the glass-transition temperature.
Thermosets and elastomers cooled from the liquid state behave like an amorphous
polymer until cross-linking occurs. Their molecular structure restricts the formation of
crystals. And once their molecules are cross-linked, they cannot be reheated to the
molten state.
FIGURE 8.10
Behavior
of polymers as a function
of temperature.
Section 8.1/Fundamentals of Polymer Science and Technology
163

8.1.5 ADDITIVES
The properties of a polymer can often be beneficially changed by combining them with
additives. Additives either alter the molecular structure of the polymer or add a second phase
to the plastic, in effect transforming a polymer into a composite material. Additives can be
classified by function as (1) fillers, (2) plasticizers, (3) colorants, (4) lubricants, (5) flame
retardants, (6) cross-linking agents, (7) ultraviolet light absorbers, and (8) antioxidants.
Filler
Fillersaresolidmaterialsaddedtoapolymerusuallyinparticulateorfibrousformto
alter its mechanical properties or to simply reduce material cost. Other reasons for using
fillers are to improve dimensional and thermal stability. Examples of fillers used in polymers
include cellulosic fibers and powders (e.g., cotton fibers and wood flour, respectively);
powders of silica (SiO2), calcium carbonate (CaCO3), and clay (hydrous aluminum silicate);
and fibers of glass, metal, carbon, or other polymers. Fillers that improve mechanical
properties are called reinforcing agents, and composites thus created are referred to as
reinforced plastics; they have higher stiffness, strength, hardness, and toughness than the
original polymer. Fibers provide the greatest strengthening effect.
Plasticizers
Plasticizers are chemicals added to a polymer to make it softer and more
flexible, and to improve its flow characteristics during forming. The plasticizer works by
reducing the glass transition temperature to below room temperature. Whereas the
polymer is hard and brittle below Tg, it is soft and tough above it. Addition of a plasticizer1
topolyvinylchloride(PVC)isagoodexample;dependingontheproportionofplasticizerin
the mix, PVC can be obtained in a range of properties, from rigid and brittle to flexible and
rubbery.
Colorants
An advantage of many polymers over metals or ceramics is that the material
itself can be obtained in most any color. This eliminates the need for secondary coating
operations. Colorants for polymers are of two types: pigments and dies. Pigments are finely
powdered materials that are insoluble in and must be uniformly distributed throughout the
polymer in very low concentrations, usually less than 1%. They often add opacity as well as
color to the plastic. Dies are chemicals, usually supplied in liquid form, that are generally
soluble in the polymer. They are normally used to color transparent plastics such as styrene
and acrylics.
Other Additives
Lubricants are sometimes added to the polymer to reduce friction
and promote flow at the mold interface. Lubricants are also helpful in releasing the part
from the mold in injection molding. Mold-release agents, sprayed onto the mold surface,
are often used for the same purpose.
Nearly all polymers burn if the required heat and oxygen are supplied. Some
polymers are more combustible than others. Flame retardants are chemicals added to
polymers to reduce flammability by any or a combination of the following mechanisms:
(1)interferingwithflamepropagation,(2)producinglargeamountsofincombustiblegases,
and/or (3) increasing the combustion temperature of the material. The chemicals may also
function to (4) reduce the emission of noxious or toxic gases generated during combustion.
We should include among the additives those that cause cross-linking to occur in
thermosetting polymers and elastomers. The term cross-linking agent refers to a variety of
ingredients that cause a cross-linking reaction or act as a catalyst to promote such a
reaction. Important commercial examples are (1) sulfur in vulcanization of natural rubber,
(2) formaldehyde for phenolics to form phenolic thermosetting plastics, and (3) peroxides
for polyesters.
1The common plasticizer in PVC is dioctyl phthalate, a phthalate ester.
164
Chapter 8/Polymers

Manypolymersaresusceptibletodegradationbyultravioletlight(e.g.,fromsunlight)and
oxidation. The degradation manifests itself as the breaking of links in the long chain molecules.
Polyethylene, for example, is vulnerable to both types of degradation, which lead to a loss of
mechanical strength. Ultraviolet light absorbers and antioxidants are additives that reduce the
susceptibility of the polymer to these forms of attack.
8.2
THERMOPLASTIC POLYMERS
In this section, we discuss the properties of the thermoplastic polymer group and then
survey its important members.
8.2.1 PROPERTIES OF THERMOPLASTIC POLYMERS
Thedefining propertyof athermoplasticpolymer isthatitcanbe heatedfromasolidstateto
a viscous liquid state and then cooled back down to solid, and that this heating and cooling
cycle can be applied multiple times without degrading the polymer. The reason for this
propertyisthatTPpolymersconsistoflinear(and/orbranched)macromoleculesthatdonot
cross-link when heated. By contrast, thermosets and elastomers undergo a chemical change
when heated, which cross-links their molecules and permanently sets these polymers.
In truth, thermoplastics do deteriorate chemically with repeated heating and cooling.
In plastic molding, a distinction is made between new or virgin material, and plastic that has
been previously molded (e.g., sprues, defective parts) and therefore has experienced thermal
cycling. For some applications, only virgin material is acceptable. Thermoplastic polymers
also degrade gradually when subjected to continuous elevated temperatures below Tm. This
long-term effect is called thermal aging and involves slow chemical deterioration. Some TP
polymers are more susceptible to thermal aging than others, and for a given material the rate
of deterioration depends on temperature.
Mechanical Properties
In our discussion of mechanical properties in Chapter 3, we
compared polymers to metals and ceramics. The typical thermoplastic at room tempera-
ture is characterized by the following: (1) much lower stiffness, the modulus of elasticity
being two (in some cases, three) orders of magnitude lower than metals and ceramics; (2)
lower tensile strength, about 10% of the metals; (3) much lower hardness; and (4) greater
ductility on average, but there is a tremendous range of values, from 1% elongation for
polystyrene to 500% or more for polypropylene.
Mechanical properties of thermoplastics depend on temperature. The functional
relationships must be discussed in the context of amorphous and crystalline structures.
Amorphous thermoplastics are rigid and glass-like below their glass transition temperature
Tg and flexible or rubber-like just above it. As temperature increases above Tg, the polymer
becomes increasingly soft, finally becoming a viscous fluid (it never becomes a thin liquid
due to its high molecular weight). The effect on mechanical behavior can be portrayed as in
Figure 8.11, in which mechanical behavior is defined as deformation resistance. This is
analogoustomodulusofelasticitybutitallowsustoobservetheeffectoftemperatureonthe
amorphous polymerasittransitionsfromsolidtoliquid. Below Tg,thematerialiselastic and
strong. At Tg, a rather sudden drop in deformation resistance is observed as the material
transforms into its rubbery phase; its behavior is viscoelastic in this region. As temperature
increases, it gradually becomes more fluid-like.
A theoretical thermoplastic with 100% crystallinity would have a distinct melting
point Tm at which it transforms from solid to liquid, but would show no perceptible Tg point.
Of course, real polymers have less than 100% crystallinity. For partially crystallized
polymers, the resistance to deformation is characterized by the curve that lies between
Section 8.2/Thermoplastic Polymers
165

the two extremes, its position determined by the relative proportions of the two phases. The
partially crystallized polymer exhibits features of both amorphous and fully crystallized
plastics. Below Tg, it is elastic with deformation resistance sloping downward with rising
temperatures. Above Tg, the amorphous portions of the polymer soften, while the crystal-
line portions remain intact. The bulk material exhibits properties that are generally
viscoelastic. As Tm isreached, the crystalsnowmelt,giving the polymer a liquid consistency;
resistance to deformation is now due to the fluid’s viscous properties. The degree to which
the polymer assumes liquid characteristics at and above Tm depends on molecular weight
and degree of polymerization. Higher DP and MW reduce flow of the polymer, making it
moredifficulttoprocessbymoldingandsimilarshapingmethods.Thisisadilemmafacedby
those who select these materials because higher MW and DP mean higher strength.
Physical Properties
Physical properties of materials are discussed in Chapter 4. In
general, thermoplastic polymers have the following characteristics: (1) lower densities
than metals or ceramics—typical specific gravities for polymers are around 1.2, for ceramics
around 2.5, and for metals around 7.0; (2) much higher coefficient of thermal expansion—
roughly 5 times the value for metals and 10 times the value for ceramics; (3) much lower
melting temperatures; (4) specific heats that are 2 to 4 times those of metals and ceramics;
(5) thermal conductivities that are about three orders of magnitude lower than those of
metals; and (6) insulating electrical properties.
8.2.2 IMPORTANT COMMERCIAL THERMOPLASTICS
Thermoplastic products include molded and extruded items, fibers, films, sheets, packaging
materials, paints, and varnishes. The starting raw materials for these products are normally
supplied to the fabricator in the form of powders or pellets in bags, drums, or larger loads by
truck or rail car. The most important TP polymers are discussed in alphabetical order in this
section. For each plastic, Table 8.3 lists the chemical formula and selected properties.
Approximate market share is given relative to all plastics (thermoplastic and thermosetting).
Acetals
Acetal is the popular name given to polyoxymethylene, an engineering polymer
prepared from formaldehyde (CH2O) with high stiffness, strength, toughness, and wear
resistance. In addition, it has a high melting point, low moisture absorption, and is insoluble
FIGURE 8.11
Relationship of
mechanical properties,
portrayed as deformation
resistance, as a function
of temperature for an
amorphous
thermoplastic, a 100%
crystalline (theoretical)
thermoplastic, and a
partially crystallized
thermoplastic.
166
Chapter 8/Polymers

incommonsolventsatambienttemperatures.Becauseofthiscombinationofproperties,acetal
resinsarecompetitivewithcertainmetals(e.g.,brassandzinc)inautomotivecomponentssuch
as door handles, pump housings, and similar parts; appliance hardware; and machinery
components.
Acrylics
The acrylics are polymers derived from acrylic acid (C3H4O2) and compounds
originating from it. The most important thermoplastic in the acrylics group is polymethyl-
methacrylate (PMMA) or Plexiglas (Rohm & Haas’s trade name for PMMA). Data on
PMMA are listed in Table8.3(b). It isan amorphous linear polymer. Its outstanding property
is excellent transparency, which makes it competitive with glass in optical applications.
Examples include automotive tail-light lenses, optical instruments, and aircraft windows. Its
limitationwhencomparedwithglassisamuchlowerscratchresistance.OtherusesofPMMA
include floor waxes and emulsion latex paints. Another important use of acrylics is in fibers
for textiles; polyacrylonitrile (PAN)is anexamplethat goesby the more familiar trade names
Orlon (DuPont) and Acrilan (Monsanto).
Acrylonitrile–Butadiene–Styrene
ABSiscalledanengineeringplasticduetoitsexcellent
combination of mechanical properties, some of which are listed in Table 8.3(c). ABS is a two-
phase terpolymer, one phase being the hard copolymer styrene–acrylonitrile, while the other
phase is styrene-butadiene copolymer that is rubbery. The name of the plastic is derived from
the three starting monomers, which may be mixed in various proportions. Typical applications
include components for automotive, appliances, business machines; and pipes and fittings.
Cellulosics
Cellulose(C6H10O5)isacarbohydratepolymercommonlyoccurringinnature.
Wood and cotton fibers, the chief industrial sources of cellulose, contain about 50% and 95%
TABLE 8.3
Important commercial thermoplastic polymers: (a) acetal.
Polymer:
Polyoxymethylene, also known as polyacetal (OCH2)n
Symbol:
POM
Elongation:
25%–75%
Polymerization method:
Step (condensation)
Specific gravity:
1.42
Degree of crystallinity:
75% typical
Glass transition temperature:
80C (112F)
Modulus of elasticity:
3500 MPa (507,630 lb/in2)
Melting temperature:
180C (356F)
Tensile strength:
70 MPa (10,150 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
Much less than 1%
Table 8.3 is compiled from [2], [4], [6], [7], [9], [16], and other sources.
TABLE 8.3
(continued): (b) acrylics (thermoplastic).
Representative polymer:
Polymethylmethacrylate (C5H8O2)n
Symbol:
PMMA
Elongation:
5
Polymerization method:
Addition
Specific gravity:
1.2
Degree of crystallinity:
None (amorphous)
Glass transition temperature:
105C (221F)
Modulus of elasticity:
2800 MPa (406,110 lb/in2)
Melting temperature:
200C (392F)
Tensile strength:
55 MPa (7975 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
About 1%
TABLE 8.3
(continued): (c) acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene.
Polymer:
Terpolymer of acrylonitrile (C3H3N), butadiene (C4H6), and styrene (C8H8)
Symbol:
ABS
Tensile strength:
50 MPa (7250 lb/in2)
Polymerization method:
Addition
Elongation:
10%–30%
Degree of crystallinity:
None (amorphous)
Specific gravity:
1.06
Modulus of elasticity:
2100 MPa (304,580 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
About 3%
Section 8.2/Thermoplastic Polymers
167

of the polymer, respectively. When cellulose is dissolved and reprecipitated during chemical
processing, the resulting polymer is called regenerated cellulose. When this is produced as a
fiberforapparelitisknownasrayon(ofcourse,cottonitselfisawidelyusedfiberforapparel).
When it is produced as a thin film, it is cellophane, a common packaging material. Cellulose
itself cannot be used as a thermoplastic because it decomposes before melting when its
temperature is increased. However, it can be combined with various compounds to form
several plasticsofcommercialimportance;examplesarecelluloseacetate(CA)andcellulose
acetate–butyrate(CAB).CA,dataforwhicharegiveninTable8.3(d),isproducedintheform
of sheets (for wrapping), film (for photography), and molded parts. CAB is a better molding
material than CA and has greater impact strength, lower moisture absorption, and better
compatibility with plasticizers. The cellulosic thermoplastics share about 1% of the market.
Fluoropolymers
Polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE), commonly known as Teflon, accounts
for about 85% of the family of polymers called fluoropolymers, in which Fatoms replace H
atoms in the hydrocarbon chain. PTFE is extremely resistant to chemical and environmental
attack, is unaffected by water, good heat resistance, and very low coefficient of friction. These
latter two properties have promoted its use in nonstick household cookware. Other
applications that rely on the same property include nonlubricating bearings and similar
components. PTFE also finds applications in chemical equipment and food processing.
Polyamides
An important polymer family that forms characteristic amide linkages (CO-
NH) during polymerization is the polyamides (PA). The most important members of the PA
familyarenylons,ofwhichthetwoprincipalgradesarenylon-6andnylon-6,6(thenumbersare
codesthatindicatethenumberofcarbonatomsinthemonomer).ThedatagiveninTable8.3(f)
are for nylon-6,6, which was developed at DuPont in the 1930s. Properties of nylon-6,
developed in Germany are similar. Nylon is strong, highly elastic, tough, abrasion resistant,
and self-lubricating. It retains good mechanical properties at temperatures up to about 125C
(257F). One shortcoming is that it absorbs water with an accompanying degradation in
properties.Themajorityofapplicationsofnylon(about90%)areinfibersforcarpets,apparel,
andtirecord.Theremainder(10%)areinengineeringcomponents;nyloniscommonlyagood
substitute for metals in bearings, gears, and similar parts where strength and low friction are
needed.
A second group of polyamides is the aramids (aromatic polyamides) of which Kevlar
(DuPont trade name) is gaining in importance as a fiber in reinforced plastics. The reason
for the interest in Kevlar is that its strength is the same as steel at 20% of the weight.
TABLE 8.3
(continued): (e) ﬂuoropolymers.
Representative polymer:
Polytetrafluorethylene (C2F4)n
Symbol:
PTFE
Elongation:
100%–300%
Polymerization method:
Addition
Specific gravity:
2.2
Degree of crystallinity:
About 95% crystalline
Glass transition temperature:
127C (260F)
Modulus of elasticity:
425 MPa (61,640 lb/in2)
Melting temperature:
327C (620F)
Tensile strength:
20 MPa (2900 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
Less than 1%
TABLE 8.3
(continued): (d) cellulosics.
Representative polymer:
Cellulose acetate (C6H9O5–COCH3)n
Symbol:
CA
Elongation:
10%–50%
Polymerization method:
Step (condensation)
Specific gravity:
1.3
Degree of crystallinity:
Amorphous
Glass transition temperature:
105C (221F)
Modulus of elasticity:
2800 MPa (406,110 lb/in2)
Melting temperature:
306C (583F)
Tensile strength:
30 MPa (4350 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
Less than 1%
168
Chapter 8/Polymers

Polycarbonate
Polycarbonate (PC) is noted for its generally excellent mechanical prop-
erties, which include high toughness and good creep resistance. It is one of the best
thermoplastics for heat resistance—it can be used to temperatures around 125C (257F).
In addition, it is transparent and fire resistant. Applications include molded machinery parts,
housings for business machines, pump impellers, safety helmets, and compact disks (e.g.,
audio, video, and computer). It is also widely used in glazing (window and windshield)
applications.
Polyesters
The polyesters form a family of polymers made up of the characteristic
ester linkages (CO–O). They can be either thermoplastic or thermosetting, depending
on whether cross-linking occurs. Of the thermoplastic polyesters, a representative
example is polyethylene terephthalate (PET), data for which are compiled in the
table. It can be either amorphous or partially crystallized (up to about 30%),
depending on how it is cooled after shaping. Fast cooling favors the amorphous
state, which is highly transparent. Significant applications include blow-molded
beverage containers, photographic films, and magnetic recording tape. In addition,
PET fibers are widely used in apparel. Polyester fibers have low moisture absorption
and good deformation recovery, both of which make them ideal for ‘‘wash and wear’’
garments that resist wrinkling. The PET fibers are almost always blended with cotton
or wool. Familiar trade names for polyester fibers include Dacron (DuPont), Fortrel
(Celanese), and Kodel (Eastman Kodak).
Polyethylene
Polyethylene (PE) was first synthesized in the 1930s, and today it accounts
for the largest volume of all plastics. The features that make PE attractive as an engineering
material are low cost, chemical inertness, and easy processing. Polyethylene is available in
TABLE 8.3
(continued): (f) polyamides.
Representative polymer:
Nylon-6,6 ((CH2)6(CONH) 2(CH2)4)n
Symbol:
PA-6,6
Elongation:
300%
Polymerization method:
Step (condensation)
Specific gravity:
1.14
Degree of crystallinity:
Highly crystalline
Glass transition temperature:
50C (122F)
Modulus of elasticity:
700 MPa (101,500 lb/in2)
Melting temperature:
260C (500F)
Tensile strength:
70 MPa (10,150 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
1% for all polyamides
TABLE 8.3
(continued): (g) polycarbonate.
Polymer:
Polycarbonate (C3H6(C6H4)2CO3)n
Symbol:
PC
Elongation:
110%
Polymerization method:
Step (condensation)
Specific gravity:
1.2
Degree of crystallinity:
Amorphous
Glass transition temperature:
150C (302F)
Modulus of elasticity:
2500 MPa (362,590 lb/in2)
Melting temperature:
230C (446F)
Tensile strength:
65 MPa (9425 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
Less than 1%
TABLE 8.3
(continued): (h) polyesters (thermoplastic).
Representative polymer:
Polyethylene terephthalate (C2H4–C8H4O4)n
Symbol:
PET
Elongation:
200%
Polymerization method:
Step (condensation)
Specific gravity:
1.3
Degree of crystallinity:
Amorphous to 30% crystalline
Glass transition temperature:
70C (158F)
Modulus of elasticity:
2300 MPa (333,590 lb/in2)
Melting temperature:
265C (509F)
Tensile strength:
55 MPa (7975 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
About 2%
Section 8.2/Thermoplastic Polymers
169

several grades, the most common of which are low-density polyethylene (LDPE) and high-
densitypolyethylene(HDPE).Thelow-densitygradeisahighlybranchedpolymerwithlower
crystallinity and density. Applications include squeezable bottles, frozen food bags, sheets,
film, and wire insulation. HDPE has a more linear structure, with higher crystallinity and
density. These differences make HDPE stiffer and stronger and give it a higher melting
temperature. HDPE is used to produce bottles, pipes, and housewares. Both grades can be
processed by most polymer shaping methods (Chapter 13). Properties for the two grades are
given in Table 8.3(i).
Polypropylene
Polypropylene (PP) has become a major plastic, especially for injection
molding, since its introduction in the late 1950s. PP can be synthesized in isotactic,
syndiotactic, or atactic structures, the first of these being the most important and for
which the characteristics are given in the table. It is the lightest of the plastics, and its
strength-to-weight ratio is high. PP is frequently compared with HDPE because its cost and
many of its properties are similar. However, the high melting point of polypropylene allows
certainapplicationsthatprecludeuseofpolyethylene—forexample,componentsthatmust
be sterilized. Other applications are injection molded parts for automotive and houseware,
and fiber products for carpeting. A special application suited to polypropylene is one-piece
hinges that can be subjected to a high number of flexing cycles without failure.
Polystyrene
There are several polymers, copolymers, and terpolymers based on the
monomer styrene (C8H8), of which polystyrene (PS) is used in the highest volume. It is a
linear homopolymer with amorphous structure that is generally noted for its brittleness. PS is
transparent, easily colored, and readily molded, but degrades at elevated temperatures and
dissolves in various solvents. Because of its brittleness, some PS grades contain 5% to 15%
rubber and the term high-impact polystyrene (HIPS) is used for these types. They have
higher toughness, but transparency and tensile strength are reduced. In addition to injection
moldingapplications(e.g.,moldedtoys,housewares),polystyrenealsofindsusesinpackaging
in the form of PS foams.
TABLE 8.3
(continued): (i) polyethylene.
Polyethylene:
(C2H4)n (low density)
(C2H4)n (high density)
Symbol:
LDPE
HDPE
Polymerization method:
Addition
Addition
Degree of crystallinity:
55% typical
92% typical
Modulus of elasticity:
140 MPa (20,305 lb/in2)
700 MPa (101,500 lb/in2)
Tensile strength:
15 MPa (2175 lb/in2)
30 MPa (4350 lb/in2)
Elongation:
100%–500%
20%–100%
Specific gravity:
0.92
0.96
Glass transition temperature:
100C (148F)
115C (175F)
Melting temperature:
115C (239F)
135C (275F)
Approximate market share:
About 20%
About 15%
TABLE 8.3
(continued): (j) polypropylene.
Polymer:
Polypropylene (C3H6)n
Symbol:
PP
Elongation:
10%–500%a
Polymerization method:
Addition
Specific gravity:
0.90
Degree of crystallinity:
High, varies with processing
Glass transition temperature:
20C (4F)
Modulus of elasticity:
1400 MPa (203,050 lb/in2)
Melting temperature:
176C (348F)
Tensile strength:
35 MPa (5075 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
About 13%
aElongation depends on additives.
170
Chapter 8/Polymers

Polyvinylchloride
Polyvinylchloride (PVC) is a widely used plastic whose properties can
be varied by combining additives with the polymer. In particular, plasticizers are used to
achieve thermoplastics ranging from rigid PVC (no plasticizers) to flexible PVC (high
proportions of plasticizer). The range of properties makes PVC a versatile polymer, with
applicationsthatincluderigidpipe(usedinconstruction,waterandsewersystems,irrigation),
fittings,wireandcableinsulation,film,sheets,foodpackaging,flooring,andtoys.PVCbyitself
isrelativelyunstabletoheatandlight,andstabilizersmustbeaddedtoimproveitsresistanceto
these environmental conditions. Care must be taken in the production and handling of the
vinyl chloride monomer used to polymerize PVC, due to its carcinogenic nature.
8.3
THERMOSETTING POLYMERS
Thermosetting (TS) polymers are distinguished by their highly cross-linked structure. In
effect, the formed part (e.g., the pot handle or electrical switch cover) becomes one large
macromolecule. Thermosets are always amorphous and exhibit no glass transition tem-
perature. In this section, we examine the general characteristics of the TS plastics and
identify the important materials in this category.
8.3.1 GENERAL PROPERTIES AND CHARACTERISTICS
Owing to differences in chemistry and molecular structure, properties of thermosetting
plastics are different from those of thermoplastics. In general, thermosets are (1) more
rigid—modulus of elasticity is 2 to 3 times greater; (2) brittle—they possess virtually no
ductility; (3) less soluble in common solvents; (4) capable of higher service temperatures;
and (5) not capable of being remelted—instead they degrade or burn.
The differences in properties of the TS plastics are attributable to cross-linking,
which forms a thermally stable, three-dimensional, covalently bonded structure within
the molecule. Cross-linking is accomplished in three ways [7]:
1. Temperature-activated systems—In the most common systems, the changes are
caused by heat supplied during the part-shaping operation (e.g., molding). The starting
TABLE 8.3
(continued): (k) polystyrene.
Polymer:
Polystyrene (C8H8)n
Symbol:
PS
Elongation:
1%
Polymerization method:
Addition
Specific gravity:
1.05
Degree of crystallinity:
None (amorphous)
Glass transition temperature:
100C (212F)
Modulus of elasticity:
3200 MPa (464,120 lb/in2)
Melting temperature:
240C (464F)
Tensile strength:
50 MPa (7250 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
About 10%
TABLE 8.3
(continued): (l) polyvinylchloride.
Polymer:
Polyvinylchloride (C2H3Cl)n
Symbol:
PVC
Elongation:
2% with no plasticizer
Polymerization method:
Addition
Specific gravity:
1.40
Degree of crystallinity:
None (amorphous structure)
Glass transition temperature:
81C (178F)b
Modulus of elasticity:
2800 MPa (406,110 lb/in2)a
Melting temperature:
212C (414F)
Tensile strength:
40 MPa (5800 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
About 16%
bWith no plasticizer.
Section 8.3/Thermosetting Polymers
171

material is a linear polymer in granular form supplied by the chemical plant. As heat is
added, the material softens for molding; continued heating results in cross-linking of
the polymer. The term thermosetting is most aptly applied to these polymers.
2. Catalyst-activated systems—Cross-linkinginthesesystemsoccurs whensmallamounts
of a catalyst are added to the polymer, which is in liquid form. Without the catalyst, the
polymer remains stable; once combined with the catalyst, it changes into solid form.
3. Mixing-activated systems—Most epoxies are examples of these systems. The mixing
of two chemicals results in a reaction that forms a cross-linked solid polymer. Elevated
temperatures are sometimes used to accelerate the reactions.
The chemical reactions associated with cross-linking are called curing or setting. Curing is
done at the fabrication plants that shape the parts rather than the chemical plants that
supply the starting materials to the fabricator.
8.3.2 IMPORTANT THERMOSETTING POLYMERS
Thermosetting plastics are not as widely used as the thermoplastics, perhaps because of the
added processing complications involved in curing the TS polymers. The largest volume
thermosetsare phenolic resins, whoseannual volume is about 6% of the total plasticsmarket.
This is significantly less than polyethylene, the leading thermoplastic, whose volume is about
35% of the total. Technical data for these materials are given in Table 8.4. Market share data
refer to total plastics (TP plus TS).
Amino Resins
Amino plastics, characterized by the amino group (NH2), consist of two
thermosetting polymers, urea-formaldehyde and melamine-formaldehyde, which are pro-
duced by the reaction of formaldehyde (CH2O) with either urea (CO(NH2)2) or melamine
(C3H6N6),respectively.Incommercialimportance,theaminoresinsrankjustbelowtheother
formaldehyde resin, phenol-formaldehyde, discussed below. Urea–formaldehyde is compet-
itive with the phenols in certain applications, particularly as a plywood and particle-board
adhesive. The resins are also used as a molding compound. It is slightly more expensive than
the phenol material. Melamine–formaldehyde plastic is water resistant and is used for
dishware and as a coating in laminated table and counter tops (Formica, trade name of
Cyanamid Co.). When used as molding materials, amino plastics usually contain significant
proportions of fillers, such as cellulose.
Epoxies
Epoxy resins are based on a chemical group called the epoxides. The simplest
formulation of epoxide is ethylene oxide (C2H3O). Epichlorohydrin (C3H5OCl) is a much
more widely used epoxide for producing epoxy resins. Uncured, epoxides have a low degree
of polymerization. To increase molecular weight and to cross-link the epoxide, a curing agent
TABLE 8.4
Important commercial thermosetting polymers: (a) amino resins.
Representative polymer:
Melamine-formaldehyde
Monomers:
Melamine (C3H6N6) and
formaldehyde (CH2O)
Polymerization method:
Step (condensation)
Elongation:
Less than 1%
Modulus of elasticity:
9000 MPa (1,305,000 lb/in2)
Specific gravity:
1.5
Tensile strength:
50 MPa (7250 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
About 4% for urea-
formaldehyde and
melamine-formaldehyde.
Table 8.4 is compiled from [2], [4], [6], [7], [9], [16], and other sources.
172
Chapter 8/Polymers

must be used. Possible curing agents include polyamines and acid anhydrides. Cured epoxies
are noted for strength, adhesion, and heat and chemical resistance. Applications include
surface coatings, industrial flooring, glass fiber-reinforced composites, and adhesives. Insu-
lating properties of epoxy thermosets make them useful in various electronic applications,
such as encapsulation of integrated circuits and lamination of printed circuit boards.
Phenolics
Phenol (C6H5OH) is an acidic compound that can be reacted with aldehydes
(dehydrogenated alcohols), formaldehyde (CH2O) being the most reactive. Phenol-
formaldehyde is the most important of the phenolic polymers; it was first commercialized
around 1900 under the trade name Bakelite. It is almost always combined with fillers such
as wood flour, cellulose fibers, and minerals when used as a molding material. It is brittle,
possessesgoodthermal,chemical, anddimensionalstability. Itscapacity toacceptcolorants
is limited—it is available onlyin dark colors. Molded products constitute only about 10%of
total phenolics use. Other applications include adhesives for plywood, printed circuit
boards, counter tops, and bonding material for brake linings and abrasive wheels.
Polyesters
Polyesters, which contain the characteristic ester linkages (CO–O), can be
thermosetting as well as thermoplastic (Section 8.2). Thermosetting polyesters are used
largely in reinforced plastics (composites) to fabricate large items such as pipes, tanks, boat
hulls, auto body parts, and construction panels. They can also be used in various molding
processes to produce smaller parts. Synthesis of the starting polymer involves reaction of an
acid or anhydride such as maleic anhydride (C4H2O3) with a glycol such as ethylene glycol
(C2H6O2).Thisproducesanunsaturatedpolyesterofrelativelylowmolecularweight(MW¼
1000 to 3000). This ingredient is mixed with a monomer capable of polymerizing and cross-
linking with the polyester. Styrene (C8H8) is commonly used for this purpose, in proportions
of 30% to 50%. A third component, called an inhibitor, is added to prevent premature cross-
linking. This mixture forms the polyester resin system that is supplied to the fabricator.
Polyestersarecuredeitherbyheat(temperature-activatedsystems),orbymeansofacatalyst
TABLE 8.4
(continued): (c) phenol formaldehyde.
Monomer ingredients:
Phenol (C6H5OH) and formaldehyde (CH2O)
Polymerization method:
Step (condensation)
Elongation:
Less than 1%
Modulus of elasticity:
7000 MPa (1,015,000 lb/in2)
Specific gravity:
1.4
Tensile strength:
70 MPa (10,150 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
6%
TABLE 8.4
(continued): (b) epoxy.
Example chemistry:
Epichlorohydrin (C3H5OCl)
plus curing agent such as
triethylamine (C6H5–CH2N–(CH3)2)
Polymerization method:
Condensation
Elongation:
0%
Modulus of elasticity:
7000 MPa (1,015,000 lb/in2)
Specific gravity:
1.1
Tensile strength:
70 MPa (10,150 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
About 1%
TABLE 8.4
(continued): (d) unsaturated polyester.
Example chemistry:
Maleic anhydride (C4H2O3) and ethylene glycol (C2H6O2) plus styrene (C8H8)
Polymerization method:
Step (condensation)
Elongation:
0%
Modulus of elasticity:
7000 MPa (1,015,000 lb/in2)
Specific gravity:
1.1
Tensile strength:
30 MPa (4350 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
3%
Section 8.3/Thermosetting Polymers
173

added to the polyester resin (catalyst-activated systems). Curing is done at the time of
fabrication (molding or other forming process) and results in cross-linking of the polymer.
Animportantclassofpolyestersarethealkydresins(thenamederivedbyabbreviating
andcombiningthewordsalcoholandacidandchangingafewletters).Theyareusedprimarily
as bases for paints, varnishes, and lacquers. Alkyd molding compounds are also available, but
their applications are limited.
Polyimides
These plastics are available as both thermoplastics and thermosets, but the
TS types are more important commercially. They are available under brand names such as
Kapton(Dupont)andKaptrex(ProfessionalPlastics)inseveralformsincludingtapes,films,
coatings, and molding resins. TS polyimides (PI) are noted for chemical resistance, high
tensile strength and stiffness, and stability at elevated temperatures. They are called high-
temperature polymers due to their excellent heat resistance. Applications that exploit these
properties include insulating films, molded parts used in elevated temperature service,
flexible cables in laptop computers, medical tubing, and fibers for protective clothing.
Polyurethanes
This includes a large family of polymers, all characterized by the urethane
group(NHCOO)intheirstructure. Thechemistryof thepolyurethanesiscomplex, andthere
aremanychemicalvarietiesinthefamily.Thecharacteristicfeatureisthereactionofapolyol,
whose molecules contain hydroxyl (OH) groups, such as butylene ether glycol (C4H10O2);
and an isocyanate, such asdiphenylmethane diisocyanate (C15H10O2N2). Through variations
in chemistry, cross-linking, and processing, polyurethanes can be thermoplastic, thermoset-
ting, or elastomeric materials, the latter two being the most important commercially. The
largest application of polyurethane is in foams. These can range between elastomeric and
rigid, the latter being more highly cross-linked. Rigid foams are used as a filler material in
hollow construction panels and refrigerator walls. In these types of applications, the material
provides excellent thermal insulation, adds rigidity to the structure, and does not absorb
water in significant amounts. Many paints, varnishes, and similar coating materials are based
on urethane systems. We discuss polyurethane elastomers in Section 8.4.
Silicones
Silicones are inorganic and semi-inorganic polymers, distinguished by the
presence of the repeating siloxane link (–Si–O–) in their molecular structure. A typical
formulation combines the methyl radical (CH3) with (SiO) in various proportions to obtain
TABLE 8.4
(continued): (e) polyimides.
Starting monomers:
Pyromellitic dianhydride (C6H2(C2O3)2), 4,40-oxydianiline (O(C6H4NH2)2)
Polymerization method:
Condensation
Elongation:
5%
Modulus of elasticity:
3200 MPa (464,120 lb/in2)
Specific gravity:
1.43
Tensile strength:
80 MPa (11,600 lb/in2)
Approximate market share:
Less than 1%
TABLE 8.4
(continued): (f) polyurethane.
Polymer:
Polyurethane is formed by the reaction of a polyol and an isocyanate.
Chemistry varies significantly
Polymerization method:
Step (condensation)
Elongation:
Depends on cross-linking
Modulus of elasticity:
Depends on chemistry
and processing
Specific gravity:
1.2
Tensile strength:
30 MPa (4350 lb/in2)a
Approximate market share:
About 4%, including
elastomers
aTypical for highly cross-linked polyurethane.
174
Chapter 8/Polymers

the repeating unit –((CH3)m–SiO)–, where m establishes the proportionality. By variations in
composition and processing, polysiloxanes can be produced in three forms: (1) fluids,
(2) elastomers, and (3) thermosetting resins. Fluids (1) are low molecular weight polymers
used for lubricants, polishes, waxes, and other liquids—not really polymers in the sense of this
chapter, but important commercial products nevertheless. Silicone elastomers (2), covered in
Section8.4,andthermosettingsilicones(3),treatedhere,arecross-linked.Whenhighlycross-
linked, polysiloxanes form rigid resin systems used for paints, varnishes, and other coatings;
and laminates such as printed circuit boards. They are also used as molding materials for
electrical parts. Curing is accomplished by heating or by allowing the solvents containing the
polymers to evaporate. Silicones are noted for their good heat resistance and water
repellence, but their mechanical strength is not as great as other cross-linked polymers.
Data in Table 8.4(g) are for a typical silicone thermosetting polymer.
8.4
ELASTOMERS
Elastomers are polymers capable of large elastic deformation when subjected to relatively
low stresses. Some elastomers can withstand extensions of 500% or more and still return to
their original shape. The more popular term for elastomer is, of course, rubber. We can
divide rubbers into two categories: (1) natural rubber, derived from certain biological
plants; and (2) synthetic elastomers, produced by polymerization processes similar to those
used for thermoplastic and thermosetting polymers. Before discussing natural and syn-
thetic rubbers, let us consider the general characteristics of elastomers.
8.4.1 CHARACTERISTICS OF ELASTOMERS
Elastomersconsistoflong-chainmoleculesthatarecross-linked.Theyowetheirimpressive
elastic properties to the combination of two features: (1) the long molecules are tightly
kinked when unstretched, and (2) the degree of cross-linking is substantially below that of
the thermosets. These features are illustrated in the model of Figure 8.12(a), which shows a
tightly kinked cross-linked molecule under no stress.
When the material is stretched, the molecules are forced to uncoil and straighten as
shown in Figure 8.12(b). The molecules’ natural resistance to uncoiling provides the initial
elasticmodulusoftheaggregatematerial.Asfurtherstrainisexperienced,thecovalentbonds
TABLE 8.4
(continued): (g) silicone thermosetting resins.
Example chemistry:
((CH3)6 –SiO)n
Polymerization method:
Step (condensation), usually
Elongation:
0%
Tensile strength:
30 MPa (4350 lb/in2)
Specific gravity:
1.65
Approximate market share:
Less than 1%
FIGURE 8.12
Model of
long elastomer
molecules, with low
degree of cross-linking:
(a) unstretched, and (b)
under tensile stress.
Section 8.4/Elastomers
175

of the cross-linked molecules beginto play an increasing role in the modulus, and the stiffness
increasesasillustratedinFigure8.13.Withgreatercross-linking,theelastomerbecomesstiffer
anditsmodulusofelasticityismorelinear.Thesecharacteristicsareshowninthefigurebythe
stress–strain curves for three grades of rubber: natural crude rubber, whose cross-linking is
very low; cured (vulcanized) rubber with low-to-medium cross-linking; and hard rubber
(ebonite), whose high degree of cross-linking transforms it into a thermosetting plastic.
Forapolymertoexhibitelastomericproperties,itmustbeamorphousintheunstretched
condition,anditstemperaturemustbeaboveTg.Ifbelowtheglasstransitiontemperature,the
material is hard and brittle; above Tg the polymer is in the ‘‘rubbery’’ state. Any amorphous
thermoplasticpolymerwillexhibitelastomericpropertiesaboveTgforashorttime,becauseits
linear molecules are always coiled to some extent, thus allowing for elastic extension. It is the
absence of cross-linking in TP polymers that prevents them from being truly elastic; instead
they exhibit viscoelastic behavior.
Curing is required to effect cross-linking in most of the common elastomers today.
The term for curing used in the context of natural rubber (and certain synthetic rubbers) is
vulcanization, which involves the formation of chemical cross-links between the polymer
chains. Typical cross-linking in rubber is 1 to 10 links per 100 carbon atoms in the linear
polymer chain, depending on the degree of stiffness desired in the material. This is
considerably less than the degree of cross-linking in thermosets.
An alternative method of curing involves the use of starting chemicals that react when
mixed (sometimes requiring a catalyst or heat) to form elastomers with relatively infrequent
cross-links between molecules. These synthetic rubbers are known as reactive system
elastomers. Certain polymers that cure by this means, such as urethanes and silicones,
can be classified as either thermosets or elastomers, depending on the degree of cross-linking
achieved during the reaction.
A relatively new class of elastomers, called thermoplastic elastomers, possesses
elastomeric properties that result from the mixture of two phases, both thermoplastic.
One is above its Tg at room temperature while the other is below its Tg. Thus, we have a
polymer that includes soft rubbery regions intermixed with hard particles that act as cross-
links. The composite material is elastic in its mechanical behavior, although not as extensible
as most other elastomers. Because both phases are thermoplastic, the aggregate material can
be heated above its Tm for forming, using processes that are generally more economical than
those used for rubber.
We discuss the elastomers in the following two sections. The first deals with natural
rubberandhowitisvulcanizedtocreateausefulcommercialmaterial;thesecondexamines
the synthetic rubbers.
FIGURE 8.13
Increase
in stiffness as a function
of strain for three grades
of rubber: natural rubber,
vulcanized rubber, and
hard rubber.
176
Chapter 8/Polymers

8.4.2 NATURAL RUBBER
Natural rubber (NR) consists primarily of polyisoprene, a high-molecular-weight poly-
mer of isoprene (C5H8). It is derived from latex, a milky substance produced by various
plants, the most important of which is the rubber tree (Hevea brasiliensis) that grows in
tropical climates (Historical Note 8.2). Latex is a water emulsion of polyisoprene (about
one-third by weight), plus various other ingredients. Rubber is extracted from the latex
by various methods (e.g., coagulation, drying, and spraying) that remove the water.
Natural crude rubber (without vulcanization) is sticky in hot weather, but stiff and
brittle in cold weather. To form an elastomer with useful properties, natural rubber must be
vulcanized. Traditionally, vulcanization has been accomplished by mixing small amounts of
sulfur and other chemicals with the crude rubber and heating. The chemical effect of
vulcanization is cross-linking; the mechanical result is increased strength and stiffness, yet
maintenance of extensibility. The dramatic change in properties caused by vulcanization can
be seen in the stress–strain curves of Figure 8.13.
Sulfur alone can causecross-linking, but theprocess is slow, taking hours to complete.
Other chemicals are added to sulfur during vulcanization to accelerate the process and
serve other beneficial functions. Also, rubber can be vulcanized using chemicals other than
sulfur. Today, curing times have been reduced significantly compared to the original sulfur
curing of years ago.
As an engineering material, vulcanized rubber is noted among elastomers for its high
tensile strength, tear strength, resilience (capacity to recover shape after deformation), and
resistance to wear and fatigue. Its weaknesses are that it degrades when subjected to heat,
sunlight, oxygen, ozone, and oil. Some of these limitations can be reduced through the use
of additives. Typical properties and other data for vulcanized natural rubber are listed in
Table 8.5. Market share is relative to total annual rubber volume, natural plus synthetic.
Rubber volume is about 15% of total polymer market.
Historical Note 8.2
Natural rubber
The ﬁrst use of natural rubber seems to have been in the
form of rubber balls used for sport by the natives of
Central and South America at least 500 hundred years
ago. Columbus noted this during his second voyage to
the New World in 1493–1496. The balls were made from
the dried gum of a rubber tree. The ﬁrst white men in
South America called the tree caoutchouc, which was
their way of pronouncing the Indian name for it. The
name rubber came from the English chemist Joseph
Priestley, who discovered (around 1770) that gum rubber
would ‘‘rub’’ away pencil marks.
Early rubber goods were less than satisfactory; they
melted in summer heat and hardened in winter cold.
One of those in the business of making and selling rubber
goods was American Charles Goodyear. Recognizing the
deﬁciencies of the natural material, he experimented
with ways to improve its properties and discovered that
rubber could be cured by heating it with sulfur. This was
in 1839, and the process, later called vulcanization, was
patented by him in 1844.
Vulcanization and the emerging demand for rubber
products led to tremendous growth in rubber production
and the industry that supported it. In 1876, Henry
Wickham collected thousands of rubber tree seeds from
the Brazilian jungle and planted them in England; the
sprouts were later transplanted to Ceylon and Malaya
(then British colonies) to form rubber plantations. Soon,
other countries in the region followed the British
example. Southeast Asia became the base of the rubber
industry.
In 1888, a British veterinary surgeon named John
Dunlop patented pneumatic tires for bicycles. By the
twentieth century, the motorcar industry was developing
in the United States and Europe. Together, the
automobile and rubber industries grew to occupy
positions of unimagined importance.
Section 8.4/Elastomers
177

The largest single market for natural rubber is automotive tires. In tires, carbon black
is an important additive; it reinforces the rubber, serving to increase tensile strength and
resistance to tearing and abrasion. Other products made of rubber include shoe soles,
bushings, seals, and shock-absorbing components. In each case, the rubber is compounded
to achieve the specific properties required in the application. Besides carbon black, other
additives used in rubber and some of the synthetic elastomers include clay, kaolin, silica,
talc, andcalciumcarbonate, aswell aschemicalsthat accelerate and promotevulcanization.
8.4.3 SYNTHETIC RUBBERS
Today, the tonnage of synthetic rubbers is more than three times that of natural rubber.
Development of these synthetic materials was motivated largely by the world wars when NR
was difficult to obtain (Historical Note 8.3). The most important of the synthetics is styrene–
butadiene rubber(SBR), acopolymer ofbutadiene(C4H6)andstyrene (C8H8). Aswithmost
other polymers, the predominant raw material for the synthetic rubbers is petroleum. Only
the synthetic rubbers of greatest commercial importance are discussed here. Technical data
are presented in Table 8.6. Market share data are for total volume of natural and synthetic
TABLE 8.5
Characteristics and typical properties of vulcanized rubber.
Polymer:
Polyisoprene (C5H8)n
Symbol:
NR
Specific gravity:
0.93
Modulus of elasticity:
18 MPa (2610 lb/in2) at 300% elongation
High temperature limit:
80C (176F)
Tensile strength:
25 MPa (3625 lb/in2)
Low temperature limit:
50C (58F)
Elongation:
700% at failure
Approximate market share:
22%
Compiled from [2], [6], [9], and other sources.
Historical Note 8.3
Synthetic rubbers
In 1826, Faraday recognized the formula of natural
rubber to be C5H8. Subsequent attempts at reproducing
this molecule over many years were generally
unsuccessful. Regrettably, it was the world wars that
created the necessity which became the mother of
invention for synthetic rubber. In World War I, the
Germans, denied access to natural rubber, developed a
methyl-based substitute. This material was not very
successful, but it marks the ﬁrst large-scale production of
synthetic rubber.
After World War I, the price of natural rubber was so
low that many attempts at fabricating synthetics were
abandoned. However, the Germans, perhaps
anticipating a future conﬂict, renewed their development
efforts. The ﬁrm I.G. Farben developed two synthetic
rubbers, starting in the early 1930s, called Buna-S and
Buna-N. Buna is derived from butadiene (C4H6), which
has become the critical ingredient in many modern
synthetic rubbers, and Na, the symbol for sodium, used
to accelerate or catalyze the polymerization process
(Natrium is the German word for sodium). The symbol
S in Buna-S stands for styrene. Buna-S is the copolymer
we know today as styrene–butadiene rubber, or SBR.
The N in Buna-N stands for acryloNitrile, and the
synthetic rubber is called nitrile rubber in current usage.
Other efforts included the work at the DuPont
Company in the United States, which led to the devel-
opment of polychloroprene, ﬁrst marketed in 1932 under
the name Duprene, later changed to Neoprene, its
current name.
During World War II, the Japanese cut off the supply
of natural rubber from Southeast Asia to the United
States. Production of Buna-S synthetic rubber was begun
on a large scale in America. The federal government
preferred to use the name GR-S (Government Rubber-
Styrene) rather than Buna-S (the German name). By
1944, the United States was outproducing Germany
in SBR 10-to-1. Since the early 1960s, worldwide
production of synthetic rubbers has exceeded that of
natural rubbers.
178
Chapter 8/Polymers

rubbers.About10%oftotal volumeofrubberproductionisreclaimed;thus, totaltonnagesin
Tables 8.5 and 8.6 do not sum to 100%.
Butadiene Rubber
Polybutadiene (BR) is important mainly in combination with other
rubbers. It is compounded with natural rubber and with styrene (styrene–butadiene rubber
is discussed later) in the production of automotive tires. Without compounding, the tear
resistance, tensile strength, and ease of processing of polybutadiene are less than desirable.
Butyl Rubber
Butyl rubber is a copolymer of polyisobutylene (98%–99%) and poly-
isoprene (1%–2%). It can be vulcanized to provide a rubber with very low air permeability,
which has led to applications in inflatable products such as inner tubes, liners in tubeless
tires, and sporting goods.
Chloroprene Rubber
Polychloroprene was one of the first synthetic rubbers to be
developed (early 1930s). Commonly known today as Neoprene, it is an important special-
purpose rubber. It crystallizes when strained to provide good mechanical properties. Chloro-
prene rubber (CR) is more resistant to oils, weather, ozone, heat, and flame (chlorine makes
this rubber self-extinguishing) than NR, but somewhat more expensive. Its applications
include fuel hoses (and other automotive parts), conveyor belts, and gaskets, but not tires.
Ethylene–Propylene Rubber
Polymerization of ethylene and propylene with small
proportions (3%–8%) of a diene monomer produces the terpolymer ethylene–propyl-
ene–diene (EPDM), a useful synthetic rubber. Applications are for parts mostly in the
automotive industry other than tires. Other uses are wire and cable insulation.
TABLE 8.6
Characteristics and typical properties of synthetic rubbers: (a) butadiene rubber.
Polymer:
Polybutadiene (C4H6)n
Symbol:
BR
Specific gravity:
0.93
Tensile strength:
15 MPa (2175 lb/in2)
High temperature limit:
100C (212F)
Elongation:
500% at failure
Low temperature limit:
50C (58F)
Approx. market share:
12%
Table 8.6 is compiled from [2], [4], [6], [9], [11], and other sources.
TABLE 8.6
(continued): (b) butyl rubber.
Polymer:
Copolymer of isobutylene (C4H8)n and isoprene (C5H8)n
Symbol:
PIB
Specific gravity:
0.92
Modulus of elasticity:
7 MPa (1015 lb/in2) at 300% elongation
High temperature limit:
110C (230F)
Tensile strength:
20 MPa (2900 lb/in2)
Low temperature limit:
50C (58F)
Elongation:
700%
Approximate market share:
About 3%
TABLE 8.6
(continued): (c) chloroprene rubber (neoprene).
Polymer:
Polychloroprene (C4H5Cl)n
Symbol:
CR
Specific gravity:
1.23
Modulus of elasticity:
7 MPa (1015 lb/in2) at 300% elongation
High temperature limit:
120C (248F)
Tensile strength:
25 MPa (3625 lb/in2)
Low temperature limit:
20C (4F)
Elongation:
500% at failure
Approximate market share:
2%
Section 8.4/Elastomers
179

Isoprene Rubber
Isoprene can be polymerized to synthesize a chemical equivalent of
naturalrubber.Synthetic(unvulcanized)polyisopreneissofterandmoreeasilymoldedthan
raw natural rubber. Applications of the synthetic material are similar to those of its natural
counterpart, car tires being the largest single market. It is also used for footwear, conveyor
belts, and caulking compound. Cost per unit weight is about 35% higher than for NR.
Nitrile Rubber
This is a vulcanizable copolymer of butadiene (50%–75%) and acrylo-
nitrile (25%–50%). Its more technical name is butadiene-acrylonitrile rubber. It has good
strength and resistance to abrasion, oil, gasoline, and water. These properties make it ideal
for applications such as gasoline hoses and seals, and also for footwear.
Polyurethanes
Thermosetting polyurethanes (Section 8.3.2) with minimum cross-link-
ing are elastomers, mostcommonly producedasflexible foams. Inthisform,theyarewidely
used as cushion materials for furniture and automobile seats. Unfoamed polyurethane can
TABLE 8.6
(continued): (d) ethylene–propylene–diene rubber.
Representative polymer:
Terpolymer of ethylene (C2H4), propylene (C3H6), and a diene monomer
(3%–8%) for cross-linking
Symbol:
EPDM
Specific gravity:
0.86
Tensile strength:
15 MPa (2175 lb/in2)
High temperature limit:
150C (302F)
Elongation:
300% at failure
Low temperature limit:
50C (58F)
Approximate market share:
5%
TABLE 8.6
(continued): (e) isoprene rubber (synthetic).
Polymer:
Polyisoprene (C5H8)n
Symbol:
IR
Specific gravity:
0.93
Modulus of elasticity:
17 MPa (2465 lb/in2) at 300% elongation
High temperature limit:
80C (176F)
Tensile strength:
25 MPa (3625 lb/in2)
Low temperature limit:
50C (58F)
Elongation:
500% at failure
Approximate market share:
2%
TABLE 8.6
(continued): (f) nitrile rubber.
Polymer:
Copolymer of butadiene (C4H6) and acrylonitrile (C3H3N)
Symbol:
NBR
Specific gravity: 1.00 (without fillers)
Modulus of elasticity:
10 MPa (1450 lb/in2) at 300%
elongation
High temperature limit: 120C (248F)
Tensile strength:
30 MPa (4350 lb/in2)
Low temperature limit: 50C (58F)
Elongation:
500% at failure
Approximate market share: 2%
TABLE 8.6
(continued): (g) polyurethane.
Polymer:
Polyurethane (chemistry varies)
Symbol:
PUR
Specific gravity:
1.25
Modulus of elasticity:
10 MPa (1450 lb/in2) at 300%
elongation
High temperature limit:
100C (212F)
Tensile strength:
60 MPa (8700 lb/in2)
Low temperature limit:
50C (–58F)
Elongation:
700% at failure
Approximate market share:
Listed under thermosets,
Table 8.4(e)
180
Chapter 8/Polymers

be molded into products ranging from shoe soles to car bumpers, with cross-linking
adjusted to achieve the desired properties for the application. With no cross-linking,
the material is a thermoplastic elastomer that can be injection molded. As an elastomer or
thermoset, reaction injection molding and other shaping methods are used.
Silicones
Like the polyurethanes, silicones can be elastomeric or thermosetting,
depending on the degree of cross-linking. Silicone elastomers are noted for the wide
temperature range over which they can be used. Their resistance to oils is poor. The
silicones possess various chemistries, the most common being polydimethylsiloxane
(Table 8.6(h)). To obtain acceptable mechanical properties, silicone elastomers must be
reinforced, usually with fine silica powders. Owing to their high cost, they are considered
special-purpose rubbers for applications such as gaskets, seals, wire and cable insulation,
prosthetic devices, and bases for caulking materials.
Styrene–Butadiene Rubber
SBR is a random copolymer of styrene (about 25%) and
butadiene (about 75%). It was originally developed in Germany as Buna-S rubber before
World War II. Today, it is the largest tonnage elastomer, totaling about 40% of all rubbers
produced (natural rubber is second in tonnage). Its attractive features are low cost,
resistance to abrasion, and better uniformity than NR. When reinforced with carbon
black and vulcanized, its characteristics and applications are very similar to those of
natural rubber. Cost is also similar. A close comparison of properties reveals that most of
its mechanical properties except wear resistance are inferior to NR, but its resistance to
heat aging, ozone, weather, and oils is superior. Applications include automotive tires,
footwear, and wire and cable insulation. A material chemically related to SBR is styrene–
butadiene–styrene block copolymer, a thermoplastic elastomer discussed below.
Thermoplastic Elastomers
As previously described, a thermoplastic elastomer (TPE)
is a thermoplastic that behaves like an elastomer. It constitutes a family of polymers that
is a fast-growing segment of the elastomer market. TPEs derive their elastomeric
properties not from chemical cross-links, but from physical connections between soft
and hard phases that make up the material. Thermoplastic elastomers include styrene–
butadiene–styrene (SBS), a block copolymer as opposed to styrene–butadiene rubber
(SBR) which is a random copolymer (Section 8.1.2); thermoplastic polyurethanes;
TABLE 8.6
(continued): (h) silicone rubber.
Representative polymer:
Polydimethylsiloxane (SiO(CH3)2)n
Symbol:
VMQ
Specific gravity:
0.98
Tensile strength:
10 MPa (1450 lb/in2)
High temperature limit:
230C (446F)
Elongation:
700% at failure
Low temperature limit:
50C (58F)
Approximate market share:
Less than 1%
TABLE 8.6
(continued): (i) styrene–butadiene rubber.
Polymer:
Copolymer of styrene (C8H8) and butadiene (C4H6)
Symbol:
SBR
Elongation:
700% at failure
Modulus of elasticity:
17 MPa (2465 lb/in2) at 300%
elongation
Specific gravity:
0.94
Tensile strength:
20 MPa (2900 lb/in2) reinforced
High temperature limit:
110C (230F)
Low temperature limit:
50C (58F)
Approximate market share:
Slightly less than 30%
Section 8.4/Elastomers
181

thermoplastic polyester copolymers; and other copolymers and polymer blends. Table 8.6
(j) gives data on SBS. The chemistry and structure of these materials are generally
complex, involving two materials that are incompatible so that they form distinct phases
whose room temperature properties are different. Owing to their thermoplasticity, the
TPEs cannot match conventional cross-linked elastomers in elevated temperature
strength and creep resistance. Typical applications include footwear, rubber bands,
extruded tubing, wire coating, and molded parts for automotive and other uses in which
elastomeric properties are required. TPEs are not suitable for tires.
8.5
POLYMER RECYCLING AND BIODEGRADABILITY
It is estimated that since the 1950s, 1 billion tons of plastic have been discarded as
garbage.2 This plastic trash could be around for centuries, because the primary bonds that
make plastics so durable also make them resistant to degradation by the environmental
and biological processes of nature. In this section, we consider two polymer topics related
to environmental concerns: (1) recycling of polymer products and (2) biodegradable
plastics.
8.5.1 POLYMER RECYCLING
Approximately 200 million tons of plastic products are made annually throughout the
world, more than one-eighth of which are produced in the United States.3 Only about 6%
of the U.S. tonnage is recycled as plastic waste; the rest either remains in products and/or
ends up in garbage landfills. Recycling means recovering the discarded plastic items and
reprocessing them into new products, in some cases products that are quite different from
the original discarded items.
In general the recycling of plastics is more difficult that recycling of glass and metal
products. There are several reasons for this: (1) compared to plastic parts, many recycled
metal items are much larger and heavier (e.g., structural steel from buildings and bridges,
steel car body frames), so the economics of recycling are more favorable for recycling
metals; most plastic items are lightweight; (2) compared to plastics, which come in a
variety of chemical compositions that do not mix well, glass products are all based on
silicon dioxide; and (3) many plastic products contain fillers, dyes, and other additives
that cannot be readily separated from the polymer itself. Of course, a common problem in
all recycling efforts is the fluctuation in prices of recycled materials.
To cope with the problem of mixing different types of plastics and to promote
recycling of plastics, the Plastic Identification Code (PIC) was developed by the Society
TABLE 8.6
(continued): (j) thermoplastic elastomers (TPE).
Representative polymer:
Styrene–butadiene–styrene block copolymer
Symbol:
SBS (also YSBR)
Specific gravity:
1.0
Tensile strength:
14 MPa (2030 lb/in2)
High temperature limit:
65C (149F)
Elongation:
400%
Low temperature limit:
50C (58F)
Approximate market share:
12%
2en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plastic.
3According to the Society of Plastics Engineers, as reported in en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biodegradable_
plastic.
182
Chapter 8/Polymers

of the Plastics Industry. The code is a symbol consisting of a triangle formed by three bent
arrows enclosing a number. It is printed or molded on the plastic item. The number
identifies the plastic for recycling purposes. The seven plastics (all thermoplastics) used in
the PIC recycling program are (1) polyethylene terephthalate, used in 2-liter beverage
containers; (2) high-density polyethylene, used in milk jugs and shopping bags; (3)
polyvinyl chloride, used in juice bottles and PVC pipes; (4) low-density polyethylene,
used in squeezable bottles and flexible container lids; (5) polypropylene, used in yogurt
and margarine containers; (6) polystyrene, used in egg cartons, disposable plates, cups,
and utensils, and as foamed packing materials; and (7) other, such as polycarbonate or
ABS. The PIC facilitates the separation of items made from the different types of plastics
for reprocessing. Nevertheless, sorting the plastics is a labor-intensive activity.
Once separated, the thermoplastic items can be readily reprocessed into new
products by remelting. This is not the case with thermosets and rubbers because of
the cross-linking in these polymers. Thus, these materials must be recycled and
reprocessed by different means. Recycled thermosets are typically ground up into
particulate matter and used as fillers, for example, in molded plastic parts. Most
recycled rubber comes from used tires. While some of these tires are retreaded,
others are ground up into granules in forms such as chunks and nuggets that can be
used for landscape mulch, playgrounds, and similar purposes.
8.5.2 BIODEGRADABLE POLYMERS
Another approach that addresses the environmental concerns about plastics involves
the development of biodegradable plastics, which are defined as plastics that are
decomposed by the actions of microorganisms occurring in nature, such as bacteria and
fungi. Conventional plastic products usually consist of a combination of a petroleum-
based polymer and a filler (Section 8.1.5). In effect, the material is a polymer-matrix
composite (Section 9.4). The purpose of the filler is to improve mechanical properties
and/or reduce material cost. In many cases, neither the polymer nor the filler are
biodegradable. Distinguished from these non-biodegradable plastics are two forms of
biodegradable plastics: (1) partially degradable and (2) completely degradable.
Partially biodegradable plastics consist of a conventional polymer and a natural
filler. The polymer matrix is petroleum-based, which is non-biodegradable, but the
natural filler can be consumed by microorganisms (e.g., in a landfill), thus converting the
polymer into a sponge-like structure and possibly leading to its degradation over time.
The plastics of greatest interest from an environmental viewpoint are the completely
biodegradable plastics (aka bioplastics) consisting of a polymer and filler that are both
derived from natural and renewable sources. Various agricultural products are used as the
raw materials for biodegradable plastics. A common polymeric starting material is starch,
which is a major component in corn, wheat, rice, and potatoes. It consists of the two polymers
amylose and amylopectin. Starch can be used to synthesize several thermoplastic materials
that are processable by conventional plastic shaping methods, such as extrusion and injection
molding (Chapter 13). Another starting point for biodegradable plastics involves fermenta-
tion of either corn starch or sugar cane to produce lactic acid, which can be polymerized to
form polylactide, another thermoplastic material. A common filler used in bioplastics is
cellulose, often in the form of reinforcing fibers in the polymer-matrix composite. Cellulose is
grown as flax or hemp. It is inexpensive and possesses good mechanical strength.
Applications of biodegradable plastics are inhibited by the fact that these
materials are more expensive than petroleum-based polymers. That may change in
the future due to technological advances and economies of scale. Biopolymers are
most attractive in situations where degradability is a higher priority than cost savings.
At the top of the list are packaging materials that are quickly discarded as waste in
Section 8.5/Polymer Recycling and Biodegradability
183

landfills. It is estimated that approximately 40% of all plastics are used in packaging,
mostly for food products [12]. Thus, biodegradable plastics are being used increas-
ingly as substitutes for conventional plastics in packaging applications. Other appli-
cations include disposable food service items, coatings for paper and cardboard,
waste bags, and mulches for agricultural crops. Medical applications include sutures,
catheter bags, and sanitary laundry bags in hospitals.
8.6
GUIDE TO THE PROCESSING OF POLYMERS
Polymers are nearly always shaped in a heated, highly plastic consistency. Common
operations are extrusion and molding. The molding of thermosets is generally more
complicated because they require curing (cross-linking). Thermoplastics are easier to
mold, and a greater variety of molding operations are available to process them
(Chapter 13). Although plastics readily lend themselves to net shape processing,
machining is sometimes required (Chapter 22); and plastic parts can be assembled
into products by permanent joining techniques such as welding (Chapter 29), adhesive
bonding (Section 31.3), or mechanical assembly (Chapter 32).
Rubber processing has a longer history than plastics, and the industries associated
with these polymer materials have traditionally been separated, even though their
processing is similar in many ways. We cover rubber processing technology in Chapter 14.
REFERENCES
[1] Alliger, G., and Sjothum, I. J. (eds.). Vulcanization
of Elastomers. Krieger Publishing Company, New
York, 1978.
[2] Billmeyer, F. W., Jr. Textbook of Polymer Science,
3rd ed. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1984.
[3] Blow, C. M., and Hepburn, C. Rubber Technology
and Manufacture, 2nd ed. Butterworth Scientific,
London, 1982.
[4] Brandrup, J., and Immergut, E. E. (eds.). Polymer
Handbook, 4th ed. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New
York, 2004.
[5] Brydson, J. A. Plastics Materials, 4th ed. Butter-
worths & Co., Ltd., London, 1999.
[6] Chanda, M., and Roy, S. K. Plastics Technology
Handbook, 4th ed. CRC Taylor & Francis, Boca
Raton, Florida, 2006.
[7] Charrier, J-M. Polymeric Materials and Processing.
Oxford University Press, New York, 1991.
[8] Engineering Materials Handbook, Vol. 2, Engineer-
ing Plastics. ASM International, Materials Park,
Ohio, 2000.
[9] Flinn, R. A., and Trojan, P. K. Engineering Materials
and Their Applications, 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., New York, 1995.
[10] Hall, C. Polymer Materials, 2nd ed. John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 1989.
[11] Hofmann,
W.
Rubber
Technology
Handbook.
Hanser Publishers, Munich, Germany, 1988.
[12] Kolybaba, M., Tabil, L. G., Panigrahi, S., Crerar,
W. J., Powell, T., and Wang, B. ‘‘Biodegradable
Polymers: Past Present, and Future,’’ Paper Number
RRV03-0007, American Society of Agricultural
Engineers, October 2003.
[13] Margolis, J. M. Engineering Plastics Handbook.
McGraw-Hill, New York, 2006.
[14] Mark, J. E., and Erman, B. (eds.). Science and
Technology of Rubber, 3rd ed. Academic Press,
Orlando, Florida, 2005.
[15] McCrum, N. G., Buckley, C. P., and Bucknall, C. B.
Principles of Polymer Engineering, 2nd ed. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK, 1997.
[16] Modern Plastics Encyclopedia. Modern Plastics,
McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, 1990.
[17] Reisinger, T. J. G. ‘‘Polymers of Tomorrow,’’ Ad-
vancedMaterials&Processes,March2004,pp.43–45.
[18] Rudin, A. The Elements of Polymer Science and
Engineering, 2nd ed. Academic Press, Inc., Orlando,
Florida, 1998.
[19] Seymour, R. B., and Carraher, C. E. Seymour/
Carraher’s Polymer Chemistry, 5th ed. Marcel
Dekker, Inc., New York, 2000.
[20] Seymour, R. B. Engineering Polymer Sourcebook.
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1990.
[21] Wikipedia. ‘‘Plastic recycling.’’ Available at: http://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Plastic_recycling.‘‘Biodegradable
plastic.’’ Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
184
Chapter 8/Polymers

Biodegradable_plastic. ‘‘Plastic.’’ Available at: http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plastic.
[22] Green Plastics. Available at: http://www.greenplas-
tics.com/reference.
[23] Young, R. J., and Lovell, P. Introduction to Poly-
mers, 3rd ed. CRC Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton,
Florida, 2008.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
8.1.
What is a polymer?
8.2.
What are the three basic categories of polymers?
8.3.
How do the properties of polymers compare with
those of metals?
8.4.
What does the degree of polymerization indicate?
8.5.
What is cross-linking in a polymer, and what is its
significance?
8.6.
What is a copolymer?
8.7.
Copolymers can possess four different arrange-
ments of their constituent mers. Name and briefly
describe the four arrangements.
8.8.
What is a terpolymer?
8.9.
How are a polymer’s properties affected when it
takes on a crystalline structure?
8.10.
Does any polymer ever become 100% crystalline?
8.11.
What are some of the factors that influence a
polymer’s tendency to crystallize?
8.12.
Why are fillers added to a polymer?
8.13.
What is a plasticizer?
8.14.
In addition to fillers and plasticizers, what are some
other additives used with polymers?
8.15.
Describe the difference in mechanical properties as a
function of temperature between a highly crystalline
thermoplastic and an amorphous thermoplastic.
8.16.
What is unique about the polymer cellulose?
8.17.
The nylons are members of which polymer group?
8.18.
What is the chemical formula of ethylene, the
monomer for polyethylene?
8.19.
What is the basic difference between low-density
and high-density polyethylene?
8.20.
How do the properties of thermosetting polymers
differ from those of thermoplastics?
8.21.
Cross-linking (curing) of thermosetting plastics is
accomplished by one of three ways. Name the three
ways.
8.22.
Elastomers and thermosetting polymers are both
cross-linked. Why are their properties so different?
8.23.
What happens to an elastomer when it is below its
glass transition temperature?
8.24.
What is the primary polymer ingredient in natural
rubber?
8.25.
How do thermoplastic elastomers differ from con-
ventional rubbers?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 20 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
8.1.
Of the three polymer types, which one is the most
important commercially: (a) thermoplastics, (b)
thermosets, or (c) elastomers?
8.2.
Which one of the three polymer types is not nor-
mally considered to be a plastic: (a) thermoplastics,
(b) thermosets, or (c) elastomers?
8.3.
Which one of the three polymer types does not
involve cross-linking: (a) thermoplastics, (b) ther-
mosets, or (c) elastomers?
8.4.
As the degree of crystallinity in a given polymer
increases, the polymer becomes denser and stiffer,
and its melting temperature decreases: (a) true or
(b) false?
8.5.
Which one of the following is the chemical formula
for the repeating unit in polyethylene: (a) CH2, (b)
C2H4, (c) C3H6, (d) C5H8, or (e) C8H8?
8.6.
Degree of polymerization is which one of the fol-
lowing: (a) average number of mers in the molecule
chain; (b) proportion of the monomer that has been
polymerized; (c) sum of the molecule weights of the
mers in the molecule; or (d) none of the above?
8.7.
A branched molecular structure is stronger in the
solid state and more viscous in the molten state than
a linear structure for the same polymer: (a) true or
(b) false?
8.8.
A copolymer is a mixture of the macromolecules of
two different homopolymers: (a) true or (b) false?
8.9.
As the temperature of a polymer increases, its
density (a) increases, (b) decreases, or (c) remains
fairly constant?
8.10.
Which of the following plastics has the highest
market share: (a) phenolics, (b) polyethylene,
Multiple Choice Quiz
185

(c)
polypropylene,
(d)
polystyrene,
or
(e)
polyvinylchloride?
8.11.
Which of the following polymers are normally
thermoplastic (four best answers): (a) acrylics,
(b) cellulose acetate, (c) nylon, (d) phenolics,
(e)
polychloroprene,
(f)
polyesters,
(g)
poly-
ethylene, (h) polyisoprene, and (i) polyurethane?
8.12.
Polystyrene (without plasticizers) is amorphous,
transparent, and brittle: (a) true or (b) false?
8.13.
The fiber rayon used in textiles is based on which
one of the following polymers: (a) cellulose,
(b) nylon, (c) polyester, (d) polyethylene, or (e)
polypropylene?
8.14.
The basic difference between low-density poly-
ethylene and high-density polyethylene is that the
latter has a much higher degree of crystallinity: (a)
true or (b) false?
8.15.
Among the thermosetting polymers, the most
widely used commercially is which one of the fol-
lowing: (a) epoxies, (b) phenolics, (c) silicones, or
(d) urethanes?
8.16.
The chemical formula for polyisoprene in natural
rubber is which of the following: (a) CH2, (b) C2H4,
(c) C3H6, (d) C5H8, or (e) C8H8?
8.17.
The leading commercial synthetic rubber is which
one of the following: (a) butyl rubber, (b) isoprene
rubber,
(c)
polybutadiene,
(d)
polyurethane,
(e) styrene-butadiene rubber, or (f) thermoplastic
elastomers?
186
Chapter 8/Polymers

9
COMPOSITE
MATERIALS
Chapter Contents
9.1
Technology and Classification of Composite
Materials
9.1.1
Components in a Composite Material
9.1.2
The Reinforcing Phase
9.1.3
Properties of Composite Materials
9.1.4
Other Composite Structures
9.2
Metal Matrix Composites
9.2.1
Cermets
9.2.2
Fiber-Reinforced Metal Matrix
Composites
9.3
Ceramic Matrix Composites
9.4
Polymer Matrix Composites
9.4.1
Fiber-Reinforced Polymers
9.4.2
Other Polymer Matrix Composites
9.5
Guide to Processing Composite Materials
In addition to metals, ceramics, and polymers, a fourth
material category can be distinguished: composites. A com-
posite material is a material system composed of two or
morephysicallydistinct phaseswhose combinationproduces
aggregate properties that are different from those of its
constituents. In certain respects, composites are the most
interesting of the engineering materials because their struc-
ture is more complex than the other three types.
The technological and commercial interest in compos-
ite materials derives from the fact that their properties are
not just different from their components but are often far
superior. Some of the possibilities include:

Composites can be designed that are very strong and
stiff, yet very light in weight, giving them strength-
to-weight and stiffness-to-weight ratios several
times greater than steel or aluminum. These prop-
erties are highly desirable in applications ranging
from commercial aircraft to sports equipment.

Fatigue properties are generally better than for the
common engineering metals. Toughness is often
greater, too.

Composites can be designed that do not corrode like
steel; this is important in automotive and other
applications.

With composite materials, it is possible to achieve
combinations of properties not attainable with met-
als, ceramics, or polymers alone.

Better appearance and control of surface smoothness
are possible with certain composite materials.
Along with the advantages, there are disadvantages and
limitations associated with composite materials. These in-
clude: (1) properties of many important composites are an-
isotropic, which means the properties differ depending on the
direction in which they are measured; (2) many of the poly-
mer-based composites are subject to attack by chemicals or
187

solvents,justasthepolymersthemselvesaresusceptibletoattack;(3)compositematerialsare
generally expensive, although prices may drop as volume increases; and (4) certain of the
manufacturing methods for shaping composite materials are slow and costly.
We have already encountered several composite materials in our coverage of the
three other material types. Examples include cemented carbides (tungsten carbide with
cobalt binder), plastic molding compounds that contain fillers (e.g., cellulose fibers, wood
flour), and rubber mixed with carbon black. We did not always identify these materials as
composites; however, technically, they fit the above definition. It could even be argued
that a two-phase metal alloy (e.g., Fe þ Fe3C) is a composite material, although it is not
classified as such. Perhaps the most important composite material of all is wood.
In our presentation of composite materials, we first examine their technology and
classification. There are many different materials and structures that can be used to form
composites; we survey the various categories, devoting the most time to fiber-reinforced
plastics, which are commercially the most important type. In the final section, we provide
a guide to the manufacturing processes for composites.
9.1
TECHNOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION OF COMPOSITE
MATERIALS
Asnoted inour definition,a compositematerialconsistsof two ormore distinctphases. The
term phase indicates a homogeneous material, such as a metal or ceramic in which all of the
grainshavethesamecrystalstructure, orapolymerwithnofillers. Bycombiningthephases,
using methods yet to be described, a new material is created with aggregate performance
exceeding that of its parts. The effect is synergistic.
Composite materials can be classified in various ways. One possible classification
distinguishes between (1) traditional and (2) synthetic composites. Traditional composites
are those that occur in nature or have been produced by civilizations for many years. Wood
is a naturally occurring composite material, while concrete (Portland cement plus sand or
gravel) and asphalt mixed with gravel are traditional composites used in construction.
Synthetic composites are modern material systems normally associated with the manu-
facturing industries, in which the components are first produced separately and then
combined in a controlled way to achieve the desired structure, properties, and part
geometry. These synthetic materials are the composites normally thought of in the context
of engineered products. Our attention in this chapter is focused on these materials.
9.1.1 COMPONENTS IN A COMPOSITE MATERIAL
In the simplest manifestation of our definition, a composite material consists of two phases:
a primary phase and a secondary phase. The primary phase forms the matrix within which
the secondary phase is imbedded. The imbedded phase is sometimes referred to as a
reinforcing agent (or similar term), because it usually serves to strengthen the composite.
The reinforcing phase may be in the form of fibers, particles, or various other geometries, as
we shall see. The phases are generally insoluble in each other, but strong adhesion must
exist at their interface(s).
The matrix phase can be any of three basic material types: polymers, metals, or
ceramics. The secondary phase may also be one of the three basic materials, or it may be an
element such as carbon or boron. Possible combinations in a two-component composite
material can be organized as a 3  4 chart, as in Table 9.1. We see that certain combinations
are not feasible, such as a polymer in a ceramic matrix. We also see that the possibilities
188
Chapter 9/Composite Materials

include two-phase structures consisting of components of the same material type, such as
fibers of Kevlar (polymer) in a plastic (polymer) matrix. In other composites the imbedded
material is an element such as carbon or boron.
The classification system for composite materials used in this book is based on the
matrix phase. We list the classes here and discuss them in Sections 9.2 through 9.4:
1. Metal Matrix Composites (MMCs) include mixtures of ceramics and metals, such as
cemented carbides and other cermets, as well as aluminum or magnesium reinforced
by strong, high stiffness fibers.
2. Ceramic Matrix Composites (CMCs) are the least common category. Aluminum
oxide and silicon carbide are materials that can be imbedded with fibers for improved
properties, especially in high temperature applications.
3. Polymer Matrix Composites (PMCs). Thermosetting resins are the most widely used
polymers in PMCs. Epoxy and polyester are commonly mixed with fiber re-
inforcement, and phenolic is mixed with powders. Thermoplastic molding compounds
are often reinforced, usually with powders (Section 8.1.5).
Theclassificationcanbeappliedtotraditionalcompositesaswellassynthetics.Concrete
is a ceramic matrix composite, while asphalt and wood are polymer matrix composites.
The matrix material serves several functions in the composite. First, it provides the
bulk form of the part or product made of the composite material. Second, it holds the
imbedded phase in place, usually enclosing and often concealing it. Third, when a load is
applied, the matrix shares the load with the secondary phase, in some cases deforming so
that the stress is essentially born by the reinforcing agent.
9.1.2 THE REINFORCING PHASE
It is important to understand that the role played by the secondary phase is to reinforce
the primary phase. The imbedded phase is most commonly one of the shapes illustrated in
Figure 9.1: fibers, particles, or flakes. In addition, the secondary phase can take the form
of an infiltrated phase in a skeletal or porous matrix.
Fibers
Fibers are filaments of reinforcing material, generally circular in cross-section,
although alternative shapes are sometimes used (e.g., tubular, rectangular, hexagonal).
TABLE 9.1
Possible combinations of two-component composite materials.
Secondary phase
(reinforcement)
Primary Phase (matrix)
Metal
Ceramic
Polymer
Metal
Powder metal parts infiltrated
with a second metal
NA
Plastic molding compounds Steel-
belted radial tires
Ceramic
Cermetsa
Fiber-reinforced metals
SiC whisker-
reinforced
Al2O3
Plastic molding compounds
Fiberglass-reinforced plastic
Polymer
Powder metal parts
impregnated with polymer
NA
Plastic molding compounds
Kevlar-reinforced epoxy
Elements (C, B)
Fiber-reinforced metals
NA
Rubber with carbon black
B or C fiber-reinforced plastic
NA ¼ Not applicable currently.
aCermets include cemented carbides.
Section 9.1/Technology and Classification of Composite Materials
189

Diameters range from less than 0.0025 mm (0.0001 in) to about 0.13 mm (0.005 in),
depending on material.
Fiber reinforcement provides the greatest opportunity for strength enhancement of
composite structures. In fiber-reinforced composites, the fiber is often considered to be the
principal constituent since it bears the major share of the load. Fibers are of interest as
reinforcing agents because the filament form of most materials is significantly stronger than
the bulk form. The effect of fiber diameter on tensile strength can be seen in Figure 9.2. As
diameter is reduced, the material becomes oriented in the direction of the fiber axis and the
probability of defects in the structure decreases significantly. As a result, tensile strength
increases dramatically.
Fibersusedincompositescanbeeithercontinuousordiscontinuous. Continuousfibers
are very long; in theory, they offer a continuous path by which a load can be carried by the
composite part. In reality, this is difficult to achieve due to variations in the fibrous material
and processing. Discontinuous fibers (chopped sections of continuous fibers) are short
lengths (L/D  100). An important type of discontinuous fiber are whiskers—hair-like single
crystals with diameters down to about 0.001 mm (0.00004 in) and very high strength.
Fiber orientation is another factor in composite parts. We can distinguish three
cases, illustrated in Figure 9.3: (a) one-dimensional reinforcement, in which maximum
strength and stiffness are obtained in the direction of the fiber; (b) planar reinforcement,
FIGURE 9.1
Possible
physical shapes of
imbedded phases in
composite materials:
(a) ﬁber, (b) particle, and
(c) ﬂake.
FIGURE 9.2
Relationship
between tensile strength
and diameter for a carbon
ﬁber. (Source: [1]). Other
ﬁlament materials show
similar relationships.
0.006
0.008
0.0003
0.0004
0.0005
0.010
0.012
Fiber diameter, mm
Fiber diameter, in.
3000
400
300
200
2500
2000
1500
Tensile strength, MPa
Tensile strength, 1000 lb/in.2
FIGURE 9.3
Fiber
orientation in composite
materials: (a) one-
dimensional, continuous
ﬁbers; (b) planar, continuous
ﬁbers in the form of a woven
fabric; and (c) random,
discontinuous ﬁbers.
190
Chapter 9/Composite Materials

in some cases in the form of a two-dimensional woven fabric; and (c) random or three-
dimensional in which the composite material tends to possess isotropic properties.
Various materials are used as fibers in fiber-reinforced composites: metals, ceramics,
polymers, carbon, and boron. The most important commercial use of fibers is in polymer
composites. However, useof fiber-reinforced metalsandceramics is growing. Following is a
survey of the important types of fiber materials, with properties listed in Table 9.2:

Glass—The most widely used fiber in polymers, the term fiberglass is applied to
denote glass fiber-reinforced plastic (GFRP). The two common glass fibers are E-
glass and S-glass (compositions listed in Table 7.4). E-glass is strong and low cost, but
its modulus is less than other fibers. S-glass is stiffer, and its tensile strength is one of
the highest of all fiber materials; however, it is more expensive than E-glass.

Carbon—Carbon (Section 7.5.1) can be made into high-modulus fibers. Besides
stiffness, other attractive properties include low-density and low-thermal expansion.
C-fibers are generally a combination of graphite and amorphous carbon.

Boron—Boron (Section 7.5.3) has a very high elastic modulus, but its high cost limits
applications to aerospace components in which this property (and others) are critical.

Kevlar 49—This is the most important polymer fiber; it is a highly crystalline aramid,
a member of the polyamide family (Section 8.2.2). Its specific gravity is low, giving it
one of the highest strength-to-weight ratios of all fibers.

Ceramics—Silicon carbide (SiC) and aluminum oxide (Al2O3) are the main fiber
materials among ceramics. Both have high elastic moduli and can be used to
strengthen low-density, low-modulus metals such as aluminum and magnesium.

Metal—Steel filaments, both continuous and discontinuous, are used as reinforcing
fibers in plastics. Other metals are currently less common as reinforcing fibers.
Particles and Flakes
A second common shape of the imbedded phase is particulate,
ranging in size from microscopic to macroscopic. Particles are an important material form
for metals and ceramics; we discuss the characterization and production of engineering
powders in Chapters 16 and 17.
The distribution of particles in the composite matrix is random, and therefore strength
and other properties of the composite material are usually isotropic. The strengthening
mechanismdependsonparticlesize.Themicroscopicsizeisrepresentedbyveryfinepowders
TABLE 9.2
Typical properties of ﬁber materials used as reinforcement in
composites.
Diameter
Tensile Strength
Elastic Modulus
Fiber Material
mm
milsa
MPa
lb/in2
GPa
lb/in2
Metal: Steel
0.13
5.0
1000
150,000
206
30  106
Metal: Tungsten
0.013
0.5
4000
580,000
407
59  106
Ceramic: Al2O3
0.02
0.8
1900
275,000
380
55  106
Ceramic: SiC
0.13
5.0
3275
475,000
400
58  106
Ceramic: E-glass
0.01
0.4
3450
500,000
73
10  106
Ceramic: S-glass
0.01
0.4
4480
650,000
86
12  106
Polymer: Kevlar
0.013
0.5
3450
500,000
130
19  106
Element: Carbon
0.01
0.4
2750
400,000
240
35  106
Element: Boron
0.14
5.5
3100
450,000
393
57  106
a1 mil ¼ 0.001 in.
Compiled from [3], [7], [11], and other sources. Note that strength depends on fiber diameter
(Figure 9.2); the properties in this table must be interpreted accordingly.
Section 9.1/Technology and Classification of Composite Materials
191

(around 1 mm) distributed in the matrix in concentrations of 15% or less. The presence of
these powders results in dispersion-hardening of the matrix, in which dislocation movement
in the matrix material is restricted by the microscopic particles. In effect, the matrix itself is
strengthened, and no significant portion of the applied load is carried by the particles.
As particle size increases to the macroscopic range, and the proportion of imbedded
material increases to 25% andmore, the strengthening mechanism changes. In this case, the
applied load is shared between the matrix and the imbedded phase. Strengthening occurs
due to the load-carrying ability of the particles and the bonding of particles in the matrix.
This form of composite strengthening occurs in cemented carbides, in which tungsten
carbide is held in a cobalt binder. The proportion of tungsten carbide (WC) in the cobalt
(Co) matrix is typically 80% or more.
Flakes are basically two-dimensional particles—small flat platelets. Two examples of
this shape are the minerals mica (silicate of K and Al) and talc (Mg3Si4O10(OH)2), used as
reinforcing agents in plastics. They are generally lower cost materials than polymers, and
they add strength and stiffness to plastic molding compounds. Platelet sizes are usually in
therange0.01–to1mm(0.0004–0.040in)acrosstheflake, withathicknessof0.001–to0.005
mm (0.00004–0.00020 in).
Inﬁltrated Phase
The fourth form of imbedded phase occurs when the matrix has the
formofaporousskeleton(likeasponge),andthesecondphaseissimplyafiller.Inthiscase,
the imbedded phase assumes the shape of the pores in the matrix. Metallic fillers are
sometimes used to infiltrate the open porous structure of parts made by powder metallurgy
techniques (Section 16.3.4), in effect creating a composite material. Oil-impregnated
sintered PM components, such as bearingsand gears, mightbe consideredanother example
of this category.
The Interface
There is always an interface between constituent phases in a composite
material. For thecomposite to operate effectively, the phases must bond wherethey join. In
somecases, thereisa direct bondingbetween the two ingredients, assuggested byFigure9.4
FIGURE 9.4
Interfaces and interphases between phases in a composite material: (a) direct bonding between
primary and secondary phases; (b) addition of a third ingredient to bond the primary and secondary phases
and form an interphase; and (c) formation of an interphase by solution of the primary and secondary phases at
their boundary.
192
Chapter 9/Composite Materials

(a). In other cases, a third ingredient is added to promote bonding of the two primary
phases. Called an interphase, this third ingredient can be thought of as an adhesive. An
important example is the coating of glass fibers to achieve adhesion with thermosetting
resin in fiberglass-reinforced plastics. As illustrated in Figure 9.4(b), this case results in
two interfaces, one on either boundary of the interphase. Finally, a third form of interface
occurs when the two primary components are not completely insoluble in each other; in
this case, the interphase is formed consisting of a solution of the phases, as in Figure 9.4(c).
An example occurs in cemented carbides (Section 9.2.1); at the high sintering temperatures
used on these materials, some solubility results at the boundaries to create an interphase.
9.1.3 PROPERTIES OF COMPOSITE MATERIALS
In the selection of a composite material, an optimum combination of properties is usually
being sought,rather than one particular property. For example, the fuselageandwingsof an
aircraft must be lightweight as well as strong, stiff, and tough. Finding a monolithic material
that satisfies these requirements is difficult. Several fiber-reinforced polymers possess this
combination of properties.
Another example is rubber. Natural rubber is a relatively weak material. In the early
1900s, it was discovered that by adding significant amounts of carbon black (almost pure
carbon) to natural rubber, its strength is increased dramatically. The two ingredients
interact to provide a composite material that is significantly stronger than either one alone.
Rubber, of course, must also be vulcanized to achieve full strength.
Rubber itself is a useful additive in polystyrene. One of the distinctive and
disadvantageous properties of polystyrene is its brittleness. Although most other poly-
mers have considerable ductility, polystyrene has virtually none. Rubber (natural or
synthetic) can be added in modest amounts (5%–15%) to produce high-impact poly-
styrene, which has much superior toughness and impact strength.
Properties of a composite material are determined by three factors: (1) the
materials used as component phases in the composite, (2) the geometric shapes of
the constituents and resulting structure of the composite system, and (3) the manner in
which the phases interact with one another.
Rule of Mixtures
The properties of a composite material are a function of the starting
materials. Certain properties of a composite material can be computed by means of a rule
of mixtures, which involves calculating a weighted average of the constituent material
properties. Density is an example of this averaging rule. The mass of a composite material
is the sum of the masses of the matrix and reinforcing phases:
mc ¼ mm þ mr
ð9:1Þ
where m ¼ mass, kg (lb); and the subscripts c, m, and r indicate composite, matrix, and
reinforcing phases, respectively. Similarly, the volume of the composite is the sum of its
constituents:
Vc ¼ Vm þ Vr þ Vv
ð9:2Þ
where V ¼ volume, cm3 (in3). Vv is the volume of any voids in the composite (e.g., pores).
The density of the composite is the mass divided by the volume.
rc ¼ mc
Vc
¼ mm þ mr
Vc
ð9:3Þ
Section 9.1/Technology and Classification of Composite Materials
193

Because the masses of the matrix and reinforcing phase are their respective densities
multiplied by their volumes,
mm ¼ rmVm
and
mr ¼ rr Vr
we can substitute these terms into Eq. (9.3) and conclude that
rc ¼ f mrm þ f rrr
ð9:4Þ
where f m ¼ Vm=Vc and f r ¼ Vr=Vc are simply the volume fractions of the matrix and
reinforcing phases.
Fiber-Reinforced Composites
Determining mechanical properties of composites from
constituent properties is usually more involved. The rule of mixtures can sometimes be used
to estimate the modulus of elasticity of a fiber-reinforced composite made of continuous
fibers where Ec is measured in the longitudinal direction. The situation is depicted in
Figure 9.5(a); we assume that the fiber material is much stiffer than the matrix and that
the bonding between the two phases is secure. Under this model, the modulus of the
composite can be predicted as follows:
Ec ¼ f mEm þ f rEr
ð9:5Þ
where Ec, Em, and Er are the elastic moduli of the composite and its constituents, MPa (lb/
in2); and fm and fr are again the volume fractions of the matrix and reinforcing phase. The
effect of Eq. (9.5) is seen in Figure 9.5(b).
Perpendicular to the longitudinal direction, the fibers contribute little to the overall
stiffness except for their filling effect. The composite modulus can be estimated in this
FIGURE 9.5
(a) Model of a ﬁber-reinforced composite material showing direction in
which elastic modulus is being estimated by the rule of mixtures. (b) Stress–strain
relationships for the composite material and its constituents. The ﬁber is stiff but brittle,
while the matrix (commonly a polymer) is soft but ductile. The composite’s modulus is a
weighted average of its components’ moduli. But when the reinforcing ﬁbers fail, the
composite does likewise.
194
Chapter 9/Composite Materials

direction using the following:
E0
c ¼
EmEr
f mEr þ f rEm
ð9:6Þ
where Ec0 ¼ elastic modulus perpendicular to the fiber direction, MPa (lb/in2). Our two
equations for Ec demonstrate the significant anisotropy of fiber-reinforced composites.
This directional effect can be seen in Figure 9.6 for a fiber-reinforced polymer composite, in
which both elastic modulus and tensile strength are measured relative to fiber direction.
Fibers illustrate the importance of geometric shape. Most materials have tensile
strengths several times greater in a fibrous form than in bulk. However, applications of
fibers are limited by surface flaws, buckling when subjected to compression, and the
inconvenience of the filament geometry when a solid component is needed. By imbedding
the fibers in a polymer matrix, a composite material is obtained that avoids the problems of
fibers but utilizes their strengths. The matrix provides the bulk shape to protect the fiber
surfaces and resist buckling; and the fibers lend their high strength to the composite. When a
loadisapplied, thelow-strengthmatrixdeformsanddistributesthe stresstothehigh-strength
fibers, which then carry the load. If individual fibers break, the load is redistributed through
the matrix to other fibers.
9.1.4 OTHER COMPOSITE STRUCTURES
Our model of a composite material described above is one in which a reinforcing phase is
imbedded in a matrix phase, the combination having properties that are superior in certain
respectstoeitheroftheconstituentsalone. However,compositescantakealternativeforms
that do not fit this model, some of which are of considerable commercial and technological
importance.
Alaminarcompositestructureconsistsoftwoormorelayersbondedtogethertoform
an integral piece, as in Figure 9.7(a). The layers are usually thick enough that this composite
can be readily identified—not always the case with other composites. The layers are often of
different materials, but not necessarily. Plywood is such an example; the layers are of the
same wood, but the grains are oriented differently to increase overall strength of the
laminated piece. A laminar composite often uses different materials in its layers to gain the
advantage of combining the particular properties of each. In some cases, the layers
themselves may be composite materials. We have mentioned that wood is a composite
material; therefore, plywoodisa laminar composite structure inwhich the layers themselves
are composite materials. A list of examples of laminar composites is compiled in Table 9.3.
FIGURE 9.6
Variation
in elastic modulus and
tensile strength as a
function of direction of
measurement relative to
longitudinal axis of
carbon ﬁber-reinforced
epoxy composite.
(Source: [7]).
250
200
150
100
50
0
30
60
Fiber angle, degrees
90
0
30
60
Fiber angle, degrees
90
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Elastic modulus, GPa
Elastic modulus, lb/in.2    106
Ec
Ec
600
80
60
40
20
400
200
TS
Tensile strength, ksi
Tensile strength, MPa
Section 9.1/Technology and Classification of Composite Materials
195

The sandwich structure is sometimes distinguished as a special case of the laminar
composite structure. It consists of a relatively thick core of low-density material bonded on
both faces to thin sheets of a different material. The low-density core may be a foamed
material, as in Figure 9.7(b), or a honeycomb, as in (c). The reason for using a sandwich
structure is to obtain a material with high strength-to-weight and stiffness-to-weight ratios.
9.2
METAL MATRIX COMPOSITES
Metal matrix composites (MMCs) consist of a metal matrix reinforced by a second phase.
Common reinforcing phases include (1) particles of ceramic and (2) fibers of various
materials, including other metals, ceramics, carbon, and boron. MMCs of the first type are
commonly called cermets.
9.2.1 CERMETS
A cermet1 is a composite material in which a ceramic is contained in a metallic matrix.
The ceramic often dominates the mixture, sometimes ranging up to 96% by volume.
TABLE 9.3
Examples of laminar composite structures.
Laminar Composite
Description (reference in text if applicable)
Automotive tires
A tire consists of multiple layers bonded together; the layers are composite materials
(rubber reinforced with carbon black), and the plies consist of rubber-impregnated
fabrics (Chapter 14).
Honeycomb sandwich
A lightweight honeycomb structure is bonded on either face to thin sheets, as in
Figure 9.7(c).
Fiber-reinforced
polymers
Multilayered fiber-reinforced plastic panels are used for aircraft, automobile body
panels, and boat hulls (Chapter 15).
Plywood
Alternating sheets of wood are bonded together at different orientations for improved
strength.
Printed circuit boards
Layers of copper and reinforced plastic are used for electrical conductivity and
insulation, respectively (Section 36.2).
Snow skis
Skis are laminar composite structures consisting of multiple layers of metals, particle
board, and phenolic plastic.
Windshield glass
Two layers of glass on either side of a sheet of tough plastic (Section 12.3.1).
FIGURE 9.7
Laminar
composite structures:
(a) conventional laminar
structure; (b) sandwich
structure using a foam
core, and (c) honeycomb
sandwich structure.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Foam
material
Honey
comb
1The word ‘‘cermet’’ was first used in the English language around 1948.
196
Chapter 9/Composite Materials

Bonding can be enhanced by slight solubility between phases at the elevated tempera-
tures used in processing these composites. Cermets can be subdivided into (1) cemented
carbides and (2) oxide-based cermets.
Cemented Carbides
Cemented carbides are composed of one or more carbide com-
pounds bonded in a metallic matrix. The term cermet is not used for all of these materials,
even though it is technically correct. The common cemented carbides are based on tungsten
carbide (WC), titanium carbide (TiC), and chromium carbide (Cr3C2). Tantalum carbide
(TaC) and others are also used but less commonly. The principal metallic binders are cobalt
andnickel.We havepreviouslydiscussed thecarbide ceramics(Section7.3.2);they constitute
the principal ingredient in cemented carbides, typically ranging in content from 80% to 95%
of total weight.
Cemented carbide parts are produced by particulate processing techniques (Section
17.3). Cobalt is the binder used for WC (see Figure 9.8), and nickel is a common binder for
TiC and Cr3C2. Even though the binder constitutes only about 5% to 15%, its effect on
mechanicalproperties issignificantinthecompositematerial.UsingWC–Coasanexample,
as the percentage of Co is increased, hardness is decreased and transverse rupture strength
(TRS) is increased, as shown in Figure 9.9. TRS correlates with toughness of the WC–Co
composite.
Cutting tools are the most common application of cemented carbides based on
tungsten carbide. Other applications of WC–Co cemented carbides include wire drawing
dies, rock-drilling bits and other mining tools, dies for powder metallurgy, indenters for
hardness testers, and other applications where hardness and wear resistance are critical
requirements.
Titanium carbide cermets are used principally for high temperature applications.
Nickel is the preferred binder; its oxidation resistance at high temperatures is superior to
that of cobalt. Applications include gas-turbine nozzle vanes, valve seats, thermocouple
protection tubes, torch tips, and hot-working spinning tools [11]. TiC–Ni is also used as a
cutting tool material in machining operations.
FIGURE 9.8
Photomicrograph
(1500x) of cemented
carbide with 85% WC and
15% Co. (Photo courtesy
of Kennametal Inc.)
Section 9.2/Metal Matrix Composites
197

Compared with WC–Co cemented carbides, nickel-bonded chromium carbides are
more brittle, but have excellent chemical stability and corrosion resistance. This combina-
tion, together with good wear resistance, makes it suitable for applications such as gage
blocks, valve liners, spray nozzles, and bearing seal rings [11].
Oxide-based Cermets
Most of these composites utilize Al2O3 as the particulate phase;
MgO is another oxide sometimes used. A common metal matrix is chromium, although
other metals can also be used as binders. Relative proportions of the two phases vary
significantly, with the possibility for the metal binder to be the major ingredient. Appli-
cations include cutting tools, mechanical seals, and thermocouple shields.
9.2.2 FIBER-REINFORCED METAL MATRIX COMPOSITES
These MMCs are of interest because they combine the high tensile strength and modulus of
elasticity of a fiber with metals of low density, thus achieving good strength-to-weight and
modulus-to-weight ratios in the resulting composite material. Typical metals used as the
low-density matrix are aluminum, magnesium, and titanium. Some of the important fiber
materials used in the composite include Al2O3, boron, carbon, and SiC.
Properties of fiber-reinforced MMCs are anisotropic, as expected. Maximum tensile
strength inthepreferreddirectionisobtainedbyusing continuous fibersbondedstrongly to
the matrix metal. Elastic modulus and tensile strength of the composite material increase
with increasing fiber volume. MMCs with fiber reinforcement have good high-temperature
strength properties; and they are good electrical and thermal conductors. Applications
have largely been components in aircraft and turbine machinery, where these properties
can be exploited.
9.3
CERAMIC MATRIX COMPOSITES
Ceramics have certain attractive properties: high stiffness, hardness, hot hardness, and
compressive strength; and relatively low density. Ceramics also have several faults: low
toughness and bulk tensile strength, and susceptibility to thermal cracking. Ceramic matrix
composites (CMCs) represent an attempt to retain the desirable properties of ceramics
FIGURE 9.9
Typical
plot of hardness and
transverse rupture
strength as a function of
cobalt content.
Transverse rupture
strength
Transverse rupture strength, MPa
Hardness, HRA
Hardness
2800
2450
2100
1750
1400
1050
0
3
6
9
12
15
94
93
92
91
90
89
Cobalt content, %
198
Chapter 9/Composite Materials

while compensating for their weaknesses. CMCs consist of a ceramic primary phase
imbedded with a secondary phase. To date, most development work has focused on the
use of fibers as the secondary phase. Success has been elusive. Technical difficulties include
thermal and chemical compatibilityof the constituentsin CMCs during processing. Also, as
with any ceramic material, limitations on part geometry must be considered.
Ceramic materials used as matrices include alumina (Al2O3), boron carbide (B4C),
boron nitride (BN), silicon carbide (SiC), silicon nitride (Si3N4), titanium carbide (TiC),
and several types of glass [10]. Some of these materials are still in the development stage
as CMC matrices. Fiber materials in CMCs include carbon, SiC, and Al2O3.
ThereinforcingphaseincurrentCMCtechnologyconsistsofeithershortfibers,suchas
whiskers, or long fibers. Products with short fibers have been successfully fabricated using
particulate processing methods (Chapter 17), the fibers being treated as a form of powder in
these materials. Although there are performance advantages in using long fibers as re-
inforcement in ceramic matrix composites, development of economical processing tech-
niquesforthesematerialshasbeendifficult.OnepromisingcommercialapplicationofCMCs
isinmetal-cuttingtoolsasacompetitorofcementedcarbides,asillustratedinFigure9.10.The
compositetoolmaterialhaswhiskersofSiCinamatrixofAl2O3.Otherpotentialapplications
are in elevated temperatures and environments that are chemically corrosive to other
materials.
9.4
POLYMER MATRIX COMPOSITES
A polymer matrix composite (PMC) consists of a polymer primary phase in which a
secondary phase is imbedded in the form of fibers, particles, or flakes. Commercially,
PMCs are the most important of the three classes of synthetic composites. They include
most plastic molding compounds, rubber reinforced with carbon black, and fiber-
reinforced polymers (FRPs). Of the three, FRPs are most closely identified with the
term composite. If one mentions ‘‘composite material’’ to a design engineer, FRP is usually
the composite that comes to mind. Our video clip on composite materials and manufacturing
provides an overview of ﬁber-reinforced polymer composites.
VIDEO CLIP
View the segment titled Composite Materials and Manufacturing.
FIGURE 9.10
Highly
magniﬁed electron
microscopy photograph
(3000x) showing
fracture surface of SiC
whisker reinforced
ceramic (Al2O3) used as
cutting tool material.
(Courtesy of Greenleaf
Corporation,
Saegertown,
Pennsylvania.)
Section 9.4/Polymer Matrix Composites
199

9.4.1 FIBER-REINFORCED POLYMERS
Afiber-reinforcedpolymerisacompositematerialconsistingofapolymermatriximbedded
with high-strength fibers. The polymer matrix is usually a thermosetting plastic such as
unsaturated polyester or epoxy, but thermoplastic polymers, such as nylons (polyamides),
polycarbonate,polystyrene,andpolyvinylchloride,arealsoused.Inaddition,elastomersare
also reinforced by fibers for rubber products such as tires and conveyor belts.
Fibers in PMCs come in various forms: discontinuous (chopped), continuous, or woven
as a fabric. Principal fiber materials in FRPs are glass, carbon, and Kevlar 49. Less common
fibers include boron, SiC, and Al2O3, and steel. Glass (in particular E-glass) is the most
common fiber material in today’s FRPs; its use to reinforce plastics dates from around 1920.
The term advanced composites is sometimes used in connection with FRPs devel-
oped since the late 1960s that use boron, carbon, or Kevlar, as the reinforcing fibers [13].
Epoxy is the common matrix polymer. These composites generally have high fiber content
(>50% by volume) and possess high strength and modulus of elasticity. When two or more
fiber materials are combined in the FRP composite, it is called a hybrid composite.
Advantages cited for hybrids over conventional or advanced FRPs include balanced
strength and stiffness, improved toughness and impact resistance, and reduced weight
[11]. Advanced and hybrid composites are used in aerospace applications.
The most widely used form of the FRP itself is a laminar structure, made by stacking
and bonding thin layers of fiber and polymer until the desired thickness is obtained. By
varying the fiber orientation among the layers, a specified level of anisotropy in properties
can be achieved in the laminate. This method is used to form parts of thin cross section, such
as aircraft wing and fuselage sections, automobile and truck body panels, and boat hulls.
Properties
There are a number of attractive features that distinguish fiber-reinforced
plastics as engineering materials. Most notable are (1) high strength-to-weight ratio, (2) high
modulus-to-weight ratio, and (3) low specific gravity. A typical FRP weighs only about one-
fifthasmuchassteel;yetstrengthandmodulusarecomparableinthefiberdirection.Table9.4
comparesthesepropertiesforseveralFRPs,steels,andanaluminumalloy.Propertieslistedin
Table9.4dependontheproportionoffibersinthecomposite.Bothtensilestrengthandelastic
modulus increase as the fiber content is increased, by Eq. (9.5). Other properties and
characteristics of fiber-reinforced plastics include (4) good fatigue strength; (5) good corro-
sionresistance,althoughpolymersaresolubleinvariouschemicals;(6)lowthermalexpansion
for many FRPs, leading to good dimensional stability; and (7) significant anisotropy in
TABLE 9.4
Comparison of typical properties of ﬁber-reinforced plastics and representative metal alloys.
Specific
Gravity (SG)
Tensile
Strength (TS)
Elastic
Modulus (E)
Indexa
Material
MPa
lb/in2
GPa
lb/in2
TS/SG
E/SG
Low-C steel
7.87
345
50,000
207
30  106
1.0
1.0
Alloy steel (heat treated)
7.87
3450
500,000
207
30  106
10.0
1.0
Aluminum alloy (heat treated)
2.70
415
60,000
69
10  106
3.5
1.0
FRP: fiberglass in polyester
1.50
205
30,000
69
10  106
3.1
1.7
FRP: Carbon in epoxyb
1.55
1500
220,000
140
20  106
22.3
3.4
FRP: Carbon in epoxyc
1.65
1200
175,000
214
31  106
16.7
4.9
FRP: Kevlar in epoxy matrix
1.40
1380
200,000
76
11  106
22.5
2.1
aIndices are relative tensile strength-to-weight (TS/SG) and elastic modulus-to-weight (E/SG) ratios compared to low-C steel as the base
(index ¼ 1.0 for the base).
bHigh tensile-strength carbon fibers used in FRP.
cHigh modulus carbon fibers used in FRP.
Compiled from [3], [7], and other sources. Properties are measured in the fiber direction.
200
Chapter 9/Composite Materials

properties. With regard to this last feature, the mechanical properties of the FRPs given in
Table9.4areinthedirectionofthefiber.Aspreviouslynoted,theirvaluesaresignificantlyless
when measured in a different direction.
Applications
During the last three decades there has been a steady growth in the
application of fiber-reinforced polymers in products requiring high strength and low weight,
often as substitutions for metals. The aerospace industry is one of the biggest users of
advanced composites. Designers are continually striving to reduce aircraft weight to increase
fuel efficiency and payload capacity. Applications of advanced composites in both military
and commercial aircraft have increased steadily. Much of the structural weight of today’s
airplanesandhelicoptersconsistsofFRPs.ThenewBoeing787Dreamlinerfeatures50%(by
weight) composite (carbon fiber-reinforced plastic). That’s about 80% of the volume of the
aircaft. Composites are used for the fuselage, wings, tail, doors, and interior. By comparison,
Boeing’s 777 has only about 12% composites (by weight).
The automotive industry is another important user of FRPs. The most obvious
applications are FRP body panels for cars and truck cabs. A notable example is the
Chevrolet Corvette that has been produced with FRP bodies for decades. Less apparent
applications are in certain chassis and engine parts. Automotive applications differ from
those in aerospace in two significant respects. First, the requirement for high strength-to-
weight ratio is less demanding than for aircraft. Car and truck applications can use
conventional fiberglass reinforced plastics rather than advanced composites. Second,
production quantities are much higher in automotive applications, requiring more eco-
nomical methods of fabrication. Continued use of low-carbon sheet steel in automobiles in
the face of FRP’s advantages is evidence of the low cost and processability of steel.
FRPs have been widely adopted for sports and recreational equipment. Fiberglass
reinforcedplastichasbeenusedforboathullssincethe1940s.Fishingrodswereanotherearly
application. Today, FRPs are represented in a wide assortment of sports products, including
tennis rackets, golf club shafts, football helmets, bows and arrows, skis, and bicycle wheels.
9.4.2 OTHER POLYMER MATRIX COMPOSITES
In addition to FRPs, other PMCs contain particles, flakes, and short fibers. Ingredients of the
secondary phase are called fillers when used in polymer molding compounds (Section 8.1.5).
Fillers divide into two categories: (1) reinforcements and (2) extenders. Reinforcing fillers
serve to strengthen or otherwise improve mechanical properties of the polymer. Common
examples include: wood flour and powdered mica in phenolic and amino resins to increase
strength, abrasion resistance, and dimensional stability; and carbon black in rubber to
improve strength, wear, and tear resistance. Extenders simply increase the bulk and reduce
the cost-per-unit weight of the polymer, but have little or no effect on mechanical properties.
Extenders may be formulated to improve molding characteristics of the resin.
Foamed polymers (Section 13.11) are a form of composite in which gas bubbles are
imbedded in a polymer matrix. Styrofoam and polyurethane foam are the most common
examples. The combination of near-zero density of the gas and relatively low density of
the matrix makes these materials extremely light weight. The gas mixture also lends very
low thermal conductivity for applications in which heat insulation is required.
9.5
GUIDE TO PROCESSING COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Composite materials are formed into shapes by many different processing technologies.
The two phases are typically produced separately before being combined into the
Section 9.5/Guide to Processing Composite Materials
201

composite part geometry. The matrix phases are generally processed by the technologies
described in Chapters 6, 7, and 8 for metals, ceramics, and polymers.
Processing methods for the imbedded phase depend on geometry. Fiber production
is described in Section 12.2.3 for glass and Section 13.4 for polymers. Fiber production
methods for carbon, boron, and other materials are summarized in Table 15.1. Powder
production for metals is described in Section 16.2 and for ceramics in Section 17.1.1.
Processing techniques to fabricate MMC and CMC components, are similar to those used
for powdered metals and ceramics (Chapters 16 and 17). We deal with the processing of
cermets specifically in Section 17.3.
Molding processes are commonly performed on PMCs, both particle and chopped
fiber types. Molding processes for these composites are the same as those used for
polymers (Chapter 13). Other more specialized processes for polymer matrix composites,
fiber-reinforced polymers in particular, are described in Chapter 15. Many laminated
composite and honeycomb structures are assembled by adhesive bonding (Section 31.3).
REFERENCES
[1] Chawla, K. K. Composite Materials: Science and
Engineering, 3rd ed. Springer-Verlag, New York,
2008.
[2] Delmonte, J. Metal-Polymer Composites. Van Nos-
trand Reinhold, New York, 1990.
[3] Engineering Materials Handbook, Vol. 1, Com-
posites. ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio,
1987.
[4] Flinn, R. A., and Trojan, P. K. Engineering Materials
and Their Applications, 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1995.
[5] Greenleaf
Corporation.
WG-300—Whisker
Re-
inforced Ceramic/Ceramic Composites [marketing
literature]. Saegertown, Pennsylvania, YEAR??.
[6] Hunt, W. H., Jr., and Herling, S. R. ‘‘Aluminum
Metal-Matrix Composites,’’ Advanced Materials
& Processes, February 2004, pp. 39–42.
[7] Mallick, P. K. Fiber-Reinforced Composites: Mate-
rials, Manufacturing, and Designs, 3rd ed. CRC
Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2007.
[8] McCrum, N. G., Buckley, C. P., and Bucknall, C. B.
Principles of Polymer Engineering, 2nd ed. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK, 1997.
[9] Morton-Jones, D. H. Polymer Processing. Chapman
and Hall, London, 1989.
[10] Naslain, R., and Harris, B. (eds.). Ceramic Matrix
Composites. Elsevier Applied Science, London and
New York, 1990.
[11] Schwartz, M. M. Composite Materials Handbook,
2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York,
1992.
[12] Tadmor, Z., and Gogos, C. G. Principles of Polymer
Processing.
Wiley-Interscience,
Hoboken,
New
Jersey, 2006.
[13] Wick, C., and Veilleux R. F. (eds.). Tool and Man-
ufacturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed, Volume
III—, Materials, Finishing, and Coating, Chapter
8. Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn,
Michigan, 1985.
[14] Wikipedia. ‘‘Boeing 787.’’ Available at: wikipedia.
org/wiki/Boeing_787.
[15] Zweben, C., Hahn, H. T., and Chou, T-W. Delaware
Composites Design Encyclopedia, Vol. 1, Mechani-
cal Behavior and Properties of Composite Materi-
als. Technomic Publishing, Lancaster, Pennsylvania,
1989.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
9.1.
What is a composite material?
9.2.
Identify some of the characteristic properties of
composite materials.
9.3.
What does the term anisotropic mean?
9.4.
How are traditional composites distinguished from
synthetic composites?
9.5.
Name the three basic categories of composite
materials.
9.6.
What are the common forms of the reinforcing
phase in composite materials?
9.7.
What is a whisker?
9.8.
What are the two forms of sandwich structure
among laminar composite structures? Briefly de-
scribe each.
9.9.
Give some examples of commercial products which
are laminar composite structures.
202
Chapter 9/Composite Materials

Problems
203
9.10.
What are the three general factors that determine
the properties of a composite material?
9.11.
What is the rule of mixtures?
9.12.
What is a cermet?
9.13.
Cemented carbides are what class of composites?
9.14.
What are some of the weaknesses of ceramics that
might be corrected in fiber-reinforced ceramic
matrix composites?
9.15.
What is the most common fiber material in fiber-
reinforced plastics?
9.16.
What does the term advanced composites mean?
9.17.
What is a hybrid composite?
9.18.
Identify some of the important properties of fiber-
reinforced plastic composite materials.
9.19.
Name some of the important applications of FRPs.
9.20.
What is meant by the term interface in the context
of composite materials?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 19 correct answers in the following multiple-choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
9.1.
Anisotropic means which one of the following:
(a) composite materials with composition consisting
of more than two materials, (b) properties are the
same in every direction, (c) properties vary depend-
ing on the direction in which they are measured, or
(d) strength and other properties are a function of
curing temperature?
9.2.
The reinforcing phase is the matrix within which the
secondary phase is imbedded: (a) true or (b) false?
9.3.
Which one of the following reinforcing geometries
offers the greatest potential for strength and stiff-
ness
improvement
in
the
resulting
composite
material: (a) fibers, (b) flakes, (c) particles, or
(d) infiltrated phase?
9.4.
Wood is which one of the following composite
types: (a) CMC, (b) MMC, or (c) PMC?
9.5.
Which of the following materials are used as fibers
in fiber-reinforced plastics (four best answers):
(a) aluminum oxide, (b) boron, (c) cast iron,
(d) E-glass, (e) epoxy, (f) Kevlar 49, (g) polyester,
and (h) silicon?
9.6.
Which of the following metals are used as the matrix
material
in
fiber-reinforced
MMCs
(two
best
answers): (a) aluminum, (b) copper, (c) iron,
(d) magnesium, and (e) zinc?
9.7.
Which of the following metals are used as the matrix
metals in nearly all WC cemented carbides and
TiC cermets (two correct answers): (a) aluminum,
(b) chromium, (c) cobalt, (d) lead, (e) nickel,
(f) tungsten, and (g) tungsten carbide?
9.8.
Ceramic matrix composites are designed to over-
come which of the following weaknesses of ceramics
(two best answers): (a) compressive strength,
(b) hardness, (c) hot hardness, (d) modulus of
elasticity, (e) tensile strength, and (f) toughness?
9.9.
Which one of the following polymer types are
most commonly used in polymer matrix com-
posites:
(a) elastomers, (b) thermoplastics, or
(c) thermosets?
9.10.
Which of the following materials are not composites
(two
correct
answers):
(a)
cemented
carbide,
(b) phenolic molding compound, (c) plywood,
(d) Portland cement, (e) rubber in automobile tires,
(f) wood, and (g) 1020 steel?
9.11.
In the Boeing 787 Dreamliner, what percentage of
the aircraft consist of composite materials (two
correct answers): (a) 12% by volume, (b) 20% by
volume, (c) 50% by volume, (d) 80% by volume,
(e) 12% by weight, (f) 20% by weight, (g) 50% by
weight, and (h) 80% by weight?
PROBLEMS
9.1.
A fiberglass composite is composed of a matrix of
vinyl ester and reinforcing fibers of E-glass. The
volume fraction of E-glass is 35%. The remainder is
vinyl ester. The density of the vinyl ester is 0.882 g/
cm3, and its modulus of elasticity is 3.60 GPa. The
density of E-glass is 2.60 g/cm3, and its modulus
of elasticity is 76.0 GPa. A section of composite
1.00 cm  50.00 cm  200.00 cm is fabricated with
the E-glass fibers running longitudinal along the
200-cm direction. Assume there are no voids in the
composite. Determine the (a) mass of vinyl ester in
the section, (b) mass of E-glass fibers in the section,
and (c) the density of the composite.

9.2.
Forproblem9.1,determinethemodulusofelasticityin
(a) the longitudinal direction of the glass fibers and
(b) the perpendicular direction to the glass fibers.
9.3.
A composite sample of carbon reinforced epoxy has
dimensions of 12 in  12 in  0.25 in and mass of
1.8 lb. The carbon fibers have a modulus of elasticity
of 50(106) lb/in2 and a density of 0.069 lb/in3. The
epoxy matrix has modulus of elasticity of 0.61(106)
lb/in2 and a density of 0.042 lb/in3. What is the
volume fraction of (a) the carbon fibers and
(b) the epoxy matrix in the sample? Assume there
are no voids in the sample.
9.4.
In problem 9.3, what is the predicted value for the
modulus of elasticity (a) in the longitudinal direc-
tion and (b) the perpendicular to the carbon fibers?
9.5.
A composite has a matrix of polyester with Kevlar-
49 fibers. The volume fractions of polyester and
Kevlar are 60% and 40%, respectively. The Kevlar
fibers have a modulus of elasticity of 60 GPa in the
longitudinal direction and 3 GPa in the transverse
direction. The polyester matrix has a modulus of
elasticity of 5.6 GPa in both directions. (a) Deter-
mine the modulus of elasticity for the composite in
the longitudinal direction. (b) Determine the mod-
ulus of elasticity in the transverse direction.
204
Chapter 9/Composite Materials

Part III
Solidiﬁcation
Processes
10
FUNDAMENTALS
OF METAL CASTING
Chapter Contents
10.1
Overview of Casting Technology
10.1.1
Casting Processes
10.1.2
Sand-Casting Molds
10.2
Heating and Pouring
10.2.1
Heating the Metal
10.2.2
Pouring the Molten Metal
10.2.3
Engineering Analysis of Pouring
10.2.4
Fluidity
10.3
Solidification and Cooling
10.3.1
Solidification of Metals
10.3.2
Solidification Time
10.3.3
Shrinkage
10.3.4
Directional Solidification
10.3.5
Riser Design
In this part of the book, we consider those manufacturing
processes inwhich the starting work material iseither a liquid
orisina highlyplastic condition,andapartiscreatedthrough
solidification of the material. Casting and molding processes
dominate thiscategory of shaping operations. With reference
to Figure 10.1, the solidification processes can be classified
according to the engineering material that is processed: (1)
metals, (2) ceramics, specifically glasses,1 and (3) polymers
and polymer matrix composites (PMCs). Casting of metals
is covered in this and the following chapter. Glassworking is
covered in Chapter 12, and polymer and PMC processing is
treated in Chapters 13, 14, and 15.
Casting is a process in which molten metal flows by
gravity or other force into a mold where it solidifies in the
shape of the mold cavity. The term casting is also applied to
the part that is made by this process. It is one of the oldest
shaping processes, dating back 6000 years (Historical Note
10.1). The principle of casting seems simple: melt the metal,
pour it into a mold, and let it cool and solidify; yet there are
many factors and variables that must be considered in order
to accomplish a successful casting operation.
Casting includes both the casting of ingots and the
casting of shapes. The term ingot is usually associated with
the primarymetals industries; it describes a largecasting that
is simple in shape and intended for subsequent reshaping by
1Among the ceramics, only glass is processed by solidification; tradi-
tional and new ceramics are shaped using particulate processes
(Chapter 17).
205

Special processes
for PMCs
Other molding
processes
Processing of
polymers and PMCs
Glassworking
Casting of metals
Solidification
processes
Injection molding
Extrusion and
related processes
Permanent-mold
casting
Expendable-mold
casting
Sand casting
Other casting
processes
FIGURE 10.1
Classiﬁcation of solidiﬁcation processes.
Historical Note 10.1
Origins of casting
Casting of metals can be traced back to around 4000
BCE. Gold was the ﬁrst metal to be discovered and used
by the early civilizations; it was malleable and could be
readily hammered into shape at room temperature. There
seemed to be no need for other ways to shape gold. It
was the subsequent discovery of copper that gave rise to
the need for casting. Although copper could be forged to
shape, the process was more difﬁcult (due to strain
hardening) and limited to relatively simple forms.
Historians believe that hundreds of years elapsed before
the process of casting copper was ﬁrst performed,
probably by accident during the reduction of copper ore
in preparation for hammering the metal into some useful
form. Thus, through serendipity, the art of casting was
born. It is likely that the discovery occurred in
Mesopotamia, and the ‘‘technology’’ quickly spread
throughout the rest of the ancient world.
It was an innovation of signiﬁcant importance in
the history of mankind. Shapes much more intricate
could be formed by casting than by hammering. More
sophisticated tools and weapons could be fabricated.
More detailed implements and ornaments could be
fashioned. Fine gold jewelry could be made more
beautiful and valuable than by previous methods. Alloys
were ﬁrst used for casting when it was discovered that
mixtures of copper and tin (the alloy thus formed was
bronze) yielded much better castings than copper alone.
Casting permitted the creation of wealth to those nations
that could perform it best. Egypt ruled the Western
civilized world during the Bronze Age (nearly 2000
years) largely due to its ability to perform the casting
process.
Religion provided an important inﬂuence during the
Dark Ages (circa 400 to 1400) for perpetuating the
foundryman’s skills. Construction of cathedrals and
churches required the casting of bells that were used in
these structures. Indeed, the time and effort needed to
cast the large bronze bells of the period helped to move
the casting process from the realm of art toward the
regimen of technology. Advances in melting and mold-
making techniques were made. Pit molding, in which the
molds were formed in a deep pit located in front of the
furnace to simplify the pouring process, was improved as
a casting procedure. In addition, the bellfounder learned
the relationships between the tone of the bell, which was
the important measure of product quality, and its size,
shape, thickness, and metal composition.
Another important product associated with
the development of casting was the cannon.
Chronologically, it followed the bell, and therefore many
206
Chapter 10/Fundamentals of Metal Casting

processes such as rolling or forging. Ingot casting was discussed in Chapter 6. Shape casting
involves the production of more complex geometries that are much closer to the final
desired shape of the part or product. It is with the casting of shapes rather than ingots that
this chapter and the next are concerned.
A variety of shape casting methods are available, thus making it one of the most
versatile of all manufacturing processes. Among its capabilities and advantages are the
following:

Casting can be used to create complex part geometries, including both external and
internal shapes.

Some casting processes are capable of producing parts to net shape. No further
manufacturing operations are required to achieve the required geometry and dimen-
sions of theparts. Othercasting processes are near net shape, forwhichsome additional
shape processing is required (usually machining) in order to achieve accurate dimen-
sions and details.

Casting can be used to produce very large parts. Castings weighing more than 100
tons have been made.

The casting process can be performed on any metal that can be heated to the liquid state.

Some casting methods are quite suited to mass production.
There are also disadvantages associated with casting—different disadvantages for
different casting methods. These include limitations on mechanical properties, porosity,
poor dimensional accuracy and surface finish for some casting processes, safety hazards to
humans when processing hot molten metals, and environmental problems.
Parts made by casting processes range in size from small components weighing only
a few ounces up to very large products weighing tons. The list of parts includes dental
crowns, jewelry, statues, wood-burning stoves, engine blocks and heads for automotive
vehicles, machine frames, railway wheels, frying pans, pipes, and pump housings. All
varieties of metals can be cast, ferrous and nonferrous.
Casting can also be used on other materials such as polymers and ceramics; however,
the details are sufficiently different that we postpone discussion of the casting processes for
these materials until later chapters. This chapter and the next deal exclusively with metal
casting. Here we discuss the fundamentals that apply to virtually all casting operations. In
thefollowingchapter, theindividualcastingprocessesaredescribed, along with someofthe
product design issues that must be considered when making parts out of castings.
10.1
OVERVIEW OF CASTING TECHNOLOGY
As a production process, casting is usually carried out in a foundry. A foundry is a factory
equipped for making molds, melting and handling metal in molten form, performing the
casting process, and cleaning the finished casting. The workers who perform the casting
operations in these factories are called foundrymen.
of the casting techniques developed for bellfounding
were applied to cannon making. The ﬁrst cast cannon
was made in Ghent, Belgium, in the year 1313—by a
religious monk, of all people. It was made of bronze, and
the bore was formed by means of a core during casting.
Because of the rough bore surface created by the casting
process, these early guns were not accurate and had to
be ﬁred at relatively close range to be effective. It was
soon realized that accuracy and range could be
improved if the bore were made smooth by machining
the surface. Quite appropriately, this machining process
was called boring (Section 22.1.5).
Section 10.1/Overview of Casting Technology
207

10.1.1 CASTING PROCESSES
Discussion of casting logically begins with the mold. The mold contains a cavity whose
geometrydetermines the shape of the cast part. The actual size and shapeof thecavity must
beslightly oversized toallow forshrinkagethat occurs inthemetalduring solidification and
cooling. Different metals undergo different amounts of shrinkage, so the mold cavity must
be designed for the particular metal to be cast if dimensional accuracy is critical. Molds are
made of a variety of materials, including sand, plaster, ceramic, and metal. The various
casting processes are often classified according to these different types of molds.
To accomplish a casting operation, the metal is first heated to a temperature high
enough to completely transform it into a liquid state. It is then poured, or otherwise
directed, into the cavity of the mold. In an open mold, Figure 10.2(a), the liquid metal is
simply poured until it fills the open cavity. In a closed mold, Figure 10.2(b), a passageway,
called the gating system, is provided to permit the molten metal to flow from outside the
mold into the cavity. The closed mold is by far the more important category in production
casting operations.
As soon as the molten metal is in the mold, it begins to cool. When the temperature
drops sufficiently (e.g., to the freezing point for a pure metal), solidification begins. Solidifi-
cationinvolvesachangeofphaseofthemetal.Timeisrequiredtocompletethephasechange,
and considerable heat is given up in the process. It is during this step in the process that the
metal assumes the solid shape of the mold cavity and many of the properties and character-
istics of the casting are established.
Oncethecastinghascooledsufficiently,itisremovedfromthemold.Dependingonthe
casting method and metal used, further processing may be required. This may include
trimming the excess metal from the actual cast part, cleaning the surface, inspecting the
product, and heat treatment to enhance properties. In addition, machining (Chapter 22) may
berequiredtoachieveclosertolerancesoncertainpartfeaturesandtoremovethecastsurface.
Casting processes divide into two broad categories, according to type of mold used:
expendable-mold casting and permanent-mold casting. An expendable mold means that
the mold in which the molten metal solidifies must be destroyed in order to remove the
casting. These molds are made out of sand, plaster, or similar materials, whose form is
maintained by using binders of various kinds. Sand casting is the most prominent example
of the expendable-mold processes. In sand casting, the liquid metal is poured into a mold
FIGURE 10.2
Two forms of mold: (a) open mold, simply a container in the shape of the desired part; and
(b) closed mold, in which the mold geometry is more complex and requires a gating system (passageway)
leading into the cavity.
208
Chapter 10/Fundamentals of Metal Casting

made of sand. After the metal hardens, the mold must be sacrificed in order to recover the
casting.
A permanent mold is one that can be used over and over to produce many castings. It
is made of metal (or, less commonly, a ceramic refractory material) that can withstand the
high temperatures of the casting operation. In permanent-mold casting, the mold consists
of two (or more) sections that can be opened to permit removal of the finished part. Die
casting is the most familiar process in this group.
More intricate casting geometries are generally possible with the expendable-mold
processes. Part shapes in the permanent-mold processes are limited by the need to open the
mold. On the other hand, some of the permanent mold processes have certain economic
advantages in high production operations. We discuss the expendable-mold and perma-
nent-mold casting processes in Chapter 11.
10.1.2 SAND-CASTING MOLDS
Sand casting is by far the most important casting process. A sand-casting mold will be used
to describe the basic features of a mold. Many of these features and terms are common to
the molds used in other casting processes. Figure 10.2(b) shows the cross-sectional view of a
typical sand-casting mold, indicating some of the terminology. The mold consists of two
halves:copeanddrag.Thecopeistheupperhalfofthemold,andthedragisthebottomhalf.
These two mold parts are contained in a box, called a flask, which is also divided into two
halves, one for the cope and the other for the drag. The two halves of the mold separate at
the parting line.
In sand casting (and other expendable-mold processes) the mold cavity is formed by
means of a pattern, which is made of wood, metal, plastic, or other material and has the
shape of the part to be cast. The cavity is formed by packing sand around the pattern, about
half each in the cope and drag, so that when the pattern is removed, the remaining void has
the desired shape of the cast part. The pattern is usually made oversized to allow for
shrinkageofthemetalasitsolidifiesandcools. Thesandfor the moldismoist andcontains a
binder to maintain its shape.
The cavity in the mold provides the external surfaces of the cast part. In addition, a
casting may have internal surfaces. These surfaces are determined by means of a core, a
form placed inside the mold cavity to define the interior geometry of the part. In sand
casting, cores are generally made of sand, although other materials can be used, such as
metals, plaster, and ceramics.
The gating system in a casting mold is the channel, or network of channels, by which
molten metal flows into the cavity from outside the mold. As shown in the figure, the gating
system typically consists of a downsprue (also called simply the sprue), through which the
metal enters a runner that leads into the main cavity. At thetopof thedownsprue, a pouring
cup is often used to minimize splash and turbulence as the metal flows into the downsprue.
It is shown in our diagram as a simple cone-shaped funnel. Some pouring cups are designed
in the shape of a bowl, with an open channel leading to the downsprue.
In addition to the gating system, any casting in which shrinkage is significant requires
a riser connected to the main cavity. The riser is a reservoir in the mold that serves as a
source of liquid metal forthe casting to compensate for shrinkage during solidification. The
riser must be designed to freeze after the main casting in order to satisfy its function.
Asthemetal flows into themold, theair that previously occupiedthecavity, as well as
hot gases formed by reactions of the molten metal, must be evacuated so that the metal will
completely fill the empty space. In sand casting, for example, the natural porosity of the
sand mold permits the air and gases to escape through the walls of the cavity. In permanent-
metal molds, small vent holes are drilled into the mold or machined into the parting line to
permit removal of air and gases.
Section 10.1/Overview of Casting Technology
209

10.2
HEATING AND POURING
To perform a casting operation, the metal must be heated to a temperature somewhat
above its melting point and then poured into the mold cavity to solidify. In this section, we
consider several aspects of these two steps in casting.
10.2.1 HEATING THE METAL
Heating furnaces of various kinds (Section 11.4.1) are used to heat the metal to a molten
temperature sufficient for casting. The heat energy required is the sum of (1) the heat to
raise the temperature to the melting point, (2) the heat of fusion to convert it from solid to
liquid, and (3) the heat to raise the molten metal to the desired temperature for pouring.
This can be expressed:
H ¼ rV Cs Tm  To
ð
Þ þ Hf þ Cl Tp  Tm




ð10:1Þ
where H ¼ total heat required to raise the temperature of the metal to the pouring
temperature,
J
(Btu);
r ¼ density; g=cm3 lbm/in3


; Cs ¼ weight
specific
heat
for
the solid metal, J/g-C (Btu/lbm-F); Tm ¼ melting temperature of the metal, C (F);
To ¼ starting temperature—usually ambient, C (F); Hf ¼ heat of fusion, J/g (Btu/lbm);
Cl¼ weightspecificheatoftheliquidmetal,J/g-C(Btu/lbm-F);Tp¼ pouringtemperature, C
(F); and V ¼ volume of metal being heated, cm3 (in3).
Example 10.1
Heating Metal for
Casting
One cubic meter of a certain eutectic alloy is heated in a crucible from room temperature to
100C above its melting point for casting. The alloy’s density ¼ 7.5 g/cm3, melting point ¼
800C, specificheat ¼ 0.33 J/gC in the solidstateand 0.29 J/gC in theliquid state; and heat
of fusion ¼ 160 J/g. How much heat energy must be added to accomplish the heating,
assuming no losses?
Solution:
We assume ambient temperature in the foundry ¼ 25C and that the density of
the liquid and solid states of the metal are the same. Noting that one m3 ¼ 106 cm3, and
substituting the property values into Eq. (10.1), we have
H ¼ 7:5
ð
Þ 106


0:33 800  25
ð
Þ þ 160 þ 0:29 100
ð
Þ
f
g ¼ 3335 106


J
n
The above equation is of conceptual value, but its computational value is limited,
notwithstanding our example calculation. Use of Eq. (10.1) is complicated by the following
factors: (1) Specific heat and other thermal properties of a solid metal vary with temperature,
especially if the metalundergoes a change of phase during heating. (2) A metal’s specific heat
may be different in the solid and liquid states. (3) Most casting metals are alloys, and most
alloys melt over a temperature range between a solidus and liquidus rather than at a single
melting point; thus, the heat of fusion cannot be applied so simply as indicated above. (4) The
propertyvaluesrequiredintheequationforaparticularalloyarenotreadilyavailableinmost
cases. (5) There are significant heat losses to the environment during heating.
10.2.2 POURING THE MOLTEN METAL
After heating, the metal is ready for pouring. Introduction of molten metal into the mold,
including its flow through the gating system and into the cavity, is a critical step in the casting
process. For this step to be successful, the metal must flow into all regions of the mold before
solidifying. Factors affecting the pouring operation include pouring temperature, pouring
rate, and turbulence.
210
Chapter 10/Fundamentals of Metal Casting
Pouring Temperature 
pouring rate 
turbulence

The pouring temperature is the temperature of the molten metal as it is introduced
into the mold. What is important here is the difference between the temperature at
pouring and the temperature at which freezing begins (the melting point for a pure metal
or the liquidus temperature for an alloy). This temperature difference is sometimes
referred to as the superheat. This term is also used for the amount of heat that must be
removed from the molten metal between pouring and when solidification commences [7].
Pouringratereferstothevolumetricrateatwhichthemoltenmetalispouredintothe
mold. If the rate is too slow, the metal will chill and freeze before filling the cavity. If the
pouring rate is excessive, turbulence can become a serious problem. Turbulence in fluid
flow is characterized by erratic variations in the magnitude and direction of the velocity
throughout thefluid. Theflowisagitatedandirregularratherthansmooth andstreamlined,
as in laminar flow. Turbulent flow should be avoided during pouring for several reasons. It
tends to accelerate the formation of metal oxides that can become entrapped during
solidification, thus degrading the quality of the casting. Turbulence also aggravates mold
erosion, the gradual wearing away of the mold surfaces due to impact of the flowing molten
metal. The densities of most molten metals are much higher than water and other fluids we
normally deal with. These molten metals are also much more chemically reactive than at
room temperature. Consequently, the wear caused by the flow of these metals inthemold is
significant, especially under turbulent conditions. Erosion is especially serious when it
occurs in the main cavity because the geometry of the cast part is affected.
10.2.3 ENGINEERING ANALYSIS OF POURING
There are several relationships that govern the flow of liquid metal through the gating
system and into the mold. An important relationship is Bernoulli’s theorem, which states
that the sum of the energies (head, pressure, kinetic, and friction) at any two points in a
flowing liquid are equal. This can be written in the following form:
h1 þ p1
r þ v2
1
2g þ F1 ¼ h2 þ p2
r þ v2
2
2g þ F2
ð10:2Þ
where h¼ head, cm (in), p¼ pressure on the liquid, N=cm2 lb/in2


; r ¼ density;
g/cm3 (lbm/in3); v ¼ flow velocity; cm/s in/sec
ð
Þ; g ¼ gravitational acceleration constant,
981 cm/s/s (32.2  12 ¼ 386 in/sec/sec); and F ¼ head losses due to friction, cm (in). Subscripts
1 and 2 indicate any two locations in the liquid flow.
Bernoulli’s equation can be simplified in several ways. If we ignore friction losses
(to be sure, friction will affect the liquid flow through a sand mold), and assume that the
system remains at atmospheric pressure throughout, then the equation can be reduced to
h1 þ v2
1
2g ¼ h2 þ v2
2
2g
ð10:3Þ
Thiscanbeusedtodeterminethevelocityofthemoltenmetalatthebaseofthesprue.
Let us define point 1 at the top of the sprue and point 2 at its base. If point 2 is used as the
reference plane, then the head at that point is zero (h2 ¼ 0) and h1 is the height (length) of
the sprue. When the metal is poured into the pouring cup and overflows down the sprue, its
initial velocity at the top is zero (v1 ¼ 0). Hence, Eq. (10.3) further simplifies to
h1 ¼ v2
2
2g
which can be solved for the flow velocity:
v ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2gh
p
ð10:4Þ
Section 10.2/Heating and Pouring
211

where v ¼ the velocity of the liquid metal at the base of the sprue, cm/s(in/sec); g ¼ 981 cm/s/s
(386 in/sec/sec); and h ¼ the height of the sprue, cm (in).
Another relationship of importance during pouring is the continuity law, which
states that the volume rate of flow remains constant throughout the liquid. The volume
flow rate is equal to the velocity multiplied by the cross-sectional area of the flowing
liquid. The continuity law can be expressed:
Q ¼ v1 A1 ¼ v2A2
ð10:5Þ
where Q ¼ volumetric flow rate, cm3/s (in3/sec); v ¼ velocity as before; A ¼ cross-
sectional area of the liquid, cm2 (in2); and the subscripts refer to any two points in the
flow system. Thus, an increase in area results in a decrease in velocity, and vice versa.
Equations (10.4) and (10.5) indicate that the sprue should be tapered. As the metal
acceleratesduring its descent intothesprueopening, thecross-sectional area of the channel
mustbereduced;otherwise,asthevelocityoftheflowingmetalincreasestowardthebaseof
thesprue, air can beaspiratedintotheliquidandconducted intothe moldcavity. Toprevent
this condition, thesprue isdesigned with a taper, sothat thevolume flow rate vA isthesame
at the top and bottom of the sprue.
Assuming that the runner from the sprue base to the mold cavity is horizontal (and
therefore the head h is the same as at the sprue base), then the volume rate of flow
through the gate and into the mold cavity remains equal to vA at the base. Accordingly,
we can estimate the time required to fill a mold cavity of volume V as
TMF ¼ V
Q
ð10:6Þ
where TMF ¼ mold filling time, s (sec); V ¼ volume of mold cavity, cm3 (in3); and Q ¼ volume
flow rate, as before. The mold filling time computed by Eq. (10.6) must be considered a
minimum time. This is because the analysis ignores friction losses and possible constriction
of flow in the gating system; thus, the mold filling time will be longer than what is given by
Eq. (10.6).
Example 10.2
Pouring
Calculations
A mold sprue is 20 cm long, and the cross-sectional area at its base is 2.5 cm2. The sprue
feeds a horizontal runner leading into a mold cavity whose volume is 1560 cm3.
Determine: (a) velocity of the molten metal at the base of the sprue, (b) volume rate
of flow, and (c) time to fill the mold.
Solution:
(a)ThevelocityoftheflowingmetalatthebaseofthesprueisgivenbyEq.(10.4):
v ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2(981)(20)
p
¼ 198:1 cm=s
(b) The volumetric flow rate is
Q ¼ 2:5 cm2


198:1 cm=s
ð
Þ ¼ 495 cm2=s
(c) Time required to fill a mold cavity of 100 in3 at this flow rate is
TMF ¼ 1560=495 ¼ 3:2s
n
10.2.4 FLUIDITY
The molten metal flow characteristics are often described by the term fluidity, a measure
of the capability of a metal to flow into and fill the mold before freezing. Fluidity is the
inverse of viscosity (Section 3.4); as viscosity increases, fluidity decreases. Standard
212
Chapter 10/Fundamentals of Metal Casting

testing methods are available to assess fluidity, including the spiral mold test shown in
Figure 10.3, in which fluidity is indicated by the length of the solidified metal in the spiral
channel. A longer cast spiral means greater fluidity of the molten metal.
Factors affecting fluidity include pouring temperature relative to melting point,
metal composition, viscosity of the liquid metal, and heat transfer to the surroundings. A
higher pouring temperature relative to the freezing point of the metal increases the time
it remains in the liquid state, allowing it to flow further before freezing. This tends to
aggravate certain casting problems such as oxide formation, gas porosity, and penetration
of liquid metal into the interstitial spaces between the grains of sand forming the mold.
This last problem causes the surface of the casting to contain imbedded sand particles,
thus making it rougher and more abrasive than normal.
Composition also affects fluidity, particularly with respect to the metal’s solidifi-
cation mechanism. The best fluidity is obtained by metals that freeze at a constant
temperature (e.g., pure metals and eutectic alloys). When solidification occurs over a
temperature range (most alloys are in this category), the partially solidified portion
interferes with the flow of the liquid portion, thereby reducing fluidity. In addition to the
freezing mechanism, metal composition also determines heat of fusion—the amount of
heat required to solidify the metal from the liquid state. A higher heat of fusion tends to
increase the measured fluidity in casting.
10.3
SOLIDIFICATION AND COOLING
After pouring into the mold, the molten metal cools and solidifies. In this section we
examine the physical mechanism of solidification that occurs during casting. Issues
associated with solidification include the time for a metal to freeze, shrinkage, directional
solidification, and riser design.
10.3.1 SOLIDIFICATION OF METALS
Solidification involves the transformation of the molten metal back into the solid state.
The solidification process differs depending on whether the metal is a pure element or an
alloy.
Pure Metals
A pure metal solidifies at a constant temperature equal to its freezing point,
which is the same as its melting point. The melting points of pure metals are well known and
documented (Table 4.1). The process occurs over time as shown in the plot of Figure 10.4,
called a cooling curve. The actual freezing takes time, called the local solidification time in
casting, during whichthemetal’s latent heat of fusion isreleased into thesurroundingmold.
Thetotalsolidificationtimeisthetimetakenbetweenpouringandcompletesolidification.
FIGURE 10.3
Spiral
mold test for ﬂuidity, in
which ﬂuidity is
measured as the length
of the spiral channel that
is ﬁlled by the molten
metal prior to
solidiﬁcation.
Section 10.3/Solidification and Cooling
213

After the casting has completely solidified, cooling continues at a rate indicated by the
downward slope of the cooling curve.
Because of the chilling action of the mold wall, a thin skin of solid metal is initially
formed at the interface immediately after pouring. Thickness of the skin increases to form
a shell around the molten metal as solidification progresses inward toward the center of
the cavity. The rate at which freezing proceeds depends on heat transfer into the mold, as
well as the thermal properties of the metal.
It is of interest to examine the metallic grain formation and growth during this
solidification process. The metal which forms the initial skin has been rapidly cooled by the
extraction of heat through the mold wall. This cooling action causes the grains in the skin to
be fine and randomly oriented. As cooling continues, further grain formation and growth
occur in a direction away from the heat transfer. Since the heat transfer is through the skin
and mold wall, the grains grow inwardly as needles or spines of solid metal. As these spines
enlarge, lateral branches form, and as these branches grow, further branches form at right
angles to the first branches. This type of grain growth is referred to as dendritic growth, and
it occurs not only in the freezing of pure metals but alloys as well. These treelike structures
are gradually filled-in during freezing, as additional metal is continually deposited onto the
dendritesuntilcompletesolidificationhasoccurred.Thegrainsresultingfromthisdendritic
growth take on a preferred orientation, tending to be coarse, columnar grains aligned
toward the center of the casting. The resulting grain formation is illustrated in Figure 10.5.
Most Alloys
Most alloys freeze over a temperature range rather than at a single tempera-
ture. The exact range depends on the alloy system and the particular composition.
FIGURE 10.4
Cooling
curve for a pure metal
during casting.
FIGURE 10.5
Characteristic grain structure in a casting of a
pure metal, showing randomly oriented grains of small size
near the mold wall, and large columnar grains oriented toward
the center of the casting.
214
Chapter 10/Fundamentals of Metal Casting

Solidification of an alloy can be explained with reference to Figure 10.6, which shows the
phase diagram for a particular alloy system (Section 6.1.2) and the cooling curve for a given
composition. As temperature drops, freezing begins at the temperature indicated by the
liquidusandiscompletedwhenthesolidusisreached.Thestartoffreezingissimilartothatof
thepuremetal.Athinskinisformedatthemoldwallduetothelargetemperaturegradientat
this surface. Freezing then progresses as before through the formation of dendrites that grow
away from the walls. However, owing to the temperature spread between the liquidus and
solidus, the nature of the dendritic growth is such that an advancing zone is formed in which
both liquid and solid metal coexist. The solid portions are the dendrite structures that have
formed sufficiently to trap small islands of liquid metal in the matrix. This solid–liquid region
has a soft consistency that has motivated its name as the mushy zone. Depending on the
conditionsoffreezing,themushyzonecanberelativelynarrow,oritcanexistthroughoutmost
of the casting. The latter condition is promoted by factors such as slow heat transfer out of
thehotmetalandawidedifferencebetweenliquidusandsolidustemperatures.Gradually,the
liquid islands in the dendrite matrix solidify as the temperature of the casting drops to the
solidus for the given alloy composition.
Another factor complicating solidification of alloys is that the composition of the
dendrites as they start to form favors the metal with the higher melting point. As freezing
continues and the dendrites grow, there develops an imbalance in composition between the
metal that has solidified and the remaining molten metal. This composition imbalance is
finally manifested in the completed casting in the form of segregation of the elements. The
segregation is of two types, microscopic and macroscopic. At the microscopic level, the
chemical composition varies throughout each individual grain. This is due to the fact that
thebeginningspineofeachdendritehasahigherproportionofoneoftheelementsinthealloy.
Asthe dendritegrowsinits local vicinity, itmust expandusing theremainingliquidmetal that
hasbeenpartiallydepletedofthefirstcomponent.Finally,thelastmetaltofreezeineachgrain
is that which has been trapped by the branches of the dendrite, and its composition is even
further out of balance. Thus, we have a variation in chemical composition within single grains
of the casting.
At the macroscopic level, the chemical composition varies throughout the entire
casting.Sincetheregionsofthecastingthatfreezefirst(attheoutsidenearthemoldwalls)are
richer in one component than the other, the remaining molten alloy is deprived of that
component by the time freezing occurs at the interior. Thus, there is a general segregation
FIGURE 10.6
(a) Phase
diagram for a copper–
nickel alloy system and
(b) associated cooling
curve for a 50%Ni–50%Cu
composition during
casting.
Section 10.3/Solidification and Cooling
215

through the cross-section of the casting, sometimes called ingot segregation, as illustrated in
Figure 10.7.
Eutectic Alloys
Eutectic alloys constitute an exception to the general process by which
alloys solidify. A eutectic alloy is a particular composition in an alloy system for which the
solidus and liquidus are at the same temperature. Hence, solidification occurs at a constant
temperature rather than over a temperature range, as described above. The effect can be
seeninthe phase diagramofthe lead–tin systemshown inFigure6.3. Pure leadhasa melting
point of327C (621F), while pure tin meltsat 232C (450F). Althoughmost lead–tin alloys
exhibit the typical solidus–liquidus temperature range, the particular composition of 61.9%
tin and 38.1% lead has a melting (freezing) point of 183C (362F). This composition is the
eutectic composition of the lead–tin alloy system, and 183C is its eutectic temperature.
Lead–tinalloys are not commonly used in casting, but Pb–Sn compositions near the eutectic
are used for electrical soldering, where the low melting point is an advantage. Examples of
eutectic alloys encountered in casting include aluminum–silicon (11.6% Si) and cast iron
(4.3% C).
10.3.2 SOLIDIFICATION TIME
Whether the casting is pure metal or alloy, solidification takes time. The total solidifica-
tion time is the time required for the casting to solidify after pouring. This time is
dependent on the size and shape of the casting by an empirical relationship known as
Chvorinov’s rule, which states:
TTS ¼ Cm
V
A
 n
ð10:7Þ
where TTS ¼ total solidification time, min; V ¼ volume of the casting, cm3 (in3); A ¼ surface
area of the casting, cm2 (in2); n is an exponent usually taken to have a value ¼ 2; and Cm is
the mold constant. Given that n ¼ 2, the units of Cm are min/cm2 (min/in2), and its value
depends on the particular conditions of thecasting operation,including moldmaterial (e.g.,
specific heat, thermal conductivity), thermal properties of the cast metal (e.g., heat of
fusion, specific heat, thermal conductivity), and pouring temperature relative to the
melting point of the metal. The value of Cm for a given casting operation can be based
on experimental data from previous operations carried out using the same mold material,
metal, and pouring temperature, even though the shape of the part may be quite different.
Chvorinov’s rule indicates that a casting with a higher volume-to-surface area ratio
will cool and solidify more slowly than one with a lower ratio. This principle is put to good
use in designing the riser in a mold. To perform its function of feeding molten metal to the
main cavity, the metal in theriser must remain in the liquid phase longer than the casting. In
other words, the TTS for the riser must exceed the TTS for the main casting. Since the mold
conditions for both riser and casting are the same, their mold constants will be equal. By
FIGURE 10.7
Characteristic grain structure in an alloy
casting, showing segregation of alloying components in the
center of casting.
216
Chapter 10/Fundamentals of Metal Casting

designing the riser to have a larger volume-to-area ratio, we can be fairly sure that the main
casting solidifies first and that the effects of shrinkage are minimized. Before considering
how the riser might be designed using Chvorinov’s rule, let us consider the topic of
shrinkage, which is the reason why risers are needed.
10.3.3 SHRINKAGE
Our discussion of solidification has neglected the impact of shrinkage that occurs during
cooling and freezing. Shrinkage occurs in three steps: (1) liquid contraction during cooling
prior to solidification; (2) contraction during the phase change from liquid to solid, called
solidification shrinkage; and (3) thermal contraction of the solidified casting during
cooling to room temperature. The three steps can be explained with reference to a
cylindrical casting made in an open mold, as shown in Figure 10.8. The molten metal
immediately after pouring is shown in part (0) of the series. Contraction of the liquid metal
during cooling from pouring temperature to freezing temperature causes the height of the
liquid to be reduced from its starting level as in (1) of the figure. The amount of this liquid
contraction is usually around 0.5%. Solidification shrinkage, seen in part (2), has two
effects. First, contraction causes a further reduction in the height of the casting. Second,
the amount of liquid metal available to feed the top center portion of the casting becomes
restricted. This is usually the last region to freeze, and the absence of metal creates a void
in the casting at this location. This shrinkage cavity is called a pipe by foundrymen. Once
FIGURE 10.8
Shrinkage
of a cylindrical casting
during solidiﬁcation and
cooling:
(0) starting level of
molten metal
immediately after
pouring; (1) reduction in
level caused by liquid
contraction during
cooling; (2) reduction in
height and formation of
shrinkage cavity caused
by solidiﬁcation
shrinkage; and (3) further
reduction in height and
diameter due to thermal
contraction during
cooling of the solid metal.
For clarity, dimensional
reductions are
exaggerated in our
sketches.
Section 10.3/Solidification and Cooling
217

solidified, the casting experiences further contraction in height and diameter while
cooling, as in (3). This shrinkage is determined by the solid metal’s coefficient of thermal
expansion, which in this case is applied in reverse to determine contraction.
Solidification shrinkage occurs in nearly all metals because the solid phase has a
higher density than the liquid phase. The phase transformation that accompanies solidifi-
cation causes a reduction in the volume per unit weight of metal. The exception is cast iron
containing high carbon content, whose solidification during the final stages of freezing is
complicated by a period of graphitization, which results in expansion that tends to
counteract the volumetric decrease associated with the phase change [7]. Compensation
for solidification shrinkage is achieved in several ways depending on the casting operation.
In sand casting, liquid metal is supplied to the cavity by means of risers (Section 10.3.5). In
die casting (Section 11.3.3), the molten metal is applied under pressure.
Pattern-makers account for thermal contraction by making the mold cavities
oversized. The amount by which the mold must be made larger relative to the final casting
size is called the pattern shrinkage allowance. Although the shrinkage is volumetric, the
dimensions of the casting are expressed linearly, so the allowances must be applied
accordingly. Special ‘‘shrink rules’’ with slightly elongated scales are used to make the patterns
and molds larger than the desired casting by the appropriate amount. Table 10.1 lists typical values
oflinear shrinkage for variouscast metals; thesevaluescan beused todetermine shrink rule scales.
10.3.4 DIRECTIONAL SOLIDIFICATION
In order to minimize the damaging effects of shrinkage, it is desirable for the regions of the
castingmostdistantfromtheliquidmetalsupplytofreezefirstandforsolidificationtoprogress
from these remote regions toward the riser(s). In this way, molten metal will continually be
available from the risers to prevent shrinkage voids during freezing. The term directional
solidificationisusedtodescribethisaspectofthefreezingprocessandthemethodsbywhichit
iscontrolled.ThedesireddirectionalsolidificationisachievedbyobservingChvorinov’srulein
thedesignofthecastingitself,itsorientationwithinthemold,andthedesignoftherisersystem
that feeds it. For example, by locating sections of the casting with lower V/A ratios away from
theriser,freezingwilloccurfirstintheseregionsandthesupplyofliquidmetalfortherestofthe
casting will remain open until these bulkier sections solidify.
Another way to encourage directional solidification is to use chills—internal or
external heat sinks that cause rapid freezing in certain regions of the casting. Internal chills
are small metal parts placed inside the cavity before pouring so that the molten metal will
solidify first around these parts. The internal chill should have a chemical composition
similar to themetal being poured,mostreadily achieved by making thechill out of the same
metal as the casting itself.
External chills are metal inserts in the walls of the mold cavity that can remove
heat from the molten metal more rapidly than the surrounding sand in order to promote
solidification. They are often used effectively in sections of the casting that are difficult to
TABLE 10.1
Typical linear shrinkage values for different casting metals due to solid thermal contraction.
Metal
Linear
shrinkage
Metal
Linear
shrinkage
Metal
Linear
shrinkage
Aluminum alloys
1.3%
Magnesium
2.1%
Steel, chrome
2.1%
Brass, yellow
1.3%–1.6%
Magnesium alloy
1.6%
Tin
2.1%
Cast iron, gray
0.8%–1.3%
Nickel
2.1%
Zinc
2.6%
Cast iron, white
2.1%
Steel, carbon
1.6%–2.1%
Compiled from [10].
218
Chapter 10/Fundamentals of Metal Casting

feed with liquid metal, thus encouraging rapid freezing in these sections while the
connection to liquid metal is still open. Figure 10.9 illustrates a possible application of
external chills and the likely result in the casting if the chill were not used.
As important as it is to initiate freezing in the appropriate regions of the cavity, it is also
important to avoid premature solidification in sections of the mold nearest the riser. Of
particular concern is the passageway between the riser and the main cavity. This connection
must be designed in such a way that it does not freeze before the casting, which would isolate
the casting from the molten metal in the riser. Although it is generally desirable to minimize
the volume in the connection (to reduce wasted metal), the cross-sectional area must be
sufficient to delay the onset of freezing. This goal is usually aided by making the passageway
short in length, so that it absorbs heat from the molten metal in the riser and the casting.
10.3.5 RISER DESIGN
As described earlier, a riser, Figure 10.2(b), is used in a sand-casting mold to feed liquid
metal to the casting during freezing in order to compensate for solidification shrinkage.
To function, the riser must remain molten until after the casting solidifies. Chvorinov’s
rule can be used to compute the size of a riser that will satisfy this requirement. The
following example illustrates the calculation.
Example 10.3
Riser Design
Using
Chvorinov’s Rule
A cylindrical riser must be designed for a sand-casting mold. The casting itself is a steel
rectangular plate with dimensions 7:5 cm  12:5 cm  2:0 cm. Previous observations have
indicated that the total solidification time (TTS) for this casting ¼ 1.6 min. The cylinder for
theriser will havea diameter-to-heightratio¼ 1.0.Determine thedimensions oftheriserso
that its TTS ¼ 2.0 min.
Solution:
First determine the V/A ratio for the plate. Its volume V ¼ 7:5  12:5  2:0 ¼
187:5 cm3, and its surface area A ¼ 2 7:5  12:5 þ 7:5  2:0 þ 12:5  2:0
ð
Þ ¼ 267:5 cm2.
Given that TTS ¼ 1.6 min, we can determine the mold constant Cm from Eq. (10.7),
using a value of n ¼ 2 in the equation.
Cm ¼
TTS
(V=A)2 ¼
1:6
(187:5=267:5)2 ¼ 3:26 min=cm2
Next we must design the riser so that its total solidification time is 2.0 min, using the same
value of mold constant. The volume of the riser is given by
V ¼ p D2h
4
FIGURE 10.9
(a) External chill to
encourage rapid freezing
of the molten metal in a
thin section of the
casting; and (b) the likely
result if the external chill
were not used.
Section 10.3/Solidification and Cooling
219

and the surface area is given by
A ¼ p Dh þ 2p D2
4
Since we are using a D/H ratio ¼ 1.0, then D ¼ H. Substituting D for H in the volume and
area formulas, we get
V ¼ pD3=4
and
A ¼ p D2 þ 2p D2=4 ¼ 1:5p D2
Thus the V=A ratio ¼ D=6. Using this ratio in Chvorinov’s equation, we have
TTS ¼ 2:0 ¼ 3:26 D
6

2
¼ 0:09056 D2
D2 ¼ 2:0=0:09056 ¼ 22:086 cm2
D ¼ 4:7 cm
Since H ¼ D; then H ¼ 4:7 cm also.
The riser represents waste metal that will be separated from the cast part and remelted
to make subsequent castings. It is desirable for the volume of metal in the riser to be a
minimum. Since the geometry of the riser is normally selected to maximize the V/A ratio, this
tends to reduce the riser volume as much as possible. Note that the volume of the riser in our
example problem is V ¼ p 4:7
ð
Þ3=4 ¼ 81:5 cm3, only 44% of the volume of the plate
(casting), even though its total solidification time is 25% longer.
Risers can be designed in different forms. The design shown in Figure 10.2(b) is a
side riser. It is attached to the side of the casting by means of a small channel. A top riser
is one that is connected to the top surface of the casting. Risers can be open or blind. An
open riser is exposed to the outside at the top surface of the cope. This has the
disadvantage of allowing more heat to escape, promoting faster solidification. A blind
riser is entirely enclosed within the mold, as in Figure 10.1(b).
n
REFERENCES
[1] Amstead, B. H., Ostwald, P. F., and Begeman, M. L.
Manufacturing Processes. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York, 1987.
[2] Beeley, P. R. Foundry Technology. Butterworths-
Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2001.
[3] Black, J, and Kohser, R. DeGarmo’s Materials and
Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
[4] Datsko, J. Material Properties and Manufacturing
Processes. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1966.
[5] Edwards, L., and Endean, M. Manufacturing with
Materials. Open University, Milton Keynes, and
Butterworth Scientific Ltd., London, 1990.
[6] Flinn,R.A.FundamentalsofMetalCasting.American
Foundrymen’s Society, Inc., Des Plaines, Illinois, 1987.
[7] Heine, R. W., Loper, Jr., C. R., and Rosenthal, C.
Principles of Metal Casting, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill
Book Co., New York, 1967.
[8] Kotzin, E. L. (ed.). Metalcasting and Molding
Processes. American Foundrymen’s Society, Inc.,
Des Plaines, Illinois, 1981.
[9] Lessiter, M. J., and K. Kirgin. ‘‘Trends in the
Casting Industry,’’ Advanced Materials & Pro-
cesses, January 2002, pp. 42–43.
[10] Metals Handbook, Vol. 15, Casting. ASM Interna-
tional, Materials Park, Ohio, 2008.
[11] Mikelonis,
P.
J.
(ed.).
Foundry
Technology.
American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio,
1982.
220
Chapter 10/Fundamentals of Metal Casting

[12] Niebel, B. W., Draper, A. B., Wysk, R. A. Modern
Manufacturing Process Engineering. McGraw-Hill
Book Co., New York, 1989.
[13] Simpson, B. L. History of the Metalcasting Industry.
American Foundrymen’s Society, Inc., Des Plaines,
Illinois, 1997.
[14] Taylor, H. F., Flemings, M. C., and Wulff, J. Foundry
Engineering,
2nd
ed.
American
Foundrymen’s
Society, Inc., Des Plaines, Illinois, 1987.
[15] Wick, C., Benedict, J. T., and Veilleux, R. F. Tool and
Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol.
II, Forming. Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
Dearborn, Michigan, 1984.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
10.1.
Identify some of the important advantages of
shape-casting processes.
10.2.
What are some of the limitations and disadvan-
tages of casting?
10.3.
What is a factory that performs casting operations
usually called?
10.4.
What is the difference between an open mold and
a closed mold?
10.5.
Name the two basic mold types that distinguish
casting processes.
10.6.
Which casting process is the most important
commercially?
10.7.
What is the difference between a pattern and a
core in sand molding?
10.8.
What is meant by the term superheat?
10.9.
Why should turbulent flow of molten metal into
the mold be avoided?
10.10.
What is the continuity law as it applies to the flow
of molten metal in casting?
10.11.
What are some of the factors that affect the fluidity
of a molten metal during pouring into a mold
cavity?
10.12.
What does heat of fusion mean in casting?
10.13.
How does solidification of alloys differ from
solidification of pure metals?
10.14.
What is a eutectic alloy?
10.15.
What is the relationship known as Chvorinov’s
rule in casting?
10.16.
Identify the three sources of contraction in a
metal casting after pouring.
10.17.
What is a chill in casting?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 15 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
10.1.
Sand casting is which of the following types:
(a) expendable mold or (b) permanent mold?
10.2.
The upper half of a sand-casting mold is called
which of the following: (a) cope or (b) drag?
10.3.
In casting, a flask is which one of the following:
(a) beverage bottle for foundrymen, (b) box
which holds the cope and drag, (c) container
for holding liquid metal, or (d) metal which
extrudes between the mold halves?
10.4.
In foundry work, a runner is which one of the
following: (a) channel in the mold leading from
the downsprue to the main mold cavity, (b) foun-
dryman who moves the molten metal to the mold,
or (c) vertical channel into which molten metal is
poured into the mold?
10.5.
Turbulence during pouring of the molten metal is
undesirable for which of the following reasons
(two best answers): (a) it causes discoloration of
the mold surfaces, (b) it dissolves the binder used
to hold together the sand mold, (c) it increases
erosion of the mold surfaces, (d) it increases the
formation of metallic oxides that can become
entrapped during solidification, (e) it increases
the mold filling time, and (f) it increases total
solidification time?
10.6.
Total solidification time is defined as which one of
the following: (a) time between pouring and
complete solidification, (b) time between pouring
and cooling to room temperature, (c) time be-
tween solidification and cooling to room temper-
ature, or (d) time to give up the heat of fusion?
10.7.
During solidification of an alloy when a mixture of
solid and liquid metals is present, the solid-liquid
mixtureisreferredtoaswhichoneofthefollowing:
(a) eutectic composition, (b) ingot segregation,
(c) liquidus, (d) mushy zone, or (e) solidus?
Multiple Choice Quiz
221

10.8.
Chvorinov’s rule states that total solidification
time is proportional to which one of the following
quantities: (a) (A/V)n, (b) Hf, (c) Tm, (d) V,
(e) V/A, or (f) (V/A)2; where A ¼ surface area
of casting, Hf ¼ heat of fusion, Tm ¼ melting
temperature, and V ¼ volume of casting?
10.9.
Ariserincastingisdescribedbywhichofthefollowing
(three correct answers): (a) an insert in the casting
thatinhibitsbuoyancyofthecore,(b)gatingsystem
in which the sprue feeds directly into the cavity,
(c)metalthatisnotpartofthecasting,(d)sourceof
molten metal to feed the casting and compensate
for shrinkage during solidification, and (e) waste
metal that is usually recycled?
10.10.
In a sand-casting mold, the V/A ratio of the riser
should be (a) equal to, (b) greater than, or
(c) smaller than the V/A ratio of the casting itself?
10.11.
Which of the following riser types are completely
enclosed within the sand mold and connected to
the main cavity by a channel to feed the molten
metal (two correct answers): (a) blind riser,
(b) open riser, (c) side riser, and (d) top riser?
PROBLEMS
Heating and Pouring
10.1.
A disk 40 cm in diameter and 5 cm thick is to be cast
of pure aluminum in an open-mold casting opera-
tion. The melting temperature of aluminum ¼
660C, and the pouring temperature will be 800C.
Assumethattheamountofaluminumheatedwillbe
5% more than what is needed to fill the mold cavity.
Compute the amount of heat that must be added to
the metal to heat it to the pouring temperature,
starting from a room temperature of 25C. The
heat of fusion of aluminum ¼ 389.3 J/g. Other
properties can be obtained from Tables 4.1 and 4.2
in the text. Assume the specific heat has the same
value for solid and molten aluminum.
10.2.
A sufficient amount of pure copper is to be
heated for casting a large plate in an open
mold. The plate has dimensions: length ¼ 20 in,
width ¼ 10 in, and thickness ¼ 3 in. Compute the
amount of heat that must be added to the metal to
heat it to a temperature of 2150F for pouring.
Assume that the amount of metal heated will be
10% more than what is needed to fill the mold
cavity. Properties of the metal are: density ¼ 0.324
lbm/in3, melting point ¼ 1981F, specific heat of
the metal ¼ 0.093 Btu/lbm-F in the solid state and
0.090 Btu/lbm-F in the liquid state, and heat of
fusion ¼ 80 Btu/lbm.
10.3.
The downsprue leading into the runner of a certain
mold has a length ¼ 175 mm. The cross-sectional
area at the base of the sprue is 400 mm2. The mold
cavity has a volume ¼ 0.001 m3. Determine (a) the
velocity of the molten metal flowing through the
base of the downsprue, (b) the volume rate of flow,
and (c) the time required to fill the mold cavity.
10.4.
A mold has a downsprue of length ¼ 6.0 in. The
cross-sectional area at the bottom of the sprue is
0.5 in2. The sprue leads into a horizontal runner
which feeds the mold cavity, whose volume ¼
75 in3. Determine (a) the velocity of the molten
metal flowing through the base of the downsprue,
(b) the volume rate of flow, and (c) the time
required to fill the mold cavity.
10.5.
The flow rate of liquid metal into the downsprue of
a mold ¼ 1 L/s. The cross-sectional area at the top
of the sprue ¼ 800 mm2, and its length ¼ 175 mm.
What area should be used at the base of the sprue
to avoid aspiration of the molten metal?
10.6.
The volume rate of flow of molten metal into the
downsprue from the pouring cup is 50 in3/sec. At
the top where the pouring cup leads into the down-
sprue,the cross-sectionalarea¼ 1.0 in2. Determine
what the area should be at the bottom of the sprue
if its length ¼ 8.0 in. It is desired to maintain a
constant flow rate, top and bottom, in order to
avoid aspiration of the liquid metal.
10.7.
Molten metal can be poured into the pouring cup
of a sand mold at a steady rate of 1000 cm3/s. The
molten metal overflows the pouring cup and flows
into the downsprue. The cross-section of the sprue
is round, with a diameter at the top ¼ 3.4 cm. If the
sprue is 25 cm long, determine the proper diameter
at its base so as to maintain the same volume flow
rate.
10.8.
During pouring into a sand mold, the molten
metal can be poured into the downsprue at a
constant flow rate during the time it takes to
fill the mold. At the end of pouring the sprue is
filled and there is negligible metal in the pouring
cup. The downsprue is 6.0 in long. Its cross-sectional
areaatthetop¼ 0.8in2andatthebase¼ 0.6in2.The
cross-sectional area of the runner leading from the
sprue also ¼ 0.6 in2, and it is 8.0 in long before
leading into the moldcavity, whose volume ¼ 65 in3.
The volume of the riser located along the runner
near the mold cavity ¼ 25 in3. It takes a total of 3.0
222
Chapter 10/Fundamentals of Metal Casting

sec to fill the entire mold (including cavity, riser,
runner, and sprue. This is more than the theoretical
time required, indicating a loss of velocity due to
friction in the sprue and runner. Find (a) the theo-
retical velocity and flow rate at the base of the
downsprue; (b) the total volume of the mold; (c)
the actual velocity and flow rate at the base of the
sprue; and (d) the loss of head in the gating system
due to friction.
Shrinkage
10.9.
Determine the shrink rule to be used by pattern
makers for white cast iron. Using the shrinkage
value in Table 10.1, express your answer in
terms of decimal fraction inches of elongation
per foot of length compared to a standard
1-foot scale.
10.10.
Determine the shrink rule to be used by mold
makers for die casting of zinc. Using the shrink-
age value in Table 10.1, express your answer in
terms of decimal mm of elongation per 300 mm of
length compared to a standard 300-mm scale.
10.11.
A flat plate is to be cast in an open mold whose
bottomhasasquareshapethatis200mm200mm.
Themoldis40mmdeep.Atotalof1,000,000mm3of
molten aluminum is poured into the mold. Solidifi-
cation shrinkage is known to be 6.0%. Table 10.1
lists the linear shrinkage due to thermal contraction
after solidification to be 1.3%. If the availability of
molten metal in the mold allows the square shape of
the cast plate to maintain its 200 mm  200 mm
dimensions until solidification is completed, deter-
mine the final dimensions of the plate.
Solidiﬁcation Time and Riser Design
10.12.
Inthecastingofsteelundercertainmoldconditions,
the mold constant in Chvorinov’s rule is known to
be 4.0 min/cm2, based on previous experience. The
casting is a flat plate whose length ¼ 30 cm, width ¼
10 cm, and thickness ¼ 20 mm. Determine how long
it will take for the casting to solidify.
10.13.
Solve for total solidification time in the previous
problem only using an exponent value of 1.9 in
Chvorinov’s rule instead of 2.0. What adjustment
must be made in the units of the mold constant?
10.14.
A disk-shaped part is to be cast out of aluminum.
The diameter of the disk ¼ 500 mm and its thick-
ness ¼ 20 mm. If the mold constant ¼ 2.0 s/mm2 in
Chvorinov’s rule, how long will it take the casting
to solidify?
10.15.
In casting experiments performed using a certain
alloy and type of sand mold, it took 155 s for a
cube-shaped casting to solidify. The cube was
50 mm on a side. (a) Determine the value of the
mold constant in Chvorinov’s rule. (b) If the same
alloy and mold type were used, find the total
solidification time for a cylindrical casting in which
the diameter ¼ 30 mm and length ¼ 50 mm.
10.16.
A steel casting has a cylindrical geometry with 4.0
in diameter and weighs 20 lb. This casting takes
6.0 min to completely solidify. Another cylindrical-
shaped casting with the same diameter-to-length
ratio weighs 12 lb. This casting is made of the same
steel, and the same conditions of mold and pouring
were used. Determine: (a) the mold constant in
Chvorinov’s rule, (b) the dimensions, and (c) the
total solidification time of the lighter casting. The
density of steel ¼ 490 lb/ft3.
10.17.
The total solidification times of three casting
shapes are to be compared: (1) a sphere with
diameter ¼ 10 cm, (2) a cylinder with diameter
and length both ¼ 10 cm, and (3) a cube with each
side ¼ 10 cm. The same casting alloy is used in the
three cases. (a) Determine the relative solidifica-
tion times for each geometry. (b) Based on the
results of part (a), which geometric element
would make the best riser? (c) If the mold con-
stant ¼ 3.5 min/cm2 in Chvorinov’s rule, compute
the total solidification time for each casting.
10.18.
The total solidification times of three casting shapes
are to be compared: (1) a sphere, (2) a cylinder, in
which the length-to-diameter ratio ¼ 1.0, and (3) a
cube. For all three geometries, the volume ¼ 1000
cm3. The same casting alloy is used in the three
cases.
(a) Determine the relative solidification
times for each geometry. (b) Based on the results
of part (a), which geometric element would make
the best riser? (c) If the mold constant ¼ 3.5 min/
cm2 in Chvorinov’s rule, compute the total solidi-
fication time for each casting.
10.19.
A cylindrical riser is to be used for a sand-casting
mold. For a given cylinder volume, determine the
diameter-to-length ratio that will maximize the
time to solidify.
10.20.
A riser in the shape of a sphere is to be designed for
a sand casting mold. The casting is a rectangular
plate, with length ¼ 200 mm, width ¼ 100 mm, and
thickness ¼ 18 mm. If the total solidification time
of the casting itself is known to be 3.5 min, deter-
mine the diameter of the riser so that it will take
25% longer for the riser to solidify.
Problems
223

10.21.
A cylindrical riser is to be designed for a sand
casting mold. The length of the cylinder is to be
1.25 times its diameter. The casting is a square
plate, each side ¼ 10 in and thickness ¼ 0.75 in. If
the metal is cast iron, and the mold constant ¼
16.0 min/in2 in Chvorinov’s rule, determine the
dimensions of the riser so that it will take 30%
longer for the riser to solidify.
10.22.
A cylindrical riser with diameter-to-length ratio ¼
1.0 is to be designed for a sand casting mold. The
casting geometry is illustrated in Figure P10.22,
in which the units are inches. If the mold constant
in Chvorinov’s rule ¼ 19.5 min/in2, determine
the dimensions of the riser so that the riser will
take 0.5 min longer to freeze than the casting
itself.
FIGURE P10.22
Casting
geometry for Problem 10.22
(units are in inches).
224
Chapter 10/Fundamentals of Metal Casting

11
METAL CASTING
PROCESSES
Chapter Contents
11.1
Sand Casting
11.1.1
Patterns and Cores
11.1.2
Molds and Mold Making
11.1.3
The Casting Operation
11.2
Other Expendable-Mold Casting Processes
11.2.1
Shell Molding
11.2.2
Vacuum Molding
11.2.3
Expanded Polystyrene Process
11.2.4
Investment Casting
11.2.5
Plaster-Mold and Ceramic-Mold
Casting
11.3
Permanent-Mold Casting Processes
11.3.1
The Basic Permanent-Mold Process
11.3.2
Variations of Permanent-Mold
Casting
11.3.3
Die Casting
11.3.4
Squeeze Casting and Semisolid Metal
Casting
11.3.5
Centrifugal Casting
11.4
Foundry Practice
11.4.1
Furnaces
11.4.2
Pouring, Cleaning, and Heat
Treatment
11.5
Casting Quality
11.6
Metals for Casting
11.7
Product Design Considerations
Metal casting processes divide into two categories, based
on mold type: (1) expendable mold and (2) permanent
mold. In expendable mold casting operations, the mold is
sacrificed in order to remove the cast part. Since a new
mold is required for each new casting, production rates in
expendable-mold processes are often limited by the time
required to make the mold rather than the time to make the
casting itself. However, for certain part geometries, sand
molds can be produced and castings made at rates of 400
parts per hour and higher. In permanent-mold casting
processes, the mold is fabricated out of metal (or other
durable material) and can be used many times to make
many castings. Accordingly, these processes possess a nat-
ural advantage in terms of higher production rates.
Our discussion of casting processes in this chapter is
organized as follows: (1) sand casting, (2) other expend-
able-mold casting processes, and (3) permanent-mold cast-
ing processes. The chapter also includes casting equipment
and practices used in foundries. Another section deals with
inspection and quality issues. Product design guidelines are
presented in the final section.
11.1
SAND CASTING
Sand casting is the most widely used casting process,
accounting for a significant majority of the total tonnage
cast. Nearly all casting alloys can be sand cast; indeed, it is
one of the few processes that can be used for metals with
high melting temperatures, such as steels, nickels, and
titaniums. Its versatility permits the casting of parts ranging
in size from small to very large (Figure 11.1) and in
production quantities from one to millions.
Sand casting, also known as sand-mold casting,
consists of pouring molten metal into a sand mold, allow-
ing the metal to solidify, and then breaking up the mold to
remove the casting. The casting must then be cleaned and
225

inspected, and heat treatment is sometimes required to improve metallurgical proper-
ties. The cavity in the sand mold is formed by packing sand around a pattern (an
approximate duplicate of the part to be cast), and then removing the pattern by
separating the mold into two halves. The mold also contains the gating and riser system.
In addition, if the casting is to have internal surfaces (e.g., hollow parts or parts with
holes), a core must be included in the mold. Since the mold is sacrificed to remove the
FIGURE 11.1
A large sand casting weighing more than 680 kg (1500 lb) for an air compressor
frame. (Courtesy of Elkhart Foundry, photo by Paragon Inc., Elkhart, Indiana.)
FIGURE 11.2
Steps in the production sequence in sand casting. The steps include not only the casting operation
but also pattern making and mold making.
226
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

casting, a new sand mold must be made for each part that is produced. From this brief
description, sand casting is seen to include not only the casting operation itself, but also
the fabrication of the pattern and the making of the mold. The production sequence is
outlined in Figure 11.2 Our video clip on casting contains a segment on sand casting.
VIDEO CLIP
Casting: View the segment titled Sand-Mold Casting.
11.1.1 PATTERNS AND CORES
Sand casting requires a pattern—a full-sized model of the part, enlarged to account for
shrinkage and machining allowances in the final casting. Materials used to make patterns
include wood, plastics, and metals. Wood is a common pattern material because it is easily
shaped. Its disadvantages are that it tends to warp, and it is abraded by the sand being
compacted around it, thus limiting the number of times it can be reused. Metal patterns are
more expensive to make, but they last much longer. Plastics represent a compromise
between wood and metal. Selection of the appropriate pattern material depends to a large
extent on the total quantity of castings to be made.
There are various types of patterns, as illustrated in Figure 11.3. The simplest is
made of one piece, called a solid pattern—same geometry as the casting, adjusted in size
for shrinkage and machining. Although it is the easiest pattern to fabricate, it is not the
easiest to use in making the sand mold. Determining the location of the parting line
between the two halves of the mold for a solid pattern can be a problem, and
incorporating the gating system and sprue into the mold is left to the judgment and
skill of the foundry worker. Consequently, solid patterns are generally limited to very low
production quantities.
Split patterns consist of two pieces, dividing the part along a plane coinciding with
the parting line of the mold. Split patterns are appropriate for complex part geometries
and moderate production quantities. The parting line of the mold is predetermined by the
two pattern halves, rather than by operator judgment.
For higher production quantities, match-plate patterns or cope-and-drag patterns
are used. In match-plate patterns, the two pieces of the split pattern are attached to
opposite sides of a wood or metal plate. Holes in the plate allow the top and bottom (cope
FIGURE 11.3
Types of patterns used in sand casting: (a) solid pattern, (b) split pattern, (c) match-plate pattern, and
(d) cope-and-drag pattern.
Section 11.1/Sand Casting
227

and drag) sections of the mold to be aligned accurately. Cope-and-drag patterns are
similar to match-plate patterns except that split pattern halves are attached to separate
plates, so that the cope and drag sections of the mold can be fabricated independently,
instead of using the same tooling for both. Part (d) of the figure includes the gating and
riser system in the cope-and-drag patterns.
Patterns define the external shape of the cast part. If the casting is to have internal
surfaces, a core is required. A core is a full-scale model of the interior surfaces of the part. It
is inserted into the mold cavity prior to pouring, so that the molten metal will flow and
solidify between the mold cavity and the core to form the casting’s external and internal
surfaces. The core is usually made of sand, compacted into the desired shape. As with the
pattern, the actual size of the core must include allowances for shrinkage and machining.
Depending on the geometry of the part, the core may or may not require supports to hold it
in position in the mold cavity during pouring. These supports, called chaplets, are made of a
metal with a higher melting temperaturethan the casting metal. For example, steel chaplets
would be used for cast iron castings. On pouring and solidification, the chaplets become
bonded into the casting. A possible arrangement of a core in a mold using chaplets is
sketched in Figure 11.4. The portion of the chaplet protruding from the casting is
subsequently cut off.
11.1.2 MOLDS AND MOLD MAKING
Foundry sands are silica (SiO2) or silica mixedwith other minerals. The sand should possess
good refractory properties—capacity to stand up under high temperatures without melting
or otherwise degrading. Other important features of the sand include grain size, distribu-
tion of grain size in the mixture, and shape of the individual grains (Section 16.1). Small
grain size provides a better surface finish on the cast part, but large grain size is more
permeable (to allow escape of gases during pouring). Molds made from grains of irregular
shape tend to be stronger than molds of round grains because of interlocking, yet inter-
locking tends to restrict permeability.
In making the mold, the grains of sand are held together by a mixture of water and
bonding clay. A typical mixture (by volume) is 90% sand, 3% water, and 7% clay. Other
bonding agents can be used in place of clay, including organic resins (e.g., phenolic resins)
and inorganic binders (e.g., sodium silicate and phosphate). Besides sand and binder,
additives are sometimes combined with the mixture to enhance properties such as
strength and/or permeability of the mold.
FIGURE 11.4
(a) Core held in place in the mold cavity by chaplets, (b) possible chaplet design, and
(c) casting with internal cavity.
228
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

To form the mold cavity, the traditional method is to compact the molding sand
around the pattern for both cope and drag in a container called a flask. The packing
process is performed by various methods. The simplest is hand ramming, accomplished
manually by a foundry worker. In addition, various machines have been developed to
mechanize the packing procedure. These machines operate by any of several mecha-
nisms, including (1) squeezing the sand around the pattern by pneumatic pressure; (2) a
jolting action in which the sand, contained in the flask with the pattern, is dropped
repeatedly in order to pack it into place; and (3) a slinging action, in which the sand grains
are impacted against the pattern at high speed.
An alternative to traditional flasks for each sand mold is flaskless molding, which
refers to the use of one master flask in a mechanized system of mold production. Each sand
mold is produced using the same master flask. Mold production rates up to 600 perhour are
claimed for this more automated method [8].
Severalindicatorsareusedtodeterminethequalityofthesandmold[7]: (1)strength—
themold’sabilitytomaintainitsshapeandresisterosioncausedbytheflowofmoltenmetal;
it depends on grain shape, adhesive qualities of the binder, and other factors; (2) perme-
ability—capacity of the mold to allow hot air and gases from the casting operation to pass
through thevoids inthesand; (3) thermal stability—abilityof the sandatthe surfaceof the
mold cavity to resist cracking and buckling upon contact with the molten metal; (4)
collapsibility—ability of the mold to give way and allow the casting to shrink without
cracking the casting; it also refers to the ability to remove the sand from the casting during
cleaning; and (5) reusability—can the sand from the broken mold be reused to make other
molds? These measures are sometimes incompatible; for example, a mold with greater
strength is less collapsible.
Sand molds are often classified as green-sand, dry-sand, or skin-dried molds. Green-
sand molds are made of a mixture of sand, clay, and water, the word green referring to the fact
that the mold contains moisture at the time of pouring. Green-sand molds possess sufficient
strengthformostapplications,goodcollapsibility,goodpermeability,goodreusability,andare
the least expensive of the molds. They are the most widely used mold type, but they are not
without problems. Moisture in the sand can cause defects in some castings, depending on the
metal and geometry of the part. A dry-sand mold is made using organic binders rather than
clay, and the mold is baked in a large oven at temperatures ranging from 200C to 320C
(392Fto608F)[8].Ovenbakingstrengthensthemoldandhardensthecavitysurface.Adry-
sand mold provides better dimensional control in the cast product, compared to green-sand
molding. However, dry-sand molding is more expensive, and production rate is reduced
becauseofdryingtime.Applicationsaregenerallylimitedtomediumandlargecastingsinlow
to medium production rates. In a skin-dried mold, the advantages of a dry-sand mold is
partially achieved by drying the surface of a green-sand mold to a depth of 10 to 25 mm (0.4–1
in) at the mold cavity surface, using torches, heating lamps, or other means. Special bonding
materials must be added to the sand mixture to strengthen the cavity surface.
The preceding mold classifications refer to the use of conventional binders
consisting of either clay-and-water or ones that require heating to cure. In addition to
these classifications, chemically bonded molds have been developed that are not based on
either of these traditional binder ingredients. Some of the binder materials used in these
‘‘no-bake’’ systems include furan resins (consisting of furfural alcohol, urea, and
formaldehyde), phenolics, and alkyd oils. No-bake molds are growing in popularity
due to their good dimensional control in high production applications.
11.1.3 THE CASTING OPERATION
After the core is positioned (if one is used) and the two halves of the mold are clamped
together, then casting is performed. Casting consists of pouring, solidification, and cooling
Section 11.1/Sand Casting
229

of the cast part (Sections 10.2 and 10.3). The gating and riser system in the mold must be
designed to deliver liquid metal into the cavity and provide for a sufficient reservoir of
molten metal during solidification shrinkage. Air and gases must be allowed to escape.
One of the hazards during pouring is that the buoyancy of the molten metal will
displace the core. Buoyancy results from the weight of molten metal being displaced by the
core, according to Archimedes’ principle. The force tending to lift the core is equal to the
weight of the displaced liquid less the weight of the core itself. Expressing the situation in
equation form,
Fb ¼ Wm  Wc
ð11:1Þ
where Fb ¼ buoyancy force, N (lb); Wm ¼ weight of molten metal displaced, N (lb); and %
Wc ¼ weight of the core, N (lb). Weights are determined as the volume of the core
multiplied by the respective densities of the core material (typically sand) and the metal
being cast. The density of a sand core is approximately 1.6 g/cm3 (0.058 lb/in3). Densities of
several common casting alloys are given in Table 11.1.
Example 11.1
Buoyancy in Sand
Casting
A sand core has a volume ¼ 1875 cm3 and is located inside a sand mold cavity. Determine
the buoyancy force tending to lift the core during pouring of molten lead into the mold.
Solution:
Density of the sand core is 1.6 g/cm3. Weight of the core is 1875(1.6) ¼ 3000 g ¼
3.0kg.Densityoflead,basedonTable11.1,is11.3g/cm3.Theweightofleaddisplacedbythe
coreis1875(11.3)¼21,188g¼21.19kg.Thedifference¼21.193.0¼18.19kg.Giventhat1
kg ¼ 9.81 N, the buoyancy force is therefore Fb ¼ 9.81(18.19) ¼ 178.4 N.
Following solidification and cooling, the sand mold is broken away from the casting
to retrieve the part. The part is then cleaned—gating and riser system are separated, and
sand is removed. The casting is then inspected (Section 11.5).
n
11.2
OTHER EXPENDABLE-MOLD CASTING PROCESSES
As versatile as sand casting is, there areothercasting processes that havebeen developed to
meet special needs. The differences between these methods are in the composition of the
mold material, or the manner in which the mold is made, or in the way the pattern is made.
11.2.1 SHELL MOLDING
Shell molding is a casting process in which the mold is a thin shell (typically 9 mm or 3/8 in)
made of sand held together by a thermosetting resin binder. Developed in Germany during
the early 1940s, the process is described and illustrated in Figure 11.5.
TABLE 11.1
Densities of selected casting alloys.
Density
Density
Metal
g/cm3
lb/in3
Metal
g/cm3
lb/in3
Aluminum (99% ¼ pure)
2.70
0.098
Cast iron, graya
7.16
0.260
Aluminum-silicon alloy
2.65
0.096
Copper (99% ¼ pure)
8.73
0.317
Aluminum-copper (92% Al)
2.81
0.102
Lead (pure)
11.30
0.410
Brassa
8.62
0.313
Steel
7.82
0.284
Source: [7].
aDensity depends on composition of alloy; value given is typical.
230
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

There are many advantages to the shell-molding process. The surface of the shell-
mold cavity is smoother than a conventional green-sand mold, and this smoothness permits
easier flow of molten metal during pouring and better surface finish on the final casting.
Finishes of 2.5 mm (100 m-in) can be obtained. Good dimensional accuracy is also achieved,
with tolerances of 0.25 mm (0.010 in) possible on small-to-medium-sized parts. The
good finish and accuracy often precludes the need for further machining. Collapsibility of
the mold is generally sufficient to avoid tearing and cracking of the casting.
Disadvantages of shell molding include a more expensive metal pattern than the
corresponding pattern for green-sand molding. This makes shell molding difficult to
justify for small quantities of parts. Shell molding can be mechanized for mass production
and is very economical for large quantities. It seems particularly suited to steel castings of
less than 20 lb. Examples of parts made using shell molding include gears, valve bodies,
bushings, and camshafts.
11.2.2 VACUUM MOLDING
Vacuum molding, also called the V-process, was developed in Japan around 1970. It uses a
sandmoldheldtogether byvacuumpressureratherthanbyachemicalbinder. Accordingly,
the term vacuum in this process refers to the making of the mold rather than the casting
operation itself. The steps of the process are explained in Figure 11.6.
Because no binders are used, the sand is readily recovered in vacuum molding.
Also, the sand does not require extensive mechanical reconditioning normally done when
FIGURE 11.5
Steps in shell molding: (1) a match-plate or cope-and-drag metal pattern is heated and
placed over a box containing sand mixed with thermosetting resin; (2) box is inverted so that sand and
resin fall onto the hot pattern, causing a layer of the mixture to partially cure on the surface to form a
hard shell; (3) box is repositioned so that loose, uncured particles drop away; (4) sand shell is heated in
oven for several minutes to complete curing; (5) shell mold is stripped from the pattern; (6) two halves of
the shell mold are assembled, supported by sand or metal shot in a box, and pouring is accomplished.
The ﬁnished casting with sprue removed is shown in (7).
Section 11.2/Other Expendable-Mold Casting Processes
231

binders are used in the molding sand. Since no water is mixed with the sand, moisture-
related defects are absent from the product. Disadvantages of the V-process are that it is
relatively slow and not readily adaptable to mechanization.
11.2.3 EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE PROCESS
The expanded polystyrene casting process uses a mold of sand packed around a poly-
styrene foam pattern that vaporizes when the molten metal is poured into the mold. The
process and variations of it are known by other names, including lost-foam process, lost-
pattern process, evaporative-foam process, and full-mold process (the last being a trade
name). The foam pattern includes the sprue, risers, and gating system, and it may also
contain internal cores (if needed), thus eliminating the need for a separate core in
the mold. Also, since the foampattern itself becomes the cavity in the mold,considerations
of draft and parting lines can be ignored. The mold does not have to be opened into
cope and drag sections. The sequence in this casting process is illustrated and described in
Figure 11.7. Various methods for making the pattern can be used, depending on the
quantities of castings to be produced. For one-of-a-kind castings, the foam is manually cut
from large strips and assembled to form the pattern. For large production runs, an
FIGURE 11.6
Steps in vacuum molding: (1) a thin sheet of preheated plastic is drawn over a match-plate
or cope-and-drag pattern by vacuum—the pattern has small vent holes to facilitate vacuum forming; (2) a
specially designed ﬂask is placed over the pattern plate and ﬁlled with sand, and a sprue and pouring cup
are formed in the sand; (3) another thin plastic sheet is placed over the ﬂask, and a vacuum is drawn that
causes the sand grains to be held together, forming a rigid mold; (4) the vacuum on the mold pattern is
released to permit the pattern to be stripped from the mold; (5) this mold is assembled with its matching
half to form the cope and drag, and with vacuum maintained on both halves, pouring is accomplished. The
plastic sheet quickly burns away on contacting the molten metal. After solidiﬁcation, nearly all of the sand
can be recovered for reuse.
232
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

automated molding operation can be set up to mold the patterns prior to making the molds
for casting. The pattern is normally coated with a refractory compound to provide a
smoother surface on the pattern and to improve its high temperature resistance. Molding
sands usually include bonding agents. However, dry sand is used in certain processes in this
group, which aids recovery and reuse. The video clip on casting features a segment titled
Evaporative-Foam Casting.
VIDEO CLIP
Casting: View the segment titled Evaporative-Foam Casting.
A significant advantage for this process is that the pattern need not be removed
from the mold. This simplifies and expedites mold making. In a conventional green-sand
mold, two halves are required with proper parting lines, draft allowances must be
provided in the mold design, cores must be inserted, and the gating and riser system
must be added. With the expanded polystyrene process, these steps are built into the
pattern itself. A new pattern is needed for every casting, so the economics of
the expanded polystyrene casting process depend largely on the cost of producing the
patterns. The process has been applied to mass produce castings for automobiles engines.
Automated production systems are installed to mold the polystyrene foam patterns for
these applications.
11.2.4 INVESTMENT CASTING
In investment casting, a pattern made of wax is coated with a refractory material to
make the mold, after which the wax is melted away prior to pouring the molten metal.
The term investment comes from one of the less familiar definitions of the word invest,
which is ‘‘to cover completely,’’ this referring to the coating of the refractory material
around the wax pattern. It is a precision casting process, because it is capable of making
castings of high accuracy and intricate detail. The process dates back to ancient Egypt
(Historical Note 11.1) and is also known as the lost-wax process, because the wax
pattern is lost from the mold prior to casting.
FIGURE 11.7
Expanded polystyrene casting process: (1) pattern of polystyrene is coated with refractory
compound; (2) foam pattern is placed in mold box, and sand is compacted around the pattern; and (3) molten metal is
poured into the portion of the pattern that forms the pouring cup and sprue. As the metal enters the mold, the
polystyrene foam is vaporized ahead of the advancing liquid, thus allowing the resulting mold cavity to be ﬁlled.
Section 11.2/Other Expendable-Mold Casting Processes
233

Historical Note 11.1
Investment casting
The lost wax casting process was developed by the
ancient Egyptians some 3500 years ago. Although
written records do not identify when the invention
occurred or the artisan responsible, historians
speculate that the process resulted from the close
association between pottery and molding in early
times. It was the potter who crafted the molds that
were used for casting. The idea for the lost wax
process must have originated with a potter who was
familiar with the casting process. As he was working
one day on a ceramic piece—perhaps an ornate vase
or bowl—it occurred to him that the article might be
more attractive and durable if made of metal. So he
fashioned a core in the general shape of the piece, but
smaller than the desired ﬁnal dimensions, and coated
it with wax to establish the size. The wax proved to be
an easy material to form, and intricate designs and
shapes could be created by the craftsman. On the
wax surface, he carefully plastered several layers of
clay and devised a means of holding the resulting
components together. He then baked the mold in a
kiln, so that the clay hardened and the wax melted
and drained out to form a cavity. At last, he poured
molten bronze into the cavity and, after the casting
had solidiﬁed and cooled, broke away the mold to
recover the part. Considering the education and
experience of this early pottery maker and the tools he
had to work with, development of the lost wax casting
process demonstrated great innovation and insight.
‘‘No other process can be named by archeologists so
crowded with deduction, engineering ability and
ingenuity’’ [14].
FIGURE 11.8
Steps in investment casting: (1) wax patterns are produced; (2) several patterns are attached to a sprue
to form a pattern tree; (3) the pattern tree is coated with a thin layer of refractory material; (4) the full mold is formed by
covering the coated tree with sufﬁcient refractory material to make it rigid; (5) the mold is held in an inverted position
and heated to melt the wax and permit it to drip out of the cavity; (6) the mold is preheated to a high temperature, which
ensures that all contaminants are eliminated from the mold; it also permits the liquid metal to ﬂow more easily into the
detailed cavity; the molten metal is poured; it solidiﬁes; and (7) the mold is broken away from the ﬁnished casting. Parts
are separated from the sprue.
234
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

Steps in investment casting are described in Figure 11.8. Since the wax pattern is
melted off after the refractory mold is made, a separate pattern must be made for every
casting. Pattern production is usually accomplished by a molding operation—pouring or
injecting the hot wax into a master die that has been designed with proper allowances for
shrinkage of both wax and subsequent metal casting. In cases where the part geometry is
complicated, several separate wax pieces must be joined to make the pattern. In high-
production operations, several patterns are attached to a sprue, also made of wax, to form
a pattern tree; this is the geometry that will be cast out of metal. The video clip on casting
contains a segment on investment casting.
VIDEO CLIP
Casting: View the segment titled Investment Casting.
Coating with refractory (step 3) is usually accomplished by dipping the pattern
tree into a slurry of very fine grained silica or other refractory (almost in powder form)
mixed with plaster to bond the mold into shape. The small grain size of the refractory
material provides a smooth surface and captures the intricate details of the wax pattern.
The final mold (step 4) is accomplished by repeatedly dipping the tree into the refractory
slurry or by gently packing the refractory around the tree in a container. The mold is
allowed to air dry for about 8 hours to harden the binder.
Advantagesof investmentcastinginclude: (1) parts of great complexity and intricacy
can be cast; (2) close dimensional control—tolerances of 0.075 mm (0.003 in) are
possible; (3) good surface finish is possible; (4) the wax can usually be recovered for reuse;
and (5) additional machining is not normally required—this is a net shape process.
Because many steps are involved in this casting operation, it is a relatively expensive
process. Investment castings are normally small in size, although parts with complex
geometries weighing up to 75 lb have been successfully cast. All types of metals, including
steels, stainless steels, and other high temperature alloys, can be investment cast.
Examples of parts include complex machinery parts, blades, and other components for
turbine engines, jewelry, and dental fixtures. Shown in Figure 11.9 is a part illustrating the
intricate features possible with investment casting.
11.2.5 PLASTER-MOLD AND CERAMIC-MOLD CASTING
Plaster-mold casting is similar to sand casting except that the mold is made of plaster of
Paris (gypsum, CaSO4–2H2O) instead of sand. Additives such as talc and silica flour are
mixed with the plaster to control contraction and setting time, reduce cracking, and
increase strength. To make the mold, the plaster mixture combined with water is poured
over a plastic or metal pattern in a flask and allowed to set. Wood patterns are generally
unsatisfactory due to the extended contact with water in the plaster. The fluid consistency
permits the plaster mixture to readily flow around the pattern, capturing its details and
surface finish. Thus, the cast product in plaster molding is noted for these attributes.
Curing of the plaster mold is one of the disadvantages of this process, at least in high
production. The mold must set for about 20 minutes before the pattern is stripped. The
mold is then baked for several hours to remove moisture. Even with the baking, not all of
the moisture content is removed from the plaster. The dilemma faced by foundrymen is
that mold strength is lost when the plaster becomes too dehydrated, and yet moisture
content can cause casting defects in the product. A balance must be achieved between
these undesirable alternatives. Another disadvantage with the plaster mold is that it is not
permeable,thuslimitingescapeofgasesfromthemoldcavity.Thisproblemcanbesolvedin
Section 11.2/Other Expendable-Mold Casting Processes
235

a number of ways: (1) evacuating air from the mold cavity before pouring; (2) aerating the
plaster slurry prior to mold making so that the resulting hard plaster contains finely
dispersed voids; and (3) using a special mold composition and treatment known as the
Antioch process. This process involves using about 50% sand mixed with the plaster,
heating the mold in an autoclave (an oven that uses superheated steam under pressure),
and then drying. The resulting mold has considerably greater permeability than a
conventional plaster mold.
Plaster molds cannot withstand the same high temperatures as sand molds. They
are therefore limited to the casting of lower-melting-point alloys, such as aluminum,
magnesium, and some copper-base alloys. Applications include metal molds for plastic
and rubber molding, pump and turbine impellers, and other parts of relatively intricate
geometry. Casting sizes range from about 20 g (less than 1 oz) to more than 100 kg (more
than 220 lb). Parts weighing less than about 10 kg (22 lb) are most common. Advantages of
plastermoldingfortheseapplicationsare goodsurfacefinishanddimensionalaccuracy and
the capability to make thin cross-sections in the casting.
Ceramic-mold casting is similar to plaster-mold casting, except that the mold is
made of refractory ceramic materials that can withstand higher temperatures than
plaster. Thus, ceramic molding can be used to cast steels, cast irons, and other high-
temperature alloys. Its applications (relatively intricate parts) are similar to those of
plaster-mold casting except for the metals cast. Its advantages (good accuracy and finish)
are also similar.
FIGURE 11.9
A one-piece compressor stator with 108 separate airfoils made by investment
casting. (Courtesy of Howmet Corp.).
236
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

11.3
PERMANENT-MOLD CASTING PROCESSES
The economic disadvantage of any of the expendable-mold processes is that a new mold
is required for every casting. In permanent-mold casting, the mold is reused many times.
In this section, we treat permanent-mold casting as the basic process in the group of
casting processes that all use reusable metal molds. Other members of the group include
die casting and centrifugal casting.
11.3.1 THE BASIC PERMANENT-MOLD PROCESS
Permanent-mold casting uses a metal mold constructed of two sections that are designed
for easy, precise opening and closing. These molds are commonly made of steel or cast iron.
The cavity, with gating system included, is machined into the two halves to provide accurate
dimensions and good surface finish. Metals commonly cast in permanent molds include
aluminum, magnesium, copper-base alloys, and cast iron. However, cast iron requires a
high pouring temperature, 1250C to 1500C (2282F–2732F), which takes a heavy toll on
mold life. The very high pouring temperatures of steel make permanent molds unsuitable
for this metal, unless the mold is made of refractory material.
Cores can be used in permanent molds to form interior surfaces in the cast product.
The cores can be made of metal, but either their shape must allow for removal from the
casting or they must be mechanically collapsible to permit removal. If withdrawal of a
metal core would be difficult or impossible, sand cores can be used, in which case the
casting process is often referred to as semipermanent-mold casting.
Steps in the basic permanent-mold casting process are described in Figure 11.10. In
preparation for casting, the mold is first preheated and one or more coatings are sprayed
on the cavity. Preheating facilitates metal flow through the gating system and into the
cavity. The coatings aid heat dissipation and lubricate the mold surfaces for easier
separation of the cast product. After pouring, as soon as the metal solidifies, the mold is
opened and the casting is removed. Unlike expendable molds, permanent molds do not
collapse, so the mold must be opened before appreciable cooling contraction occurs in
order to prevent cracks from developing in the casting.
Advantages of permanent-mold casting include good surface finish and close
dimensional control, as previously indicated. In addition, more rapid solidification caused
by the metal mold results in a finer grain structure, so stronger castings are produced. The
process is generally limited to metals of lower melting points. Other limitations include
simple part geometries compared to sand casting (because of the need to open the mold),
and the expense of the mold. Because mold cost is substantial, the process is best suited to
high-volume production and can be automated accordingly. Typical parts include automo-
tive pistons, pump bodies, and certain castings for aircraft and missiles.
11.3.2 VARIATIONS OF PERMANENT-MOLD CASTING
Several casting processes are quite similar to the basic permanent-mold method. These
include slush casting, low-pressure casting, and vacuum permanent-mold casting.
Slush Casting
Slush casting is a permanent-mold process in which a hollow casting is
formed by inverting the mold after partial freezing at the surface to drain out the liquid
metal in the center. Solidification begins at the mold walls because they are relatively cool,
and it progresses over time toward the middle of the casting (Section 10.3.1). Thickness of
Section 11.3/Permanent-Mold Casting Processes
237

the shell is controlled by the length of time allowed before draining. Slush casting is used to
make statues, lamp pedestals, and toys out of low-melting-point metals such as zinc and tin.
In these items, the exterior appearance is important, but the strength and interior geometry
of the casting are minor considerations.
Low-Pressure Casting
In the basic permanent-mold casting process and in slush
casting, the flow of metal into the mold cavity is caused by gravity. In low-pressure
casting, the liquid metal is forced into the cavity under low pressure—approximately 0.1
MPa (14.5 lb/in2)—from beneath so that the flow is upward, as illustrated in Figure 11.11.
The advantage of this approach over traditional pouring is that clean molten metal from
the center of the ladle is introduced into the mold, rather than metal that has been
exposed to air. Gas porosity and oxidation defects are thereby minimized, and mechani-
cal properties are improved.
Vacuum Permanent-Mold Casting
Not to be confused with vacuum molding (Section
11.2.2), this process is a variation of low-pressure casting in which a vacuum is used to draw
themoltenmetalintothe moldcavity. Thegeneralconfiguration ofthevacuum permanent-
mold casting process is similar to the low-pressure casting operation. The difference is that
reduced air pressure from the vacuum in the mold is used to draw the liquid metal into the
FIGURE 11.10
Steps in permanent-mold casting: (1) mold is preheated and coated; (2) cores (if used) are inserted,
and mold is closed; (3) molten metal is poured into the mold; and (4) mold is opened. Finished part is shown in (5).
238
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

cavity, rather than forcing it by positive air pressure from below. There are several benefits
of the vacuum technique relative to low-pressure casting: air porosity and related defects
are reduced, and greater strength is given to the cast product.
11.3.3 DIE CASTING
Die casting is a permanent-mold casting process in which the molten metal is injected into
the mold cavity under high pressure. Typical pressures are 7 to 350 MPa (1015–50,763 lb/
in2). The pressure is maintained during solidification, after which the mold is opened and
the part is removed. Molds in this casting operation are called dies; hence the name die
casting. The use of high pressure to force the metal into the die cavity is the most notable
feature that distinguishes this process from others in the permanent-mold category. The
reader can see the various forms of this process in the video clip on die casting.
VIDEO CLIP
Die Casting. This clip contains two segments: (1) die casting machines and (2) die casting
tooling.
Die casting operations are carried out in special die casting machines (Historical
Note 11.2), which are designed to hold and accurately close the two halves of the mold, and
keep them closed while the liquid metal is forced into the cavity. The general configuration
isshown inFigure11.12.There aretwomaintypes ofdie castingmachines:(1) hot-chamber
and (2) cold-chamber, differentiated by how the molten metal is injected into the cavity.
Inhot-chambermachines, themetal ismelted ina containerattached tothemachine,
and a piston is used to inject the liquid metal under high pressure into the die. Typical
injection pressures are 7 to 35 MPa (1015–5076 lb/in2). The casting cycle is summarized in
Figure 11.13. Production rates up to 500 parts per hour are not uncommon. Hot-chamber
die casting imposes a special hardship on the injection system because much of it is
submerged in the molten metal. The process is therefore limited in its applications to low-
melting-point metals that do not chemically attack the plunger and other mechanical
components. The metals include zinc, tin, lead, and sometimes magnesium.
FIGURE 11.11
Low-pressure
casting. The diagram shows
how air pressure is used to
force the molten metal in the
ladle upward into the mold
cavity. Pressure is maintained
until the casting has solidiﬁed.
e
Section 11.3/Permanent-Mold Casting Processes
239

Historical Note 11.2
Die casting machines
The modern die casting machine has its origins in the
printing industry and the need in the mid to late 1800s
to satisfy an increasingly literate population with a
growing appetite for reading. The linotype, invented and
developed by O. Mergenthaler in the late 1800s, is a
machine that produces printing type. It is a casting
machine because it casts a line of type characters out of
lead to be used in preparing printing plates. The name
linotype derives from the fact that the machine produces
a line of type characters during each cycle of operation.
The machine was ﬁrst used successfully on a commercial
basis in New York City by The Tribune in 1886.
The linotype proved the feasibility of mechanized
casting machines. The ﬁrst die casting machine was
patented by H. Doehler in 1905 (this machine is
displayed in the Smithsonian Institute in Washington,
DC). In 1907, E. Wagner developed the ﬁrst die casting
machine to utilize the hot-chamber design. It was ﬁrst
used during World War I to cast parts for binoculars and
gas masks.
FIGURE 11.12
General
conﬁguration of a (cold-
chamber) die casting
machine.
FIGURE 11.13
Cycle in hot-
chamber casting: (1) with die
closed and plunger
withdrawn, molten metal
ﬂows into the chamber;
(2) plunger forces metal in
chamber to ﬂow into die,
maintaining pressure during
cooling and solidiﬁcation; and
(3) plunger is withdrawn, die
is opened, and solidiﬁed part
is ejected. Finished part is
shown in (4).
240
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

In cold-chamber die casting machines, molten metal is poured into an unheated
chamber from an external melting container, and a piston is used to inject the metal under
high pressure into the die cavity. Injection pressures used in these machines are typically 14
to 140 MPa (2031–20,305 lb/in2). The production cycle is explained in Figure 11.14.
Compared to hot-chamber machines, cycle rates are not usually as fast because of the
need to ladle the liquid metal into the chamber from an external source. Nevertheless, this
casting process is a high production operation. Cold-chamber machines are typically used
for casting aluminum, brass, and magnesium alloys. Low-melting-point alloys (zinc, tin,
lead) can also be cast on cold-chamber machines, but the advantages of the hot-chamber
process usually favor its use on these metals.
Molds used in die casting operations are usually made of tool steel, mold steel, or
maraging steel. Tungsten and molybdenum with good refractory qualities are also being
used, especially in attempts to die cast steel and cast iron. Dies can be single-cavity or
multiple-cavity. Single-cavity dies are shown in Figures 11.13 and 11.14. Ejector pins are
required to remove the part from the die when it opens, as in our diagrams. These pins
push the part away from the mold surface so that it can be removed. Lubricants must also
be sprayed into the cavities to prevent sticking.
Because the die materials have no natural porosity and the molten metal rapidly
flows into the die during injection, venting holes and passageways must be built into the
dies at the parting line to evacuate the air and gases in the cavity. The vents are quite
small; yet they fill with metal during injection. This metal must later be trimmed from the
part. Also, formation of flash is common in die casting, in which the liquid metal under
high pressure squeezes into the small space between the die halves at the parting line or
into the clearances around the cores and ejector pins. This flash must be trimmed from
the casting, along with the sprue and gating system.
Advantagesofdiecastinginclude(1)highproductionratespossible;(2)economicalfor
large production quantities; (3) close tolerances possible, on the order of 0.076 mm (0.003
FIGURE 11.14
Cycle in cold-chamber casting: (1) with die closed and ram withdrawn, molten
metal is poured into the chamber; (2) ram forces metal to ﬂow into die, maintaining pressure
during cooling and solidiﬁcation; and (3) ram is withdrawn, die is opened, and part is ejected.
(Gating system is simpliﬁed.)
Section 11.3/Permanent-Mold Casting Processes
241

in)forsmallparts;(4)goodsurfacefinish;(5)thinsectionsarepossible,downtoabout0.5mm
(0.020in);and(6)rapidcoolingprovidessmallgrainsizeandgoodstrengthtothecasting.The
limitation of this process, in addition to the metals cast, is the shape restriction. The part
geometry must allow for removal from the die cavity.
11.3.4 SQUEEZE CASTING AND SEMISOLID METAL CASTING
These are two processes that are often associated with die casting. Squeeze casting is a
combinationofcastingandforging(Section19.3)inwhichamoltenmetalispouredintoapre-
heated lower die, and the upper die is closed to create the mold cavity after solidification
begins.Thisdiffersfromtheusualpermanent-moldcastingprocessinwhichthediehalvesare
closedpriortopouringorinjection.Owingtothehybridnatureoftheprocess,itisalsoknown
as liquid–metal forging. The pressure applied by the upper die insqueeze casting causes the
metal to completely fill the cavity, resulting in good surface finish and low shrinkage. The
required pressures are significantly less than in forging of a solid metal billet and much finer
surfacedetailcanbeimpartedbythediethaninforging.Squeezecastingcanbeusedforboth
ferrous and non-ferrous alloys, but aluminum and magnesium alloys are the most common
due to their lower melting temperatures. Automotive parts are a common application.
Semi-solid metal casting is a family of net-shape and near net-shape processes
performed on metal alloys at temperatures between the liquidus and solidus (Section
10.3.1). Thus the alloy is a mixture of solid and molten metals during casting, like a slurry;
it is in the mushy state. In order to flow properly, the mixture must consist of solid metal
globules in a liquid rather than the more typical dendritic solid shapes that form during
freezing of a molten metal. This is achieved by forcefully stirring the slurry to prevent
dendrite formation and instead encourage the spherical shapes, which in turn reduces
the viscosity of the work metal. Advantages of semisolid metal casting include the
following [16]: (1) complex part geometries, (2) thin walls in parts, (3) close tolerances,
(4) zero or low porosity, resulting in high strength of the casting.
There are several forms of semisolid metal casting. When applied to aluminum, the
terms thixocasting and rheocasting are used. The prefix in thixocasting is derived from
the word thixotropy, which refers to the decrease in viscosity of some fluid-like materials
when agitated. The prefix in rheocasting comes from rheology, the science that relates
deformation and flow of materials. In thixocasting, the starting work material is a pre-
cast billet that has a nondendritic microstructure; this is heated into the semisolid
temperature range and injected into a mold cavity using die casting equipment. In
rheocasting, a semisolid slurry is injected into the mold cavity by a die casting machine,
very much like conventional die casting. The difference is that the starting metal in
rheocasting is at a temperature between the solidus and liquidus rather than above the
liquidus. And the mushy mixture is agitated to prevent dendrite formation.
When applied to magnesium, the term is thixomolding, which utilizes equipment
similar to an injection-molding machine (Section 13.6.3). Magnesium alloy granules are
fed into a barrel and propelled forward by a rotating screw as they are heated into the
semisolid temperature range. The required globular form of the solid phase is accom-
plished by the mixing action of the rotating screw. The slurry is then injected into the
mold cavity by a linear forward movement of the screw.
11.3.5 CENTRIFUGAL CASTING
Centrifugal casting refers to several casting methods in which the mold is rotated at high
speed so that centrifugal force distributes the molten metal to the outer regions of the die
cavity. The group includes (1) true centrifugal casting, (2) semicentrifugal casting, and
(3) centrifuge casting.
242
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

True Centrifugal Casting
In true centrifugal casting, molten metal is poured into a
rotating mold to produce a tubular part. Examples of parts made by this process include
pipes, tubes, bushings, and rings. One possible setup is illustrated in Figure 11.15. Molten
metal is poured into a horizontal rotating mold at one end. In some operations, mold
rotation commences after pouring has occurred rather than beforehand. The high-speed
rotationresultsincentrifugalforces thatcausethemetaltotaketheshapeof themoldcavity.
Thus, the outside shape of the casting can be round, octagonal, hexagonal, and so on.
However,theinsideshapeofthecastingis(theoretically)perfectlyround,duetotheradially
symmetric forces at work.
Orientation of the axis of mold rotation can be either horizontal or vertical, the
former being more common. Let us consider how fast the mold must rotate in horizontal
centrifugal casting for the process to work successfully. Centrifugal force is defined by
this physics equation:
F ¼ mv2
R
ð11:2Þ
where F ¼ force, N (lb); m ¼ mass, kg (lbm); v ¼ velocity, m/s (ft/sec); and R ¼ inside
radius of the mold, m (ft). The force of gravity is its weight W ¼ mg, where Wis given in kg
(lb), and g ¼ acceleration of gravity, 9.8 m/s2 (32.2 ft/sec2). The so-called G-factor GF is
the ratio of centrifugal force divided by weight:
GF ¼ mv2
R ¼ mv2
Rmg ¼ v2
Rg
ð11:3Þ
Velocity v can be expressed as 2pRN=60 ¼ pRN=30, where N ¼ rotational speed, rev/min.
Substituting this expression into Eq. (11.3), we obtain
GF ¼ R pN
30

2
g
ð11:4Þ
Rearranging this to solve for rotational speed N, and using diameter D rather than radius
in the resulting equation, we have
N ¼ 30
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2gGF
D
r
ð11:5Þ
where D ¼ inside diameter of the mold, m (ft). If the G-factor is too low in centrifugal
casting, the liquid metal will not remain forced against the mold wall during the upper
half of the circular path but will ‘‘rain’’ inside the cavity. Slipping occurs between the
molten metal and the mold wall, which means that the rotational speed of the metal is less
than that of the mold. On an empirical basis, values of GF ¼ 60 to 80 are found to be
appropriate for horizontal centrifugal casting [2], although this depends to some extent
on the metal being cast.
FIGURE 11.15
Setup
for true centrifugal
casting.
Section 11.3/Permanent-Mold Casting Processes
243

Example 11.2
Rotation Speed in
True Centrifugal
Casting
A true centrifugal casting operation is to be performed horizontally to make copper tube
sections with OD ¼ 25 cm and ID ¼ 22.5 cm. What rotational speed is required if a G-
factor of 65 is used to cast the tubing?
Solution:
TheinsidediameterofthemoldD¼ODofthecasting¼25 cm¼0.25 m.Wecan
compute the required rotational speed from Eq. (11.5) as follows:
N ¼ 30
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2(9:8)(26)
0:25
r
¼ 61:7 rev/min:
n
In vertical centrifugal casting, the effect of gravity acting on the liquid metal causes
the casting wall to be thicker at the base than at the top. The inside profile of the casting
wall takes on a parabolic shape. The difference in inside radius between top and bottom is
related to speed of rotation as follows:
N ¼ 30
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2gL
R2
t  R2
b
s
ð11:6Þ
where L ¼ vertical length of the casting, m (ft); Rt ¼ inside radius at the top of the casting,
m (ft); and Rb ¼ inside radius at the bottom of the casting, m (ft). Equation (11.6) can be
used to determine the required rotational speed for vertical centrifugal casting, given
specifications on the inside radii at top and bottom. One can see from the formula that for
Rt to equal Rb, the speed of rotation N would have to be infinite, which is impossible of
course. As a practical matter, part lengths made by vertical centrifugal casting are usually
no more than about twice their diameters. This is quite satisfactory for bushings and other
parts that have large diameters relatively to their lengths, especially if machining will be
used to accurately size the inside diameter.
Castings made by true centrifugal casting are characterized by high density, especially
in the outer regions of the part where Fis greatest. Solidification shrinkage at the exterior of
the cast tube is not a factor, because the centrifugal force continually reallocates molten
metal toward the mold wall during freezing. Any impurities in the casting tend to be on the
inner wall and can be removed by machining if necessary.
Semicentrifugal Casting
In this method, centrifugal force is used to produce solid
castings, as in Figure 11.16, rather than tubular parts. The rotation speed in semicentrifugal
casting is usually set so that G-factors of around 15 are obtained [2], and the molds are
FIGURE 11.16
Semicentrifugal
casting.
244
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

designedwithrisersatthecentertosupplyfeedmetal.Densityofmetalinthefinalcastingis
greaterintheouter sectionsthan atthecenter of rotation.Theprocess isoften usedon parts
in which the center of the casting is machined away, thus eliminating the portion of the
casting where the quality is lowest. Wheels and pulleys are examples of castings that can be
made by this process. Expendable molds are often used in semicentrifugal casting, as
suggested by our illustration of the process.
Centrifuge Casting
In centrifuge casting, Figure 11.17, the mold is designed with part
cavities located away from the axis of rotation, so that the molten metal poured into the
mold is distributed to these cavities by centrifugal force. The process is used for smaller
parts, and radial symmetry of the part is not a requirement as it is for the other two
centrifugal casting methods.
11.4
FOUNDRY PRACTICE
In all casting processes, the metal must be heated to the molten state to be poured or
otherwise forced into the mold. Heating and melting are accomplished in a furnace. This
section covers the various types of furnaces used in foundries and the pouring practices
for delivering the molten metal from furnace to mold.
11.4.1 FURNACES
The types of furnaces most commonly used in foundries are (1) cupolas, (2) direct fuel-fired
furnaces, (3) crucible furnaces, (4) electric-arc furnaces, and (5) induction furnaces.
Selection of the most appropriate furnace type depends on factors such as the casting
alloy; its melting and pouring temperatures; capacity requirements of the furnace; costs of
investment, operation, and maintenance; and environmental pollution considerations.
Cupolas
A cupola is a vertical cylindrical furnace equipped with a tapping spout near
its base. Cupolas are used only for melting cast irons, and although other furnaces are also
used, the largest tonnage of cast iron is melted in cupolas. General construction and
operating features of the cupola are illustrated in Figure 11.18. It consists of a large shell
FIGURE 11.17
(a) Centrifuge
casting—centrifugal force
causes metal to ﬂow to the mold
cavities away from the axis of
rotation; and (b) the casting.
Section 11.4/Foundry Practice
245

of steel plate lined with refractory. The ‘‘charge,’’ consisting of iron, coke, flux, and
possible alloying elements, is loaded through a charging door located less than halfway up
the height of the cupola. The iron is usually a mixture of pig iron and scrap (including
risers, runners, and sprues left over from previous castings). Coke is the fuel used to heat
the furnace. Forced air is introduced through openings near the bottom of the shell for
combustion of the coke. The flux is a basic compound such as limestone that reacts with
coke ash and other impurities to form slag. The slag serves to cover the melt, protecting it
from reaction with the environment inside the cupola and reducing heat loss. As the
mixture is heated and melting of the iron occurs, the furnace is periodically tapped to
provide liquid metal for the pour.
Direct Fuel-Fired Furnaces
A direct fuel-fired furnace contains a small open-hearth,
in which the metal charge is heated by fuel burners located on the side of the furnace. The
roof of the furnace assists the heating action by reflecting the flame down against the
charge. Typical fuel is natural gas, and the combustion products exit the furnace through a
stack. At the bottom of the hearth is a tap hole to release the molten metal. Direct fuel-
fired furnaces are generally used in casting for melting nonferrous metals such as copper-
base alloys and aluminum.
Crucible Furnaces
These furnaces melt the metal without direct contact with a burning
fuel mixture. For this reason, they are sometimes called indirect fuel-fired furnaces. Three
types of crucible furnaces are used in foundries: (a) lift-out type, (b) stationary, and
FIGURE 11.18
Cupola
used for melting cast
iron. Furnace shown is
typical for a small
foundry and omits details
of emissions control
system required in a
modern cupola.
246
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

(c) tilting, illustrated in Figure 11.19. They all utilize a container (the crucible) made out of
a suitable refractory material (e.g., a clay–graphite mixture) or high-temperature steel
alloy to hold the charge. In the lift-out crucible furnace, the crucible is placed in a furnace
and heated sufficiently to melt the metal charge. Oil, gas, or powdered coal are typical
fuels for these furnaces. When the metal is melted, the crucible is lifted out of the furnace
and used as a pouring ladle. The other two types, sometimes referred to as pot furnaces,
have the heating furnace and container as one integral unit. In the stationary pot furnace,
the furnace is stationary and the molten metal is ladled out of the container. In the tilting-
pot furnace, the entire assembly can be tilted for pouring. Crucible furnaces are used for
nonferrous metals such as bronze, brass, and alloys of zinc and aluminum. Furnace
capacities are generally limited to several hundred pounds.
Electric-Arc Furnaces
In this furnace type, the charge is melted by heat generated
from an electric arc. Various configurations are available, with two or three electrodes
(see Figure 6.9). Power consumption is high, but electric-arc furnaces can be designed for
high melting capacity (23,000–45,000 kg/hr or 25–50 tons/hr), and they are used primarily
for casting steel.
Induction Furnaces
An induction furnace uses alternating current passing through a
coil to develop a magnetic field in the metal, and the resulting induced current causes
rapid heating and melting of the metal. Features of an induction furnace for foundry
operations are illustrated in Figure 11.20. The electromagnetic force field causes a mixing
FIGURE 11.19
Three types of crucible furnaces: (a) lift-out crucible, (b) stationary pot, and (c) tilting-pot furnace.
FIGURE 11.20
Induction furnace.
Section 11.4/Foundry Practice
247

action to occur in the liquid metal. Also, since the metal does not come in direct contact
with the heating elements, the environment in which melting takes place can be closely
controlled. All of this results in molten metals of high quality and purity, and induction
furnaces are used for nearly any casting alloy when these requirements are important.
Melting steel, cast iron, and aluminum alloys are common applications in foundry work.
11.4.2 POURING, CLEANING, AND HEAT TREATMENT
Moving the molten metal from the melting furnace to the mold is sometimes done using
crucibles. More often, the transfer is accomplished by ladles of various kinds. These
ladles receive the metal from the furnace and allow for convenient pouring into the
molds. Two common ladles are illustrated in Figure 11.21, one for handling large volumes
of molten metal using an overhead crane, and the other a ‘‘two-man ladle’’ for manually
moving and pouring smaller amounts.
One of the problems in pouring is that oxidized molten metal can be introduced
into the mold. Metal oxides reduce product quality, perhaps rendering the casting
defective, so measures are taken to minimize the entry of these oxides into the mold
during pouring. Filters are sometimes used to catch the oxides and other impurities as the
metal is poured from the spout, and fluxes are used to cover the molten metal to retard
oxidation. In addition, ladles have been devised to pour the liquid metal from the bottom,
since the top surface is where the oxides accumulate.
After the casting has solidified and been removed from the mold, a number of
additional steps are usually required. These operations include (1) trimming, (2)
removing the core, (3) surface cleaning, (4) inspection, (5) repair, if required, and (6)
heat treatment. Steps (1) through (5) are collectively referred to in foundry work as
‘‘cleaning.’’ The extent to which these additional operations are required varies with
casting processes and metals. When required, they are usually labor intensive and costly.
Trimming involves removal of sprues, runners, risers, parting-line flash, fins,
chaplets, and any other excess metal from the cast part. In the case of brittle casting
alloys and when the cross sections are relatively small, these appendages on the casting
can be broken off. Otherwise, hammering, shearing, hack-sawing, band-sawing, abrasive
wheel cutting, or various torch cutting methods are used.
If cores have been used to cast the part, they must be removed. Most cores are
chemically bonded or oil-bonded sand, and they often fall out of the casting as the binder
deteriorates. In some cases, they are removed by shaking the casting, either manually or
mechanically. In rare instances, cores are removed by chemically dissolving the bonding
agent used in the sand core. Solid cores must be hammered or pressed out.
FIGURE 11.21
Two
common types of ladles:
(a) crane ladle and (b)
two-man ladle.
248
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

Surface cleaning is most important in the case of sand casting. In many of the other
casting methods, especially the permanent-mold processes, this step can be avoided.
Surface cleaning involves removal of sand from the surface of the casting and otherwise
enhancing the appearance of the surface. Methods used to clean the surface include
tumbling, air-blasting with coarse sand grit or metal shot, wire brushing, buffing, and
chemical pickling (Chapter 28).
Defects are possible in casting, and inspection is needed to detect their presence.
We consider these quality issues in the following section.
Castings are often heat treated to enhance their properties, either for subsequent
processing operations such as machining or to bring out the desired properties for
application of the part.
11.5
CASTING QUALITY
There are numerous opportunities for things to go wrong in a casting operation, resulting
in quality defects in the cast product. In this section, we compile a list of the common
defects that occur in casting, and we indicate the inspection procedures to detect them.
Casting Defects
Some defects are common to any and all casting processes. These
defects are illustrated in Figure 11.22 and briefly described in the following:
(a) Misruns, which are castings that solidify before completely filling the mold cavity.
Typical causes include (1) fluidity of the molten metal is insufficient, (2) pouring
temperature is too low, (3) pouring is done too slowly, and/or (4) cross-section of the
mold cavity is too thin.
(b) Cold Shuts, which occur when two portions of the metal flow together but there is a
lack of fusion between them due to premature freezing. Its causes are similar to those
of a misrun.
(c) Coldshots, whichresult fromsplatteringduring pouring, causingtheformation ofsolid
globules of metal that become entrapped in the casting. Pouring procedures and gating
system designs that avoid splattering can prevent this defect.
FIGURE 11.22
Some
common defects in
castings: (a) misrun,
(b) cold shut, (c) cold
shot, (d) shrinkage cavity,
(e) microporosity, and
(f) hot tearing.
Section 11.5/Casting Quality
249

(d) Shrinkage cavity is a depression in the surface or an internal void in the casting,
caused by solidification shrinkage that restricts the amount of molten metal available
in the last region to freeze. It often occurs near the top of the casting, in which case it
is referred to as a ‘‘pipe.’’ See Figure 10.8(3). The problem can often be solved by
proper riser design.
(e) Microporosity consists of a network of small voids distributed throughout the casting
caused by localized solidification shrinkage of the final molten metal in the dendritic
structure. The defect is usually associated with alloys, because of the protracted
manner in which freezing occurs in these metals.
(f) Hot tearing, also called hot cracking, occurs when the casting is restrained from
contraction by an unyielding mold during the final stages of solidification or early
stages of cooling after solidification. The defect is manifested as a separation of
the metal (hence, the terms tearing and cracking) at a point of high tensile stress
caused by the metal’s inability to shrink naturally. In sand casting and other
expendable-mold processes, it is prevented by compounding the mold to be
collapsible. In permanent-mold processes, hot tearing is reduced by removing the
part from the mold immediately after solidification.
Some defects are related to the use of sand molds, and therefore they occur only in
sand castings. To a lesser degree, other expendable-mold processes are also susceptible to
these problems. Defects found primarily in sand castings are shown in Figure 11.23 and
described here:
(a) Sand blow is a defect consisting of a balloon-shaped gas cavity caused by release of
mold gases during pouring. It occurs at or below the casting surface near the top of
the casting. Low permeability, poor venting, and high moisture content of the sand
mold are the usual causes.
(b) Pinholes, also caused by release of gases during pouring, consist of many small gas
cavities formed at or slightly below the surface of the casting.
(c) Sand wash, which is an irregularity in the surface of the casting that results from
erosion of the sand mold during pouring, and the contour of the erosion is formed in
the surface of the final cast part.
FIGURE 11.23
Common defects in sand
castings: (a) sand blow,
(b) pin holes, (c) sand
wash, (d) scabs,
(e) penetration, (f) mold
shift, (g) core shift, and
(h) mold crack.
250
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

(d) Scabs are rough areas on the surface of the casting due to encrustations of sand and
metal. It is caused by portions of the mold surface flaking off during solidification and
becoming imbedded in the casting surface.
(e) Penetration refers to a surface defect that occurs when the fluidity of the liquid metal
is high, and it penetrates into the sand mold or sand core. Upon freezing, the casting
surface consists of a mixture of sand grains and metal. Harder packing of the sand
mold helps to alleviate this condition.
(f) Mold shift refers to a defect caused by a sidewise displacement of the mold cope
relative to the drag, the result of which is a step in the cast product at the parting line.
(g) Core shift is similar to mold shift, but it is the core that is displaced, and the
displacement is usually vertical. Core shift and mold shift are caused by buoyancy of
the molten metal (Section 11.1.3).
(h) Mold crack occurs when mold strength is insufficient, and a crack develops, into
which liquid metal can seep to form a ‘‘fin’’ on the final casting.
Inspection Methods
Foundry inspection procedures include (1) visual inspection
to detect obvious defects such as misruns, cold shuts, and severe surface flaws;
(2) dimensional measurements to ensure that tolerances have been met; and
(3) metallurgical, chemical, physical, and other tests concerned with the inherent quality
of the cast metal [7]. Tests in category (3) include: (a) pressure testing—to locate leaks in
the casting; (b) radiographic methods, magnetic particle tests, the use of fluorescent
penetrants, and supersonic testing—to detect either surface or internal defects in the
casting; and (c) mechanical testing to determine properties such as tensile strength and
hardness. If defects are discovered but are not too serious, it is often possible to save the
casting by welding, grinding, or other salvage methods to which the customer has agreed.
11.6
METALS FOR CASTING
Most commercial castings are made of alloys rather than pure metals. Alloys are
generally easier to cast, and properties of the resulting product are better. Casting alloys
can be classified as ferrous or nonferrous. The ferrous category is subdivided into cast
iron and cast steel.
Ferrous Casting Alloys: Cast Iron
Cast iron is the most important of all casting alloys
(Historical Note 11.3). The tonnage of cast iron castings is several times that of all other
metals combined. There are several types of cast iron: (1) gray cast iron, (2) nodular iron,
(3) white cast iron, (4) malleable iron, and (5) alloy cast irons (Section 6.2.4). Typical
pouring temperatures for cast iron are around 1400C (2552F), depending on
composition.
Ferrous Casting Alloys: Steel
The mechanical properties of steel make it an
attractive engineering material (Section 6.2.3), and the capability to create complex
geometries makes casting an appealing process. However, great difficulties are faced
by the foundry specializing in steel. First, the melting point of steel is considerably
higher than for most other metals that are commonly cast. The solidification range for
low carbon steels (Figure 6.4) begins at just under 1540C (2804F). This means that
the pouring temperature required for steel is very high—about 1650C (3002F). At
these high temperatures, steel is chemically very reactive. It readily oxidizes, so special
procedures must be used during melting and pouring to isolate the molten metal from
air. Also, molten steel has relatively poor fluidity, and this limits the design of thin
sections in components cast out of steel.
Section 11.6/Metals for Casting
251

Severalcharacteristicsofsteelcastingsmakeitworththeefforttosolvetheseproblems.
Tensile strength is higher than for most other casting metals, ranging upward from about 410
MPa (59,465 lb/in2) [9]. Steel castings have better toughness than most other casting alloys.
The propertiesof steel castingsare isotropic; strength is virtually the same in all directions. By
contrast, mechanically formed parts (e.g., rolling, forging) exhibit directionality in their
properties. Depending on the requirements of the product, isotropic behavior of the material
may be desirable. Another advantage of steel castings is ease of welding. They can be readily
weldedwithoutsignificantlossofstrength,torepairthecasting,ortofabricatestructureswith
other steel components.
Nonferrous Casting Alloys
Nonferrous casting metals include alloys of aluminum,
magnesium, copper, tin, zinc, nickel, and titanium (Section 6.3). Aluminum alloys are
generally considered to be very castable. The melting point of pure aluminum is 660C
(1112F), so pouring temperatures for aluminum casting alloys are low compared to cast iron
and steel. Their properties make them attractive for castings: light weight, wide range of
strength properties attainable through heat treatment, and ease of machining. Magnesium
alloys are the lightest of all casting metals. Other properties include corrosion resistance, as
well as high strength-to-weight and stiffness-to-weight ratios.
Copper alloys include bronze, brass, and aluminum bronze. Properties that make them
attractive include corrosion resistance, attractive appearance, and good bearing qualities. The
high cost of copper is a limitation on the use of its alloys. Applications include pipe fittings,
marine propeller blades, pump components, and ornamental jewelry.
Tin has the lowest melting point of the casting metals. Tin-based alloys are
generally easy to cast. They have good corrosion resistant but poor mechanical strength,
which limits their applications to pewter mugs and similar products not requiring high
strength. Zinc alloys are commonly used in die casting. Zinc has a low melting point and
good fluidity, making it highly castable. Its major weakness is low creep strength, so its
castings cannot be subjected to prolonged high stresses.
Historical Note 11.3
Early cast iron products
In the early centuries of casting, bronze and brass were
preferred over cast iron as foundry metals. Iron was more
difﬁcult to cast, due to its higher melting temperatures
and lack of knowledge about its metallurgy. Also, there
was little demand for cast iron products. This all changed
starting in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
The art of sand-casting iron entered Europe from
China, where iron was cast in sand molds more than
2500 years ago. In 1550 the ﬁrst cannons were cast from
iron in Europe. Cannon balls for these guns were made of
cast iron starting around 1568. Guns and their projectiles
created a large demand for cast iron. But these items
were for military rather than civilian use. Two cast iron
products that became signiﬁcant to the general public in
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were the cast
iron stove and cast iron water pipe.
As unspectacular a product as it may seem today, the
cast iron stove brought comfort, health, and improved
living conditions to many people in Europe and America.
During the 1700s, the manufacture of cast iron stoves
was one of the largest and most proﬁtable industries on
these two continents. The commercial success of stove
making was due to the large demand for the product and
the art and technology of casting iron that had been
developed to produce it.
Cast iron water pipe was another product that spurred
the growth of the iron casting industry. Until the advent
of cast iron pipes, a variety of methods had been tried to
supply water directly to homes and shops, including
hollow wooden pipes (which quickly rotted), lead pipes
(too expensive), and open trenches (susceptible to
pollution). Development of the iron casting process
provided the capability to fabricate water pipe sections at
relatively low cost. Cast iron water pipes were used in
France starting in 1664, and later in other parts of Europe.
By the early 1800s, cast iron pipe lines were being
widely installed in England for water and gas delivery.
The ﬁrst signiﬁcant water pipe installation in the United
States was in Philadelphia in 1817, using pipe imported
from England.
252
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

Nickel alloys have good hot strength and corrosion resistance, which make them
suited to high-temperature applications such as jet engine and rocket components, heat
shields, and similar components. Nickel alloys also have a high melting point and are not
easy to cast. Titanium alloys for casting are corrosion resistant and possess high strength-
to-weight ratios. However, titanium has a high melting point, low fluidity, and a
propensity to oxidize at high temperatures. These properties make it and its alloys
difficult to cast.
11.7
PRODUCT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
If casting is selected by the product designer as the primary manufacturing process for
a particular component, then certain guidelines should be followed to facilitate
production of the part and avoid many of the defects enumerated in Section 11.5.
Some of the important guidelines and considerations for casting are presented here.

Geometric simplicity. Although casting is a process that can be used to produce
complex part geometries, simplifying the part design will improve its castability.
Avoiding unnecessary complexities simplifies mold making, reduces the need for
cores, and improves the strength of the casting.

Corners. Sharp corners and angles should be avoided, because they are sources of
stress concentrations and may cause hot tearing and cracks in the casting. Generous
fillets should be designed on inside corners, and sharp edges should be blended.

Section thicknesses. Section thicknesses should be uniform in order to avoid shrink-
age cavities. Thicker sections create hot spots in the casting, because greater volume
requires more time for solidification and cooling. These are likely locations of
shrinkage cavities. Figure 11.24 illustrates the problem and offers some possible
solutions.

Draft. Part sections that project into the mold should have a draft or taper, as
defined in Figure 11.25. In expendable-mold casting, the purpose of this draft is to
facilitate removal of the pattern from the mold. In permanent-mold casting, its
purpose is to aid in removal of the part from the mold. Similar tapers should be
allowed if solid cores are used in the casting process. The required draft need only be
about 1 for sand casting and 2 to 3 for permanent-mold processes.

Use of cores. Minor changes in part design can reduce the need for coring, as shown
in Figure 11.25.

Dimensional tolerances. There are significant differences in the dimensional accu-
racies that can be achieved in castings, depending on which process is used. Table 11.2
provides a compilation of typical part tolerances for various casting processes and
metals.

Surface finish. Typical surface roughness achieved in sand casting is around 6 mm
(250 m-in). Similarly poor finishes are obtained in shell molding, while plaster-mold
and investment casting produce much better roughness values: 0.75 mm (30 m-in).
FIGURE 11.24
(a) Thick
section at intersection can
result in a shrinkage
cavity. Remedies include
(b) redesign to reduce
thickness and (c) use of a
core.
Section 11.7/Product Design Considerations
253

Among the permanent-mold processes, die casting is noted for good surface finishes
at around 1 mm (40 m-in).

Machining allowances. Tolerances achievable in many casting processes are insuf-
ficient to meet functional needs in many applications. Sand casting is the most
prominent example of this deficiency. In these cases, portions of the casting must be
machined to the required dimensions. Almost all sand castings must be machined to
some extent in order for the part to be made functional. Therefore, additional
material, called the machining allowance, is left on the casting for machining those
surfaces where necessary. Typical machining allowances for sand castings range
between 1.5 mm and 3 mm (0.06 in and 0.12 in).
REFERENCES
[1] Amstead, B. H., Ostwald, P. F., and Begeman, M. L.
Manufacturing Processes. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York, 1987.
[2] Beeley, P. R. Foundry Technology. Newnes-Butter-
worths, London, 1972.
[3] Black, J, and Kohser, R. DeGarmo’s Materials and
Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
[4] Datsko, J. Material Properties and Manufacturing
Processes. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1966.
FIGURE 11.25
Design
change to eliminate the
need for using a core: (a)
original design and (b)
redesign.
TABLE 11.2
Typical dimensional tolerances for various casting processes and metals.
Tolerance
Tolerance
Casting Process
Part
Size
mm
in
Casting Process
Part
Size
mm
in
Sand casting
Permanent mold
Aluminuma
Small
0.5
0.020
Aluminuma
Small
0.25
0.010
Cast iron
Small
1.0
0.040
Cast iron
Small
0.8
0.030
Large
1.5
0.060
Copper alloys
Small
0.4
0.015
Copper alloys
Small
0.4
0.015
Steel
Small
0.5
0.020
Steel
Small
1.3
0.050
Die casting
Large
2.0
0.080
Aluminuma
Small
0.12
0.005
Shell molding
Copper alloys
Small
0.12
0.005
Aluminuma
Small
0.25
0.010
Investment
Cast iron
Small
0.5
0.020
Aluminum
a
Small
0.12
 0.005
Copper alloys
Small
0.4
0.015
Cast iron
Small
0.25
0.010
Steel
Small
0.8
0.030
Copper alloys
Small
0.12
0.005
Plaster mold
Small
0.12
0.005
Steel
Small
0.25
0.010
Large
0.4
0.015
Compiled from [7], [15], and other sources.
aValues for aluminum also apply to magnesium.
254
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

[5] Decker, R. F., D. M. Walukas, S. E. LeBeau, R. E.
Vining, and N. D. Prewitt.‘‘Advances in Semi-Solid
Molding,’’ Advanced Materials & Processes, April
2004, pp 41–42.
[6] Flinn,R.A.FundamentalsofMetalCasting.American
Foundrymen’s Society, Inc., Des Plaines, Illinois, 1987.
[7] Heine, R. W., Loper, Jr., C. R., and Rosenthal, C.
Principles of Metal Casting, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill
Book Co., New York, 1967.
[8] Kotzin, E. L. Metalcasting & Molding Processes.
American Foundrymen’s Society, Inc., Des Plaines,
Illinois, 1981.
[9] Metals Handbook, Vol. 15, Casting. ASM Interna-
tional, Materials Park, Ohio, 2008.
[10] Mikelonis,
P.
J.
(ed.).
Foundry
Technology.
American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio,
1982.
[11] Mueller, B. ‘‘Investment Casting Trends,’’ Advanced
Materials & Processes, March 2005, pp. 30–32.
[12] Niebel, B. W., Draper, A. B., Wysk, R. A. Modern
Manufacturing Process Engineering. McGraw-Hill
Book Co., New York, 1989.
[13] Perry, M. C. ‘‘Investment Casting,’’ Advanced Mate-
rials & Processes, June 2008, pp. 31–33.
[14] Simpson, B. L. History of the Metalcasting Industry.
American Foundrymen’s Society, Inc., Des Plaines,
Illinois, 1997.
[15] Wick, C., Benedict, J. T., and Veilleux, R. F. Tool and
Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed. Vol. II,
Forming, Ch. 16. Society of Manufacturing Engi-
neers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1984.
[16] Wikipedia. ‘‘Semi-solid metal casting.’’ Available at:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semi-
solid_metal_casting.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
11.1.
Name the two basic categories of casting processes.
11.2.
There are various types of patterns used in sand
casting. What is the difference between a split
pattern and a match-plate pattern?
11.3.
What is a chaplet?
11.4.
What properties determine the quality of a sand
mold for sand casting?
11.5.
What is the Antioch process?
11.6.
What is the difference between vacuum perma-
nent-mold casting and vacuum molding?
11.7.
What are the most common metals used in die
casting?
11.8.
Which die casting machines usually have a higher
production rate, cold-chamber or hot-chamber,
and why?
11.9.
What is flash in die casting?
11.10.
What is the difference between true centrifugal
casting and semicentrifugal casting?
11.11.
What is a cupola?
11.12.
What are some of the operations required in sand
casting after the casting is removed from the
mold?
11.13.
What are some of the general defects encountered
in casting processes? Name and briefly describe
three.
11.14.
(Video) What is the composition of green sand in
the green-sand molding process?
11.15.
(Video) What are the advantages and disadvan-
tages of sand casting over investment casting?
11.16.
(Video) Explain the difference between horizontal
and vertical die casting machines. Which is more
popular?
11.17.
(Video) Why are aluminum and copper alloys
unsuitable for use in hot-chamber die casting?
11.18.
(Video) According to the die casting video, what
materials are most common for die casting dies?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 27 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
11.1.
Which one of the following casting processes is the
most widely used: (a) centrifugal casting, (b) die
casting, (c) investment casting, (d) sand casting, or
(e) shell casting?
11.2.
In sand casting, the volumetric size of the pattern is
(a) bigger than, (b) same size as, or (c) smaller than
the cast part?
11.3.
Silica sand has which one of the following com-
positions: (a) Al2O3, (b) SiO, (c) SiO2, or (d)
SiSO4?
11.4.
For which one of the following reasons is a green
mold named: (a) green is the color of the mold,
(b) moisture is contained in the mold, (c) mold is
cured, or (d) mold is dry?
Multiple Choice Quiz
255

11.5.
Given that Wm ¼ weight of the molten metal
displaced by a core and Wc ¼ weight of the core,
the buoyancy force is which one of the following:
(a) downward force ¼ Wm þ Wc, (b) downward
force ¼ Wm  Wc, (c) upward force ¼ Wm þ Wc, or
(d) upward force ¼ Wm  Wc?
11.6.
Which of the following casting processes are
expendable-mold
operations
(four
correct
answers): (a) centrifugal casting, (b) die casting,
(c) investment casting, (d) low pressure casting,
(e) sand casting, (f) shell molding, (g) slush casting,
and (h) vacuum molding?
11.7.
Shell molding is best described by which one of the
following: (a) casting operation in which the molten
metalhasbeenpoured outaftera thinshell hasbeen
solidified in the mold, (b) casting process in which
the mold is a thin shell of sand bonded by a thermo-
setting resin, (c) sand casting operation in which the
pattern is a shell rather than a solid form, or (d)
casting operation used to make artificial sea shells?
11.8.
Investment casting is also known by which one of
the following names: (a) fast-payback molding,
(b)
full-mold
process,
(c)
lost-foam
process,
(d) lost-pattern process, or (e) lost-wax process?
11.9.
In plaster-mold casting, the mold is made of which
one
of
the
following
materials:
(a)
Al2O3,
(b) CaSO4-H2O, (c) SiC, or (d) SiO2?
11.10.
Which of the following qualifies as a precision-
casting process (two correct answers): (a) ingot
casting, (b) investment casting, (c) plaster-mold
casting, (d) sand casting, and (e) shell molding?
11.11.
Which of the following casting processes are perma-
nent-mold
operations
(three
correct
answers):
(a) centrifugal casting, (b) die casting, (c) expanded
polystyreneprocess,(d)sandcasting,(e)shellmold-
ing, (f) slush casting, and (g) vacuum molding.
11.12.
Which of the following metals would typically be
used in die casting (three best answers): (a) alumi-
num, (b) cast iron, (c) steel, (d) tin, (e) tungsten,
and (f) zinc?
11.13.
Which of the following are advantages of die cast-
ing over sand casting (four best answers): (a) better
surface finish, (b) closer tolerances, (c) higher
melting temperature metals, (d) higher production
rates, (e) larger parts can be cast, and (f) mold can
be reused?
11.14.
Cupolas are furnaces used to melt which of the
following metals (one best answer): (a) aluminum,
(b) cast iron, (c) steel, or (d) zinc?
11.15.
A misrun is which one of the following defects in
casting: (a) globules of metal becoming entrapped
in the casting, (b) metal is not properly poured
into the downsprue, (c) metal solidifies before
filling the cavity, (d) microporosity, and (e) ‘‘pipe’’
formation?
11.16.
Which one of the following casting metals is most
important commercially: (a) aluminum and its
alloys, (b) bronze, (c) cast iron, (d) cast steel, or
(e) zinc alloys?
PROBLEMS
Buoyancy Force
11.1.
An 92% aluminum-8% copper alloy casting is
made in a sand mold using a sand core that weighs
20 kg. Determine the buoyancy force in Newtons
tending to lift the core during pouring.
11.2.
A sand core located inside a mold cavity has a
volume of 157.0 in3. It is used in the casting of a cast
iron pump housing. Determine the buoyancy force
that will tend to lift the core during pouring.
11.3.
Caplets are used to support a sand core inside a
sand mold cavity. The design of the caplets and the
manner in which they are placed in the mold cavity
surface allows each caplet to sustain a force of 10 lb.
Several caplets are located beneath the core to
support it before pouring; and several other caplets
are placed above the core to resist the buoyancy
force during pouring. If the volume of the core ¼
325 in3, and the metal poured is brass, determine
the minimum number of caplets that should be
placed (a) beneath the core, and (b) above the core.
11.4.
A sand core used to form the internal surfaces of a
steel casting experiences a buoyancy force of 23 kg.
The volume of the mold cavity forming the outside
surface of the casting ¼ 5000 cm3. What is the
weight of the final casting? Ignore considerations
of shrinkage.
Centrifugal Casting
11.5.
A horizontal true centrifugal casting operation
will be used to make copper tubing. The lengths
will be 1.5 m with outside diameter ¼ 15.0 cm, and
inside diameter ¼ 12.5 cm. If the rotational speed
of the pipe ¼ 1000 rev/min, determine the G-
factor.
256
Chapter 11/Metal Casting Processes

11.6.
A true centrifugal casting operation is to be per-
formed in a horizontal configuration to make cast
iron pipe sections. The sections will have a length ¼
42.0 in, outside diameter ¼ 8.0 in, and wall thick-
ness ¼ 0.50 in. If the rotational speed of the pipe ¼
500 rev/min, determine the G-factor. Is the opera-
tion likely to be successful?
11.7.
A horizontal true centrifugal casting process is
used to make brass bushings with the following
dimensions: length ¼ 10 cm, outside diameter ¼ 15
cm, and inside diameter ¼ 12 cm. (a) Determine
the required rotational speed in order to obtain a
G-factor of 70. (b) When operating at this speed,
what is the centrifugal force per square meter (Pa)
imposed by the molten metal on the inside wall of
the mold?
11.8.
True centrifugal casting is performed horizontally
to make large diameter copper tube sections. The
tubes have a length ¼ 1.0 m, diameter ¼ 0.25 m, and
wall thickness ¼ 15 mm. (a) If the rotational speed
of the pipe ¼ 700 rev/min, determine the G-factor
on the molten metal. (b) Is the rotational speed
sufficient to avoid ‘‘rain?’’ (c) What volume of
molten metal must be poured into the mold to
make the casting if solidification shrinkage and
contraction after solidification are considered?
Solidification shrinkage for copper ¼ 4.5%, and
solid thermal contraction ¼ 7.5%.
11.9.
If a true centrifugal casting operation were to be
performed in a space station circling the Earth,
how would weightlessness affect the process?
11.10.
A horizontal true centrifugal casting process is used
to make aluminum rings with the following dimen-
sions: length ¼ 5 cm, outside diameter ¼ 65 cm, and
insidediameter¼60cm.(a)Determinetherotational
speed that will provide a G-factor ¼ 60. (b) Suppose
that the ring were made out of steel instead of
aluminum. If the rotational speed computed in part
(a) were used in the steel casting operation, deter-
mine the G-factor and(c)centrifugalforceper square
meter(Pa)onthemoldwall.(d)Wouldthisrotational
speed result in a successful operation?
11.11.
For the steel ring of preceding Problem 11.10(b),
determine the volume of molten metal that must be
poured into the mold, given that the liquid shrink-
age is 0.5%, solidification shrinkage ¼ 3%, and
solid contraction after freezing ¼ 7.2%.
11.12.
A horizontal, true centrifugal casting process is
used to make lead pipe for chemical plants. The
pipe has length ¼ 0.5 m, outside diameter ¼ 70 mm,
and wall thickness ¼ 6.0 mm. Determine the rota-
tional speed that will provide a G-factor ¼ 60.
11.13.
A vertical, true centrifugal casting process is used
to make tube sections with length ¼ 10.0 in and
outside diameter ¼ 6.0 in. The inside diameter of
the tube ¼ 5.5 in at the top and 5.0 in at the bottom.
At what speed must the tube be rotated during the
operation in order to achieve these specifications?
11.14.
A vertical, true centrifugal casting process is used
to produce bushings that are 200 mm long and 200
mm in outside diameter. If the rotational speed
during solidification is 500 rev/min, determine the
inside diameter at the top of the bushing if the
inside diameter at the bottom is 150 mm.
11.15.
Avertical, true centrifugal casting process is used to
cast brass tubing that is 15.0 in long and whose
outside diameter ¼ 8.0 in. If the speed of rotation
during solidification is 1000 rev/min, determine the
inside diameters at the top and bottom of the tubing
if the total weight of the final casting ¼ 75.0 lbs.
Defects and Design Considerations
11.16.
The housing for a certain machinery product is
made of two components, both aluminum castings.
The larger component has the shape of a dish sink,
and the second component is a flat cover that is
attached to the first component to create an
enclosed space for the machinery parts. Sand cast-
ing is used to produce the two castings, both of
which are plagued by defects in the form of misruns
and cold shuts. The foreman complains that the
parts are too thin, and that is the reason for the
defects. However, it is known that the same com-
ponents are cast successfully in other foundries.
What other explanation can be given for the
defects?
11.17.
A large, steel sand casting shows the characteristic
signs of penetration defect: a surface consisting of a
mixture of sand and metal. (a) What steps can be
taken to correct the defect? (b) What other possi-
ble defects might result from taking each of these
steps?
Problems
257

12
GLASSWORKING
Chapter Contents
12.1
Raw Materials Preparation and Melting
12.2
Shaping Processes in Glassworking
12.2.1
Shaping of Piece Ware
12.2.2
Shaping of Flat and Tubular Glass
12.2.3
Forming of Glass Fibers
12.3
Heat Treatment and Finishing
12.3.1
Heat Treatment
12.3.2
Finishing
12.4
Product Design Considerations
Glass products are commercially manufactured in an al-
most unlimited variety of shapes. Many are produced in
very large quantities, such as light bulbs, beverage bottles,
and window glass. Others, such as giant telescope lenses,
are made individually.
Glass is one of three basic types of ceramics (Chap-
ter 7). It is distinguished by its noncrystalline (vitreous)
structure, whereas the other ceramic materials have a crys-
talline structure. The methods by which glass is shaped into
useful products are quite different from those used for the
other types. Inglassworking, theprincipalstarting material is
silica (SiO2); this is usually combined with other oxide
ceramics, which form glasses. The starting material is heated
to transform it from a hard solid into a viscous liquid; it is
then shaped into the desired geometry while in this highly
plastic or fluid condition. When cooled and hard, the mate-
rial remains in the glassy state rather than crystallizing.
The typical manufacturing sequence in glassworking
consists of the steps pictured in Figure 12.1. Shaping is
accomplished by various processes, including casting, press-
ing-and-blowing (to produce bottles and other containers),
and rolling (to make plate glass). A finishing step is
required for certain products.
12.1
RAW MATERIALS
PREPARATION AND
MELTING
The main component in nearly all glasses is silica, the pri-
mary sourceofwhichisnaturalquartzinsand.Thesandmust
be washed and classified. Washing removes impurities such
as clay and certain minerals that would cause undesirable
coloring of the glass. Classifying the sand means grouping
the grains according to size. The most desirable particle size
for glassmaking is in the range of 0.1 to 0.6 mm (0.004 to
258

0.025 in) [3]. The various other components, such as soda ash (source of Na2O), limestone
(source of CaO), aluminum oxide, potash (source of K2O), and other minerals are added in
the proper proportions to achieve the desired composition. The mixing is usually done in
batches, in amounts that are compatible with the capacities of available melting furnaces.
Recycled glass is usually added to the mixture in modern practice. In addition to
preserving the environment, recycled glass facilitates melting. Depending on the amount
of waste glass available and the specifications of the final composition, the proportion of
recycled glass may be up to 100%.
The batch of starting materials to be melted is referred to as a charge, and the
procedure of loading it into the melting furnace is called charging the furnace. Glass-
melting furnaces can be divided into the following types [3]: (1) pot furnaces—ceramic
pots of limited capacity in which melting occurs by heating the walls of the pot; (2) day
tanks—larger capacity vessels for batch production in which heating is done by burning
fuels above the charge; (3) continuous tank furnaces—long tank furnaces in which raw
materials are fed in one end, and melted as they move to the other end where molten glass
is drawn out for high production; and (4) electric furnaces of various designs for a wide
range of production rates.
Glass melting is generally carried out at temperatures around 1500C to 1600C
(2700F to 2900F). The melting cycle for a typical charge takes 24 to 48 hours. This is the
time required for all of the sand grains to become a clear liquid and the molten glass to be
refined and cooled to the appropriate temperature for working. Molten glass is a viscous
liquid, the viscosity being inversely related to temperature. Because the shaping opera-
tion immediately follows the melting cycle, the temperature at which the glass is tapped
from the furnace depends on the viscosity required for the subsequent process.
12.2
SHAPING PROCESSES IN GLASSWORKING
The major categories of glass products were identified in Section 7.4.2 as window glass,
containers, light bulbs, laboratory glassware, glass fibers, and optical glass. Despite the
variety represented by this list, the shaping processes to fabricate these products can be
grouped into only three categories: (1) discrete processes for piece ware, which includes
bottles, light bulbs, and other individual items; (2) continuous processes for making flat
glass (sheet and plate glass for windows) and tubing (for laboratory ware and fluorescent
lights); and (3) fiber-making processes to produce fibers for insulation, fiberglass
composite materials, and fiber optics.
12.2.1 SHAPING OF PIECE WARE
The ancient methods of hand-working glass, such as glass blowing, were briefly described
in Historical Note 7.3. Handicraft methods are still employed today for making glassware
items of high value in small quantities. Most of the processes discussed in this section are
FIGURE 12.1
The
typical process sequence
in glassworking: (1) prep-
aration of raw materials
and melting, (2) shaping,
and (3) heat treatment.
Section 12.2/Shaping Processes in Glassworking
259

highly mechanized technologies for producing discrete pieces such as jars, bottles, and
light bulbs in high quantities.
Spinning
Glass spinning is similar to centrifugal casting of metals, and is also known by
that name in glassworking. It is used to produce funnel-shaped components such as the
back sections of cathode ray tubes for televisions and computer monitors. The setup is
pictured in Figure 12.2. A gob of molten glass is dropped into a conical mold made of
steel. The mold is rotated so that centrifugal force causes the glass to flow upward and
spread itself on the mold surface. The faceplate (i.e., the front viewing screen) is later
assembled to the funnel using a sealing glass of low melting point.
Pressing
This is a widely used process for mass producing glass pieces such as dishes,
bake ware, headlight lenses, TV tube faceplates, and similar items that are relatively flat.
The process is illustrated and described in Figure 12.3. The large quantities of most
pressed products justify a high level of automation in this production sequence.
Blowing
Several shaping sequences include blowing as one or more of the steps.
Instead of a manual operation, blowing is performed on highly automated equipment.
The two sequences we describe here are the press-and-blow and blow-and-blow methods.
As the name indicates, the press-and-blow method is a pressing operation followed
by a blowing operation, as portrayed in Figure 12.4. The process is suited to the
production of wide-mouth containers. A split mold is used in the blowing operation
for part removal.
The blow-and-blow method is used to produce smaller-mouthed bottles. The
sequence is similar to the preceding, except that two (or more) blowing operations
FIGURE 12.2
Spinning of
funnel-shaped glass parts:
(1) gob of glass dropped into
mold; and (2) rotation of mold
to cause spreading of molten
glass on mold surface.
FIGURE 12.3
Pressing
of a ﬂat glass piece: (1) a
gob of glass fed into
mold from the furnace;
(2) pressing into shape by
plunger; and (3) plunger
is retracted and the ﬁn-
ished product is removed.
Symbols v and F indicate
motion (v ¼ velocity)
and applied force,
respectively.
260
Chapter 12/Glassworking

are used rather than pressing and blowing. There are variations to the process, depending
on the geometry of the product, with one possible sequence shown in Figure 12.5.
Reheating is sometimes required between blowing steps. Duplicate and triplicate molds
are sometimes used along with matching gob feeders to increase production rates. Press-
and-blow and blow-and-blow methods are used to make jars, beverage bottles, incan-
descent light bulb enclosures, and similar geometries.
FIGURE 12.4
Press-and-blow forming sequence: (1) molten gob is fed into mold cavity; (2) pressing to form a parison;
(3) the partially formed parison, held in a neck ring, is transferred to the blow mold; and (4) blown into ﬁnal shape.
Symbols v and F indicate motion (v ¼ velocity) and applied force, respectively.
FIGURE 12.5
Blow-and-blow forming sequence: (1) gob is fed into inverted mold cavity; (2) mold is covered; (3) ﬁrst
blowing step; (4) partially formed piece is reoriented and transferred to second blow mold; and (5) blown to ﬁnal shape.
Section 12.2/Shaping Processes in Glassworking
261

Casting
If the molten glass is sufficiently fluid, it can be poured into a mold. Relatively
massive objects, such as astronomical lenses and mirrors, are made by this method. These
pieces must be cooled very slowly to avoid internal stresses and possible cracking owing
to temperature gradients that would otherwise be set up in the glass. After cooling and
solidifying, the piece must be finished by lapping and polishing. Casting is not much used
in glassworking except for these kinds of special jobs. Not only is cooling and cracking a
problem, but also molten glass is relatively viscous at normal working temperatures, and
does not flow through small orifices or into small sections as well as molten metals or
heated thermoplastics. Smaller lenses are usually made by pressing, discussed in the
preceding.
12.2.2 SHAPING OF FLAT AND TUBULAR GLASS
Here we describe two methods for making plate glass and one method for producing tube
stock. They are continuous processes, in which long sections of flat window glass or glass
tubing are made and later cut into appropriate sizes and lengths. They are modern
technologies in contrast to the ancient method described in Historical Note 12.1.
Rolling of Flat Plate
Flat plate glass can be produced by rolling, as illustrated in
Figure 12.6. The starting glass, in a suitably plastic condition from the furnace, is squeezed
through opposing rolls whose separation determines the thickness of the sheet. The
rolling operation is usually set up so that the flat glass is moved directly into an annealing
furnace. The rolled glass sheet must later be ground and polished for parallelism and
smoothness.
Historical Note 12.1
Ancient methods of making ﬂat glass [7]
Glass windows have been used in buildings for many
centuries. The oldest process for making ﬂat window
glass was by manual glass blowing. The procedure
consisted of the following: (1) a glass globe was blown on
a blowpipe; (2) a portion of the globe was made to stick to
theendofa‘‘punty,’’ametalrodusedbyglassblowers,and
then detached from the blowpipe; and (3) after reheating
the glass, the punty was rotated with sufﬁcient speed for
centrifugal force to shape the open globe into a ﬂat disk.
The disk, whose maximum possible size was only about
1 m (3 ft), was later cut into small panes for windows.
At the center of the disk, where the glass was attached
to the punty during the third step in the process, a lump
would tend to form that had the appearance of a crown.
The name ‘‘crown glass’’ was derived from this
resemblance. Lenses for spectacles were ground from
glass made by this method. Today, the name crown glass
is still used for certain types of optical and ophthalmic
glass, even though the ancient method has been replaced
by modern production technology.
FIGURE 12.6
Rolling of
ﬂat glass.
262
Chapter 12/Glassworking

Float Process
This process was developed in the late 1950s. Its advantage over other
methods such as rolling is that it obtains smooth surfaces that need no subsequent finishing.
In the float process, illustrated in Figure 12.7, the glass flows directly from its melting
furnace onto the surface of a molten tin bath. The highly fluid glass spreads evenly across
the molten tin surface, achieving a uniform thickness and smoothness. After moving into a
cooler region of the bath, the glass hardens and travels through an annealing furnace, after
which it is cut to size.
Drawing of Glass Tubes
Glass tubing is manufactured by a drawing process known as
the Danner process, illustrated in Figure 12.8. Molten glass flows around a rotating
hollow mandrel through which air is blown while the glass is being drawn. The air
temperature and its volumetric flow rate, as well as the drawing velocity, determine the
diameter and wall thickness of the tubular cross section. During hardening, the glass tube
is supported by a series of rollers extending about 30 m (100 ft) beyond the mandrel.
The continuous tubing is then cut into standard lengths. Tubular glass products include
laboratory glassware, fluorescent light tubes, and thermometers.
12.2.3 FORMING OF GLASS FIBERS
Glass fibers are used in applications ranging from insulation wool to fiber optics commu-
nications lines (Section 7.4.2). Glass fiber products can be divided into two categories [6]:
(1) fibrous glass for thermal insulation, acoustical insulation, and air filtration, in which
the fibers are in a random, wool-like condition; and (2) long, continuous filaments suitable
for fiber-reinforced plastics, yarns and fabrics, and fiber optics. Different production
methods are used for the two categories; we describe two methods in the following,
representing each of the product categories, respectively.
FIGURE 12.7
The ﬂoat
process for producing
sheet glass.
FIGURE 12.8
Drawing
of glass tubes by the
Danner process. Symbols
v and F indicate motion
(v ¼ velocity) and applied
force, respectively.
Section 12.2/Shaping Processes in Glassworking
263

Centrifugal Spraying
In a typical process for making glass wool, molten glass flows
into a rotating bowl with many small orifices around its periphery. Centrifugal force
causes the glass to flow through the holes to become a fibrous mass suitable for thermal
and acoustical insulation.
Drawing of Continuous Filaments
In this process, illustrated in Figure 12.9, continu-
ous glass fibers of small diameter (the lower size limit is around 0.0025 mm [0.0001 in])
are produced by drawing strands of molten glass through small orifices in a heated plate
made of a platinum alloy. The plate may have several hundred holes, each making one
fiber. The individual fibers are collected into a strand by reeling them onto a spool.
Before spooling, the fibers are coated with various chemicals to lubricate and protect
them. Drawing speeds of around 50 m/s (10,000 ft/min) or more are not unusual.
12.3
HEAT TREATMENT AND FINISHING
Heat treatment of the glass product is the third step in the glassworking sequence. For
some products, additional finishing operations are performed.
12.3.1 HEAT TREATMENT
We discussed glass-ceramics in Section 7.4.3 This unique material is made by a special
heat treatment that transforms most of the vitreous state into a polycrystalline ceramic.
Other heat treatments performed on glass cause changes that are less dramatic techno-
logically but perhaps more important commercially; examples include annealing and
tempering.
FIGURE 12.9
Drawing of continuous
glass ﬁbers.
264
Chapter 12/Glassworking

Annealing
Glass products usually have undesirable internal stresses after forming,
which reduce their strength. Annealing is done to relieve these stresses; the treatment
therefore has the same function in glassworking as it does in metalworking. Annealing
involves heating the glass to an elevated temperature and holding it for a certain period to
eliminate stresses and temperature gradients, then slowly cooling the glass to suppress
stress formation, followed by more rapid cooling to room temperature. Common
annealing temperatures are around 500C (900F). The length of time the product is
held at the temperature, as well as the heating and cooling rates during the cycle, depend
on thickness of the glass, the usual rule being that the required annealing time varies with
the square of thickness.
Annealing in modern glass factories is performed in tunnel-like furnaces, called
lehrs, in which the products flow slowly through the hot chamber on conveyors. Burners
are located only at the front end of the chamber, so that the glass experiences the required
heating and cooling cycle.
Tempered Glass and Related Products
A beneficial internal stress pattern can be
developed in glass products by a heat treatment known as tempering, and the resulting
material is called tempered glass. As in the treatment of hardened steel, tempering
increases the toughness of glass. The process involves heating the glass to a temperature
somewhat above its annealing temperature and into the plastic range, followed by
quenching of the surfaces, usually with air jets. When the surfaces cool, they contract
and harden while the interior is still plastic and compliant. As the internal glass slowly
cools, it contracts, thus putting the hard surfaces in compression. Like other ceramics,
glass is much stronger when subjected to compressive stresses than tensile stresses.
Accordingly, tempered glass is much more resistant to scratching and breaking because of
the compressive stresses on its surfaces. Applications include windows for tall buildings,
all-glass doors, safety glasses, and other products requiring toughened glass.
When tempered glass fails, it does so by shattering into numerous small fragments
that are less likely to cut someone than conventional (annealed) window glass. Interest-
ingly, automobile windshields are not made of tempered glass, because of the danger
posed to the driver by this fragmentation. Instead, conventional glass is used; however, it
is fabricated by sandwiching two pieces of glass on either side of a tough polymer sheet.
Should this laminated glass fracture, the glass splinters are retained by the polymer sheet
and the windshield remains relatively transparent.
12.3.2 FINISHING
Finishing operations are sometimes required for glassware products. These secondary
operations include grinding, polishing, and cutting. When glass sheets are produced by
drawing and rolling, the opposite sides are not necessarily parallel, and the surfaces
contain defects and scratch marks caused by the use of hard tooling on soft glass. The
glass sheets must be ground and polished for most commercial applications. In pressing
and blowing operations when split dies are used, polishing is often required to remove the
seam marks from the container product.
In continuous glassworking processes, such as plate and tube production, the continu-
oussectionsmustbecutintosmallerpieces.This isaccomplishedbyfirstscoringtheglasswith
a glass-cutting wheel or cutting diamond and then breaking the section along the score line.
Cutting is generally done as the glass exits the annealing lehr.
Decorative and surface processes are performed on certain glassware products.
These processes include mechanical cutting and polishing operations; sandblasting; chem-
ical etching (with hydrofluoric acid, often in combination with other chemicals); and
coating (for example, coating of plate glass with aluminum or silver to produce mirrors).
Section 12.3/Heat Treatment and Finishing
265

12.4
PRODUCT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
Glass possesses special properties that make it desirable in certain applications. The
following design recommendations are compiled from Bralla [1] and other sources.

Glass is transparent and has certain optical properties that are unusual if not unique
among engineering materials. For applications requiring transparency, light trans-
mittance, magnification, and similar optical properties, glass is likely to be the
material of choice. Certain polymers are transparent and may be competitive,
depending on design requirements.

Glass is several times stronger in compression than in tension; components should be
designed so that they are subjected to compressive stresses, not tensile stresses.

Ceramics, including glass, are brittle. Glass parts should not be used in applications
that involve impact loading or high stresses, which might cause fracture.

Certain glass compositions have very low thermal expansion coefficients and are
therefore tolerant of thermal shock. These glasses can be selected for applications in
which this characteristic is important.

Outside edges and corners on glass parts should have large radii or chamfers;
likewise, inside corners should have large radii. Both outside and inside corners
are potential points of stress concentration.

Unlike parts made of traditional and new ceramics, threads may be included in the
design of glass parts; they are technically feasible with the press-and-blow shaping
processes. However, the threads should be coarse.
REFERENCES
[1] Bralla, J. G. (editor). Design for Manufacturability
Handbook.
2nd
ed.
McGraw-Hill,
New
York,
1998.
[2] Flinn, R. A., and Trojan, P. K. Engineering Materials
and Their Applications, 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1995.
[3] Hlavac, J. The Technology of Glass and Ceramics.
Elsevier Scientific Publishing, New York, 1983.
[4] McColm, I. J. Ceramic Science for Materials Tech-
nologists. Chapman and Hall, New York, 1983.
[5] McLellan, G., and Shand, E. B. Glass Engineering
Handbook. 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1984.
[6] Mohr, J. G., and Rowe, W. P. Fiber Glass. Krieger,
New York, 1990.
[7] Scholes, S. R., and Greene, C. H. Modern Glass
Practice. 7th ed. TechBooks, Marietta, Georgia, 1993.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
12.1. Glass is classified as a ceramic material; yet glass is
different from the traditional and new ceramics.
What is the difference?
12.2. What is the predominant chemical compound in
almost all glass products?
12.3. What are the three basic steps in the glassworking
sequence?
12.4. Melting furnaces for glassworking can be divided
into four types. Name three of the four types.
12.5. Describe the spinning process in glassworking.
12.6. What is the main difference between the press-and-
blow and the blow-and-blow shaping processes in
glassworking?
12.7. There are several ways of shaping plate or sheet
glass. Name and briefly describe one of them.
12.8. Describe the Danner process.
12.9. Two processes for forming glass fibers are discussed
in the text. Name and briefly describe one of them.
12.10. What is the purpose of annealing in glassworking?
12.11. Describe how a piece of glass is heat treated to
produce tempered glass.
12.12. Describe the type of material that is commonly used
to make windshields for automobiles.
12.13. What are some of the design recommendations for
glass parts?
266
Chapter 12/Glassworking

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 10 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
12.1. Which one of the following terms refers to the glassy
state of a material: (a) crystalline, (b) devitrified,
(c) polycrystalline, (d) vitiated, or (e) vitreous?
12.2. Besides helping to preserve the environment, the
use of recycled glass as an ingredient of the starting
material in glassmaking serves what other useful
purpose (one answer): (a) adds coloring variations
to the glass for aesthetic value, (b) makes the glass
easier to melt, (c) makes the glass stronger, or (d)
reduces odors in the plant?
12.3. The charge in glassworking is which one of the
following: (a) the duration of the melting cycle,
(b) the electric energy required to melt the glass,
(c) the name given to the melting furnace, or (d) the
starting materials in melting?
12.4. Typical glass melting temperatures are in which of
the following ranges: (a) 400C to 500C, (b) 900C
to 1000C, (c) 1500C to 1600C, or (d) 2000C to
2200C?
12.5. Casting is a glassworking process used for (a) high
production, (b) low production, or (c) medium
production?
12.6. Which one of the following processes or processing
steps is not applicable in glassworking: (a) anneal-
ing, (b) pressing, (c) quenching, (d) sintering, and
(e) spinning?
12.7. The press-and-blow process is best suited to the
production of (narrow-necked) beverage bottles,
whereas the blow-and-blow process is more appro-
priate for producing (wide-mouthed) jars: (a) true,
or (b) false?
12.8. Which one of the following processes is used to
produce glass tubing: (a) Danner process, (b) press-
ing, (c) rolling, or (d) spinning?
12.9. If a glass part with a wall thickness of 5 mm (0.20 in)
takes 10 minutes to anneal, how much time would
a glass part of similar geometry but with a wall
thickness of 7.5 mm (0.30 in) take to anneal (choose
the one closest answer): (a) 10 minutes, (b) 15
minutes, (c) 20 minutes, or (d) 30 minutes?
12.10. A lehr is which of the following: (a) a lion’s den,
(b) a melting furnace, (c) a sintering furnace, (d) an
annealing furnace, or (e) none of the above?
Multiple Choice Quiz
267

13
SHAPING
PROCESSES
FOR PLASTICS
Chapter Contents
13.1
Properties of Polymer Melts
13.2
Extrusion
13.2.1
Process and Equipment
13.2.2
Analysis of Extrusion
13.2.3
Die Configurations and Extruded
Products
13.2.4
Defects in Extrusion
13.3
Production of Sheet and Film
13.4
Fiber and Filament Production (Spinning)
13.5
Coating Processes
13.6
Injection Molding
13.6.1
Process and Equipment
13.6.2
The Mold
13.6.3
Injection Molding Machines
13.6.4
Shrinkage and Defects in Injection
Molding
13.6.5
Other Injection Molding Processes
13.7
Compression and Transfer Molding
13.7.1
Compression Molding
13.7.2
Transfer Molding
13.8
Blow Molding and Rotational Molding
13.8.1
Blow Molding
13.8.2
Rotational Molding
13.9
Thermoforming
13.10 Casting
13.11 Polymer Foam Processing and Forming
13.12 Product Design Considerations
Plastics can be shaped into a wide variety of products, such
as molded parts, extruded sections, films and sheets, insu-
lation coatings on electrical wires, and fibers for textiles. In
addition, plastics are often the principal ingredient in other
materials, such as paints and varnishes; adhesives; and
various polymer matrix composites. In this chapter we con-
sider the technologies by which these products are shaped,
postponing paints and varnishes, adhesives, and composites
until later chapters. Many plastic-shaping processes can be
adapted to rubbers (Chapter 14) and polymer matrix
composites (Chapter 15).
Thecommercialandtechnologicalimportanceofthese
shapingprocessesderivesfromthegrowingimportanceofthe
materials being processed. Applications of plastics have
increasedata muchfaster rate thaneither metalsorceramics
during the last 50 years. Indeed, many parts previously made
of metals are today being made of plastics and plastic com-
posites.Thesameistrueofglass;plasticcontainershavebeen
largelysubstitutedforglassbottlesandjarsinproductpackag-
ing. The total volume of polymers (plastics and rubbers) now
exceeds that of metals. We can identify several reasons why
the plastic-shaping processes are important:

The variety of shaping processes, and the ease with
which polymers can be processed, allows an almost
unlimited variety of part geometries to be formed.

Many plastic parts are formed by molding, which is a net
shape process. Further shaping is generally not needed.

Although heating is usually required to form plastics,
less energy is required than for metals because the
processing temperatures are much lower.

Because lower temperatures are used in processing,
handling of the product is simplified during production.
Because many plastic processing methods are one-step
operations (e.g., molding), the amount of product
handling required is substantially reduced compared
with metals.
268


Finishing by painting or plating is not required (except in unusual circumstances) for
plastics.
As discussed in Chapter 8, the two types of plastics are thermoplastics and
thermosets. The difference is that thermosets undergo a curing process during heating
and shaping, which causes a permanent chemical change (cross-linking) in their molec-
ular structure. Once they have been cured, they cannot be melted through reheating. By
contrast, thermoplastics do not cure, and their chemical structure remains basically
unchanged upon reheating even though they transform from solid to fluid. Of the two
types, thermoplastics are by far the more important type commercially, comprising more
than 80% of the total plastics tonnage.
Plastic-shaping processes can be classified as follows according to the resulting
product geometry: (1) continuous extruded products with constant cross section other
than sheets, films, and filaments; (2) continuous sheets and films; (3) continuous
filaments (fibers); (4) molded parts that are mostly solid; (5) hollow molded parts
with relatively thin walls; (6) discrete parts made of formed sheets and films; (7) castings;
and (8) foamed products. This chapter examines each of these categories. The most
important processes commercially are those associated with thermoplastics; the two
processes of greatest significance are extrusion and injection molding. A brief history of
plastic-shaping processes is presented in Historical Note 13.1.
Coverage of the plastic-shaping processes begins by examining the properties of
polymer melts, because nearly all of the thermoplastic shaping processes share the
common step of heating the plastic so that it flows.
13.1
PROPERTIES OF POLYMER MELTS
To shape a thermoplastic polymer it must be heated so that it softens to the consistency of
a liquid. In this form, it is called a polymer melt. Polymer melts exhibit several unique
properties and characteristics, considered in this section.
Historical Note 13.1
Plastic shaping processes
Equipment for shaping plastics evolved largely from
rubber processing technology. Noteworthy among the
early contributors was Edwin Chaffee, an American who
developed a two-roll steam-heated mill for mixing
additives into rubber around 1835 (Section 14.1.3).
He was also responsible for a similar device called a
calender, which consists of a series of heated rolls for
coating rubber onto cloth (Section 13.3). Both machines
are still used today for plastics as well as rubbers.
The ﬁrst extruders, dating from around 1845 in
the United Kingdom, were ram-driven machines for
extruding rubber and coating rubber onto electrical wire.
The trouble with ram-type extruders is that they operate
in an intermittent fashion. An extruder that could operate
continuously, especially for wire and cable coating, was
highly desirable. Although several individuals worked
with varying degrees of success on a screw-type extruder
(Section 13.2.1), Mathew Gray in the United Kingdom is
credited with the invention; his patent is dated 1879.
As thermoplastics were subsequently developed, these
screw extruders, originally designed for rubber, were
adapted. An extrusion machine speciﬁcally designed for
thermoplastics was introduced in 1935.
Injection molding machines for plastics were
adaptations of equipment designed for metal die casting
(Historical Note 11.2). Around 1872, John Hyatt, an
important ﬁgure in the development of plastics
(Historical Note 8.1), patented a molding machine
speciﬁcally for plastics. It was a plunger-type machine
(Section 13.6.3). The injection molding machine in
its modern form was introduced in 1921, with
semiautomatic controls added in 1937. Ram-type
machines were the standard in the plastic molding
industry for many decades, until the superiority of the
reciprocating screw machine, developed by William
Willert in the United States in 1952, became obvious.
Section 13.1/Properties of Polymer Melts
269

Viscosity
Because of its high molecular weight, a polymer melt is a thick fluid with high
viscosity. As we defined the term in Section 3.4, viscosity is a fluid property that relates the
shear stress experienced during flow of the fluid to the rate of shear. Viscosity is important
in polymer processing because most of the shaping methods involve flow of the polymer
melt through small channels or die openings. The flow rates are often large, thus leading to
high rates of shear; and the shear stresses increase with shear rate, so that significant
pressures are required to accomplish the processes.
Figure 13.1 shows viscosity as a function of shear rate for two types of fluids. For a
Newtonian fluid (which includes most simple fluids such as water and oil), viscosity is a
constant at a given temperature; it does not change with shear rate. The relationship
between shear stress and shear strain is proportional, with viscosity as the constant of
proportionality:
t ¼ h _g
or
h ¼ t _g
ð13:1Þ
where t ¼ shear stress, Pa (lb/in2); h ¼ coefficient of shear viscosity, Ns/m2, or Pa-s (lb-sec/
in2); and _g ¼ shear rate, 1/s (1/sec).
However, for a polymer melt, viscosity decreases with shear rate, indicating that the
fluid becomes thinner at higher rates of shear. This behavior is called pseudoplasticity and
can be modeled to a reasonable approximation by the expression
t ¼ k _g
ð Þn
ð13:2Þ
where k ¼ a constant corresponding to the viscosity coefficient and n ¼ flow behavior
index.
For n ¼ 1, the equation reduces to the previous Eq. (13.1) for a Newtonian fluid,
and k becomes h. For a polymer melt, values of n are less than 1.
In addition to the effect of shear rate (fluid flow rate), viscosity of a polymer melt is
also affected by temperature. Like most fluids, the value decreases with increasing
temperature. This is shown in Figure 13.2 for several common polymers at a shear rate
of 103 s1, which is approximately the same as the rates encountered in injection molding
and high speed extrusion. Thus we see that the viscosity of a polymer melt decreases with
increasingvaluesofshearrateand temperature. Equation(13.2) canbeapplied,exceptthat
k depends on temperature as shown in Figure 13.2.
Viscoelasticity
Another property possessed by polymer melts is viscoelasticity. We
discussed this property in the context of solid polymers in Section 3.5. However, liquid
polymers exhibit it also. A good example is die swell in extrusion, in which the hot plastic
expands when exiting the die opening. The phenomenon, illustrated in Figure 13.3, can be
explained by noting that the polymer was contained in a much larger cross section before
entering the narrow die channel. In effect, the extruded material ‘‘remembers’’ its former
shape and attempts to return to it after leaving the die oriﬁce. More technically, the compressive
FIGURE 13.1
Viscosity relationships for Newtonian
ﬂuid and typical polymer melt.
270
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

stresses acting on the material as it enters the small die opening do not relax immediately. When the
materialsubsequentlyexitstheoriﬁceandtherestrictionisremoved,theunrelaxedstressescausethe
cross section to expand.
Die swell can be most easily measured for a circular cross section by means of the
swell ratio, defined as
rs ¼ Dx
Dd
ð13:3Þ
where rs ¼ swell ratio; Dx ¼ diameter of the extruded cross section, mm (in); and Dd ¼
diameter of the die orifice, mm (in).
The amount of die swell depends on the time the polymer melt spends in the die
channel. Increasing the time in the channel, by means of a longer channel, reduces die
swell.
13.2
EXTRUSION
Extrusion is one of the fundamental shaping processes, for metals and ceramics as well as
polymers. Extrusion is a compression process in which material is forced to flow through a
die orifice to provide long continuous product whose cross-sectional shape is determined by
FIGURE 13.2
Viscosity
as a function of
temperatures for
selected polymers at a
shear rate of 103 s-1.
(Data compiled from [12].)
FIGURE 13.3
Die swell,
a manifestation of
viscoelasticity in polymer
melts, as depicted here on
exiting an extrusion die.
Section 13.2/Extrusion
271

the shape of the orifice. As a polymer shaping process, it is widely used for thermoplastics
and elastomers(butrarelyfor thermosets)tomass produce items suchastubing, pipes, hose,
structural shapes (such as window and door molding), sheet and film, continuous filaments,
and coated electrical wire and cable. For these types of products, extrusion is carried out as a
continuous process; the extrudate (extruded product) is subsequently cut into desired
lengths. This section covers the basic extrusion process, and several subsequent sections
examine processes based on extrusion.
13.2.1 PROCESS AND EQUIPMENT
In polymer extrusion, feedstock in pellet or powder form is fed into an extrusion barrel
where it is heated and melted and forced to flow through a die opening by means of a
rotating screw, as illustrated in Figure 13.4. The two main components of the extruder are
the barrel and the screw. The die is not a component of the extruder; it is a special tool
that must be fabricated for the particular profile to be produced.
The internal diameter of the extruder barrel typically ranges from 25 to 150 mm (1.0
to 6.0 in). The barrel is long relative to its diameter, with L=D ratios usually between 10 and
30. The L=D ratio is reduced in Figure 13.4 for clarity of drawing. The higher ratios are used
for thermoplastic materials, whereas lower L=D values are for elastomers. A hopper
containing the feedstock is located at the end of the barrel opposite the die. The pellets are
fed by gravity onto the rotating screw whose turning moves the material along the barrel.
Electric heaters are used to initially melt the solid pellets; subsequent mixing and
mechanical working of the material generate additional heat, which maintains the melt.
In some cases, enough heat is supplied through the mixing and shearing action that external
heating is not required. Indeed, in some cases the barrel must be externally cooled to
prevent overheating of the polymer.
The material is conveyed through the barrel toward the die opening by the action of
the extruder screw, which rotates at about 60 rev/min. The screw serves several functions
and is divided into sections that correspond to these functions. The sections and functions
are the (1) feed section, in which the stock is moved from the hopper port and preheated;
(2) compression section, where the polymer is transformed into liquid consistency, air
entrapped amongst the pellets is extracted from the melt, and the material is compressed;
and (3) metering section, in which the melt is homogenized and sufficient pressure is
developed to pump it through the die opening.
FIGURE 13.4
Components and features of a (single-screw) extruder for plastics and elastomers.
272
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

The operation of the screw is determined by its geometry and speed of rotation.
Typical extruder screw geometry is depicted in Figure 13.5. The screw consists of spiraled
‘‘flights’’ (threads) with channels between them through which the polymer melt is moved. The
channel has a width wc and depth dc. As the screw rotates, the flights push the material
forward through the channel from the hopper end of the barrel toward the die. Although
not discernible in the diagram, the flight diameter is smaller than the barrel diameter D
by a very small clearance—around 0.05 mm (0.002 in). The function of the clearance is to
limit leakage of the melt backward to the trailing channel. The flight land has a width wf
and is made of hardened steel to resist wear as it turns and rubs against the inside of the
barrel. The screw has a pitch whose value is usually close to the diameter D. The flight
angle A is the helix angle of the screw and can be determined from the relation
tan A ¼ p
pD
ð13:4Þ
where p ¼ pitch of the screw1.
The increase in pressure applied to the polymer melt in the three sections of the
barrel is determined largely by the channel depth dc. In Figure 13.4, dc is relatively large
in the feed section to allow large amounts of granular polymer to be admitted into the
barrel. In the compression section, dc is gradually reduced, thus applying increased
pressure on the polymer as it melts. In the metering section, dc is small and pressure
reaches a maximum as flow is restrained by the screen pack and backer plate. The three
sections of the screw are shown as being about equal in length in Figure 13.4; this is
appropriate for a polymer that melts gradually, such as low-density polyethylene. For
other polymers, the optimal section lengths are different. For crystalline polymers such as
nylon, melting occurs rather abruptly at a specific melting point; therefore, a short
compression section is appropriate. Amorphous polymers such as polyvinylchloride melt
more slowly than LDPE, and the compression zone for these materials must take almost
the entire length of the screw. Although the optimal screw design for each material type is
different, it is common practice to use general-purpose screws. These designs represent a
compromise among the different materials, and they avoid the need to make frequent
screw changes, which result in costly equipment downtime.
FIGURE 13.5
Details of
an extruder screw inside
the barrel.
Screw
Barrel
Pitch p
A
D
dc
wc
wf
Direction of melt flow
Channel
Flight
1Unfortunately, p is the natural symbol to use for two variables in this chapter. It represents the screw pitch
here and in several other chapters. We use the same symbol p for pressure later in the chapter.
Section 13.2/Extrusion
273

Progress of the polymer along the barrel leads ultimately to the die zone. Before
reaching the die, the melt passes through a screen pack—a series of wire meshes
supported by a stiff plate (called a breaker plate) containing small axial holes. The
screen pack assembly functions to (1) filter contaminants and hard lumps from the melt;
(2) build pressure in the metering section; and (3) straighten the flow of the polymer melt
and remove its ‘‘memory’’ of the circular motion imposed by the screw. This last function is
concerned with the polymer’s viscoelastic property; if the flow were left unstraightened,
the polymer would play back its history of turning inside the extrusion chamber, tending
to twist and distort the extrudate.
13.2.2 ANALYSIS OF EXTRUSION
In this section, we develop mathematical models to describe, in a simplified way, several
aspects of polymer extrusion.
Melt Flow in the Extruder
As the screw rotates inside the barrel, the polymer melt is
forced to move forward toward the die; the system operates much like an Archimedian
screw. The principal transport mechanism is drag flow, resulting from friction between
the viscous liquid and two opposing surfaces moving relative to each other: (1) the
stationary barrel and (2) the channel of the turning screw. The arrangement can be
likened to the fluid flow that occurs between a stationary plate and a moving plate
separated by a viscous liquid, as illustrated in Figure 3.17. Given that the moving plate has
a velocity v, it can be reasoned that the average velocity of the fluid is v=2, resulting in a
volume flow rate of
Qd ¼ 0:5 v d w
ð13:5Þ
where Qd ¼ volume drag flow rate, m3/s (in3/sec.); v ¼ velocity of the moving plate, m/s
(in/sec.); d ¼ distance separating the two plates, m (in); and w ¼ the width of the plates
perpendicular to velocity direction, m (in).
These parameters can be compared with those in the channel defined by the
rotating extrusion screw and the stationary barrel surface.
v ¼ pDN cos A
ð13:6Þ
d ¼ dc
ð13:7Þ
and
w ¼ wc ¼ pD tan A  wf


cos A
ð13:8Þ
where D ¼ screw flight diameter, m (in); N ¼ screw rotational speed, rev/s; dc ¼ screw
channel depth, m (in); wc ¼ screw channel width, m (in); A ¼ flight angle; and wf ¼ flight
land width, m (in).
If we assume that the flight land width is negligibly small, then the last of these
equations reduces to
wc ¼ pD tan A cos A ¼ pD sin A
ð13:9Þ
Substituting Eqs. (13.6), (13.7), and (13.9) into Eq. (13.5), and using several trigonometric
identities, we get
Qd ¼ 0:5 p2 D2 N dc sin A cos A
ð13:10Þ
If no forces were present to resist the forward motion of the fluid, this equation
would provide a reasonable description of the melt flow rate inside the extruder.
However, compressing the polymer melt through the downstream die creates a back
274
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

pressure in the barrel that reduces the material moved by drag flow in Eq. (13.10). This
flow reduction, called the back pressure flow, depends on the screw dimensions, viscosity
of the polymer melt, and pressure gradient along the barrel. These dependencies can be
summarized in this equation [12]:
Qb ¼ pDd3
c sin2 A
12h
dp
dl


ð13:11Þ
where Qb ¼ back pressure flow, m3/s (in3/sec); h ¼ viscosity, N-s/m2 (lb-sec/in2); dp=dl ¼
the pressure gradient, MPa/m (lb/in2/in); and the other terms were previously defined.
The actual pressure gradient in the barrel is a function of the shape of the screw
over its length; a typical pressure profile is given in Figure 13.6. If we assume as an
approximation that the profile is a straight line, indicated by the dashed line in the figure,
then the pressure gradient becomes a constant p=L, and the previous equation reduces to
Qb ¼ ppDd3
c sin2 A
12hL
ð13:12Þ
where p ¼ head pressure in the barrel, MPa (lb/in2); and L ¼ length of the barrel, m (in).
Recall that this back pressure flow is really not an actual flow by itself; it is a
reduction in the drag flow. Thus, we can compute the magnitude of the melt flow in an
extruder as the difference between the drag flow and back pressure flow:
Qx ¼ Qd  Qb
Qx ¼ 0:5 p2 D2 N dc sin A cos A  ppDd3
c sin2 A
12hL
ð13:13Þ
where Qx ¼ the resulting flow rate of polymer melt in the extruder.
Equation (13.13) assumes that there is minimal leak flow through the clearance
between flights and barrel. Leak flow of melt will be small compared with drag and back
pressure flow except in badly worn extruders.
Equation (13.13) contains many parameters, which can be divided into two types: (1)
design parameters, and (2) operating parameters. The design parameters are those that
define the geometry of the screw and barrel: diameter D, length L, channel depth dc, and
helix angle A. For a given extruder operation, these factors cannot be changed during the
process. The operating parameters are those that can be changed during the process to
affect output flow; they include rotational speed N, head pressure p, and melt viscosity h. Of
course, melt viscosity is controllable only to the extent to which temperature and shear rate
can be manipulated to affect this property. Let us see how the parameters play out their
roles in the following example.
FIGURE 13.6
Typical pressure
gradient in an extruder; dashed line
indicates a straight line approximation
to facilitate computations.
Section 13.2/Extrusion
275

Example 13.1
Extrusion Flow
Rates
An extruder barrel has a diameter D ¼ 75 mm. The screw rotates at N ¼ 1 rev/s. Channel
depth dc ¼ 6.0 mm and flight angle A ¼ 20. Head pressure at the end of the barrel p ¼ 7.0
 106Pa,lengthofthebarrelL¼ 1.9m,andviscosityofthepolymermeltisassumedtobeh ¼
100 Pa-s. Determine the volume flow rate of the plastic in the barrel Qx.
Solution:
Using Eq. (13.13) we can compute the drag flow and opposing back
pressure flow in the barrel.
Qd ¼ 0:5 p2 75  103

2 1:0
ð
Þ 6  103


sin 20
ð
Þ cos 20
ð
Þ ¼ 53; 525 109


m3/s
Qb ¼ p 7  106


75  103


6  103

3 sin 20
ð
Þ2
12 100
ð
Þ 1:9
ð
Þ
¼ 18:276 106


¼ 18; 276 109


m3/s
Qx ¼ Qd  Qb ¼ 53; 525  18; 276
ð
Þ 109


¼ 35;249 109


m3/s
n
Extruder and Die Characteristics
If back pressure is zero, so that melt flow is
unrestrained in the extruder, then the flow would equal drag flow Qd given by Eq.
(13.10). Given the design and operating parameters (D, A, N, etc.), this is the maximum
possible flow capacity of the extruder. Denote it as Qmax:
Qmax ¼ 0:5p2 D2 N dc sin A cos A
ð13:14Þ
On the other hand, if back pressure were so great as to cause zero flow, then back
pressure flow would equal drag flow; that is
Qx ¼ Qd  Qb ¼ 0; so Qd ¼ Qb
UsingtheexpressionsforQdandQbinEq.(13.13),wecansolveforptodeterminewhat
this maximum head pressure pmax would have to be to cause no flow in the extruder:
pmax ¼ 6pDNLh cot A
d2
c
ð13:15Þ
The two values Qmax and pmax are points along the axes of a diagram known as the
extruder characteristic (or screw characteristic), as in Figure 13.7. It defines the
relationship between head pressure and flow rate in an extrusion machine with given
operating parameters.
Witha die inthemachine andtheextrusion process underway, theactual valuesof Qx
and p will lie somewhere between the extreme values, the location determined by the
characteristics of the die. Flow rate through the die depends on the size and shape of the
opening and the pressure applied to force the melt through it. This can be expressed as
Qx ¼ Ksp
ð13:16Þ
FIGURE 13.7
Extruder
characteristic (also called
the screw characteristic)
and die characteristic. The
extruder operating point is
at intersection of the two
lines.
276
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

where Qx ¼ flow rate, m3/s (in3/sec.); p ¼ head pressure, Pa (lb/in2); and Ks ¼ shape factor
for the die, m5/Ns (in5/lb-sec).
For a circular die opening of a given channel length, the shape factor can be
computed [12] as
Ks ¼
pD4
d
128hLd
ð13:17Þ
where Dd ¼ die opening diameter, m (in) h ¼ melt viscosity, N-s/m2 (lb-sec/in2); and Ld ¼
die opening length, m (in).
For shapes other than round, the die shape factor is less than for a round of the same
cross-sectional area, meaning that greater pressure is required to achieve the same flow
rate.
The relationship between Qx and p in Eq. (13.16) is called the die characteristic. In
Figure 13.7, this is drawn as a straight line that intersects with the previous extruder
characteristic. The intersection point identifies the values of Qx and p that are known as
the operating point for the extrusion process.
Example 13.2
Extruder and Die
Characteristics
Consider the extruder from Example 13.1, in which D ¼ 75 mm, L ¼ 1.9 m, N ¼ 1 rev/s, dc
¼ 6 mm, and A ¼ 20. The plastic melt has a shear viscosity h ¼ 100 Pa-s. Determine (a)
Qmax and pmax, (b) shape factor Ks for a circular die opening in which Dd ¼ 6.5 mm and Ld
¼ 20 mm, and (c) values of Qx and p at the operating point.
Solution:
(a) Qmax is given by Eq. (13.14).
Qmax ¼ 0:5p2D2 Ndc sin A cos A ¼ 0:5 p2 75  103

2 1:0
ð
Þ 6  103


sin 20
ð
Þ cos 20
ð
Þ
¼ 53;525 109


m3/s
pmax is given by Eq. (13.15).
pmax ¼ 6pDNLh cot A
d2
c
¼ 6p 75  103


1:9
ð
Þ 1:0
ð
Þ 100
ð
Þ cot 20
6  103

2
¼ 20;499;874 Pa
These two values define the intersection with the ordinate and abscissa for the extruder
characteristic.
(b) The shape factor for a circular die opening with Dd ¼ 6.5 mm and Ld ¼ 20 mm can be
determined from Eq. (13.17).
Ks ¼
p 6:5  103

4
128 100
ð
Þ 20  103

 ¼ 21:9 1012


m5/Ns
This shape factor defines the slope of the die characteristic.
(c) The operating point is defined by the values of Qx and p at which the screw
characteristic intersects with the die characteristic. The screw characteristic can be
expressed as the equation of the straight line between Qmax and pmax, which is
Qx ¼ Qmax  Qmax=pmax
ð
Þp
¼ 53; 525 109


 53; 525 109


=20; 499; 874


p ¼ 53; 525 109


 2:611 1012


p
ð13:18Þ
The die characteristic is given by Eq. (13.16) using the value of Ks computed in part (b).
Qx ¼ 21:9 1012


p
Section 13.2/Extrusion
277

Setting the two equations equal, we have
53; 525 109


 2:611 1012


p ¼ 21:9 1012


p
p ¼ 2:184 106


Pa
Solving for Qx using one of the starting equations, we obtain
Qx ¼ 53:525 106


 2:611 1012


2:184
ð
Þ 106


¼ 47:822 106


m3/s
Checking this with the other equation for verification,
Qx ¼ 21:9 1012


2:184
ð
Þ 106


¼ 47:82 106


m3/s
n
13.2.3 DIE CONFIGURATIONS AND EXTRUDED PRODUCTS
The shape of the die orifice determines the cross-sectional shape of the extrudate. We can
enumerate the common die profiles and corresponding extruded shapes as follows: (1)
solid profiles; (2) hollow profiles, such as tubes; (3) wire and cable coating; (4) sheet and
film; and (5) filaments. The first three categories are covered in the present section.
Methods for producing sheet and film are examined in Section 13.3; and filament
production is discussed in Section 13.4. These latter shapes sometimes involve forming
processes other than extrusion.
Solid Proﬁles
Solid profiles include regular shapes such as rounds and squares and
irregular cross sections such as structural shapes, door and window moldings, automobile
trim,andhousesiding.Thesideviewcrosssectionofadieforthesesolidshapesisillustrated
in Figure 13.8. Just beyond the end of the screw and before the die, the polymer melt passes
through the screen pack and breaker plate to straighten the flow lines. Then it flows into a
(usually) converging die entrance, the shape designed to maintain laminar flow and avoid
dead spots in the corners that would otherwise be present near the orifice. The melt then
flows through the die opening itself.
When the material exits the die, it is still soft. Polymers with high melt viscosities are
the best candidates for extrusion, because they hold shape better during cooling. Cooling is
accomplished by air blowing, water spray, or passing the extrudate through a water trough.
FIGURE 13.8
(a) Side view cross section of an extrusion die for solid regular shapes, such as round stock; (b) front
view of die, with proﬁle of extrudate. Die swell is evident in both views. (Some die construction details are simpliﬁed or
omitted for clarity.)
278
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

To compensate for die swell, the die opening is made long enough to remove some of the
memory in the polymer melt. In addition, the extrudate is often drawn (stretched) to offset
expansion from die swell.
For shapes other than round, the die opening is designed with a cross section that is
slightly different from the desired profile, so that the effect of die swell is to provide shape
correction. This correction is illustrated in Figure 13.9 for a square cross section. Because
different polymers exhibit varying degrees of die swell, the shape of the die profile
depends on the material to be extruded. Considerable skill and judgment are required by
the die designer for complex cross sections.
Hollow Proﬁles
Extrusion of hollow profiles, such as tubes, pipes, hoses, and other
cross sections containing holes, requires a mandrel to form the hollow shape. A typical die
configuration is shown in Figure 13.10. The mandrel is held in place using a spider, seen in
Section A-A of the figure. The polymer melt flows around the legs supporting the
mandrel to reunite into a monolithic tube wall. The mandrel often includes an air channel
through which air is blown to maintain the hollow form of the extrudate during
FIGURE 13.9
(a) Die cross
section showing required
oriﬁce proﬁle to obtain (b) a
square extruded proﬁle.
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 13.10
Side view cross section of extrusion die for shaping hollow cross sections such as tubes and pipes;
Section A-A is a front view cross section showing how the mandrel is held in place; Section B-B shows the tubular
cross section just prior to exiting the die; die swell causes an enlargement of the diameter. (Some die construction
details are simpliﬁed.)
Section 13.2/Extrusion
279

hardening. Pipes and tubes are cooled using open water troughs or by pulling the soft
extrudate through a water-filled tank with sizing sleeves that limit the OD of the tube
while air pressure is maintained on the inside.
Wire and Cable Coating
The coating of wire and cable for insulation is one of the most
important polymer extrusion processes. As shown in Figure 13.11 for wire coating, the
polymer melt is applied to the bare wire as it is pulled at high speed through a die. A slight
vacuum is drawn between the wire and the polymer to promote adhesion of the coating.
The taught wire provides rigidity during cooling, which is usually aided by passing the
coated wire through a water trough. The product is wound onto large spools at speeds of
up to 50 m/s (10,000 ft/min).
13.2.4 DEFECTS IN EXTRUSION
A number of defects can afflict extruded products. One of the worst is melt fracture, in
which thestresses acting onthemelt immediately beforeandduring its flow throughthedie
are so high as to cause failure, manifested in the form of a highly irregular surface on the
extrudate. As suggested by Figure 13.12,melt fracture can be caused by a sharp reduction at
the die entrance, causing turbulent flow that breaks up the melt. This contrasts with the
streamlined, laminar flow in the gradually converging die in Figure 13.8.
FIGURE 13.11
Side
view cross section of die
for coating of electrical
wire by extrusion. (Some
die construction details
are simpliﬁed.)
FIGURE 13.12
Melt
fracture, caused by
turbulent ﬂow of the
melt through a sharply
reduced die entrance.
280
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

A more common defect in extrusion is sharkskin, in which the surface of the
product becomes roughened upon exiting the die. As the melt flows through the die
opening, friction at the interface results in a velocity profile across the cross section,
Figure 13.13. Tensile stresses develop at the surface as this material is stretched to keep
up with the faster moving center core. These stresses cause minor ruptures that roughen
the surface. If the velocity gradient becomes extreme, prominent marks occur on the
surface, giving it the appearance of a bamboo pole; hence, the name bambooing for this
more severe defect.
13.3
PRODUCTION OF SHEET AND FILM
Thermoplastic sheet and film are produced by a number of processes, most important of
which are two methods based on extrusion. The term sheet refers to stock with a
thickness ranging from 0.5 mm (0.020 in) to about 12.5 mm (0.5 in) and used for products
such as flat window glazing and stock for thermoforming (Section 13.9). Film refers to
thicknesses below 0.5 mm (0.020 in). Thin films are used for packaging (product
wrapping material, grocery bags, and garbage bags); thicker film applications include
covers and liners (pool covers and liners for irrigation ditches).
All of the processes covered in this section are continuous, high-production
operations. More than half of the films produced today are polyethylene, mostly low-
density PE. The principal other materials are polypropylene, polyvinylchloride, and
regenerated cellulose (cellophane). These are all thermoplastic polymers.
Slit-Die Extrusion of Sheet and Film
Sheetandfilmofvariousthicknessesareproduced
by conventional extrusion, using a narrow slit as the die opening. The slit may be up to 3 m
(10 ft) wide and as narrow as around 0.4 mm (0.015 in). One possible die configuration is
illustrated in Figure 13.14. The die includes a manifold that spreads the polymer melt
laterally before it flows through the slit (die orifice). One of the difficulties in this extrusion
method is uniformity of thickness throughout the width of the stock. This is caused by the
drastic shape change experienced by the polymer melt during its flow through the die and
also to temperatureand pressure variations in the die. Usually, theedges of thefilm must be
trimmed because of thickening at the edges.
To achieve high production rates, an efficient method of cooling and collecting the
film must be integrated with the extrusion process. This is usually done by immediately
directing the extrudate into a quenching bath of water or onto chill rolls, as shown in
Figure 13.15. The chill roll method seems to be the more important commercially.
Contact with the cold rolls quickly quenches and solidifies the extrudate; in effect, the
extruder serves as a feeding device for the chill rolls that actually form the film. The
process is noted for very high production speeds—5 m/s (1000 ft/min). In addition, close
tolerances on film thickness can be achieved. Owing to the cooling method used in this
process, it is known as chill-roll extrusion.
FIGURE 13.13
(a) Velocity proﬁle of the
melt as it ﬂows through
the die opening, which
can lead to defects
called sharkskin and
(b) bambooing.
Section 13.3/Production of Sheet and Film
281

Blown-Film Extrusion Process
This is the other widely used process for making thin
polyethylene film for packaging. It is a complex process, combining extrusion and
blowing to produce a tube of thin film; it is best explained with reference to the diagram
in Figure 13.16. The process begins with the extrusion of a tube that is immediately drawn
upward while still molten and simultaneously expanded in size by air inflated into it
through the die mandrel. A ‘‘frost line’’ marks the position along the upward moving bubble
where solidiﬁcation of the polymer occurs. Air pressure in the bubble must be kept constant to
maintain uniform ﬁlm thickness and tube diameter. The air is contained in the tube by pinch rolls
that squeeze the tube back together after it has cooled. Guide rolls and collapsing rolls are also
used to restrain the blown tube and direct it into the pinch rolls. The ﬂat tube is then collected
onto a windup reel.
The effect of air inflation is to stretch the film in both directions as it cools from the
molten state. This results in isotropic strength properties, which is an advantage over
other processes in which the material is stretched primarily in one direction. Other
advantages include the ease with which extrusion rate and air pressure can be changed to
control stock width and gage. Comparing this process with slit-die extrusion, the blown-
film method produces stronger film (so that a thinner film can be used to package a
product), but thickness control and production rates are lower. The final blown film can
FIGURE 13.14
One of
several die conﬁgurations
for extruding sheet and
ﬁlm.
FIGURE13.15
Use of (a) water quenching bath or (b) chill rolls to achieve fast solidiﬁcation of the molten ﬁlm
after extrusion.
282
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

be left in tubular form (e.g., for garbage bags), or it can be subsequently cut at the edges to
provide two parallel thin films.
Calendering
Calendering is a process for producing sheet and film stock out of rubber
(Section 14.1.4) or rubbery thermoplastics such as plasticized PVC. In the process, the
initial feedstock is passed through a series of rolls to work the material and reduce its
thickness to the desired gage. A typical setup is illustrated in Figure 13.17. The equipment
is expensive, but production rate is high; speeds approaching 2.5 m/s (500 ft/min) are
possible. Close control is required over roll temperatures, pressures, and rotational speed.
The process is noted for its good surface finish and high gage accuracy in the film. Plastic
products made by the calendering process include PVC floor covering, shower curtains,
vinyl table cloths, pool liners, and inflatable boats and toys.
FIGURE 13.16
Blown-
ﬁlm process for high
production of thin
tubular ﬁlm.
FIGURE 13.17
A typical roll conﬁguration in
calendering.
Section 13.3/Production of Sheet and Film
283

13.4
FIBER AND FILAMENT PRODUCTION (SPINNING)
The most important application of polymer fibers and filaments is in textiles. Their use as
reinforcing materials in plastics (composites) is a growing application, but still small compared
withtextiles.Afibercanbedefinedasalong,thinstrandofmaterialwhoselengthisatleast100
times its cross-sectional dimension. A filament is a fiber of continuous length.
Fibers can be natural or synthetic. Synthetic fibers constitute about 75% of the
total fiber market today, polyester being the most important, followed by nylon,
acrylics, and rayon. Natural fibers are about 25% of the total produced, with cotton by
far the most important staple (wool production is significantly less than cotton).
The term spinning is a holdover from the methods used to draw and twist natural
fibers into yarn or thread. In the production of synthetic fibers, the term refers to the
process of extruding a polymer melt or solution through a spinneret (a die with multiple
small holes) to make filaments that are then drawn and wound onto a bobbin. There are
three principal variations in the spinning of synthetic fibers, depending on the polymer
being processed: (1) melt spinning, (2) dry spinning, and (3) wet spinning.
Melt spinning is used when the starting polymer can best be processed by heating to
the molten state and pumping through the spinneret, much in the manner of conventional
extrusion.Atypicalspinneretis6mm(0.25 in)thickandcontainsapproximately 50holes of
diameter 0.25 mm (0.010 in); the holes are countersunk, so that the resulting bore has an
L/D ratio of only 5/1 or less. The filaments that emanate from the die are drawn and
simultaneously air cooled before being collected together and spooled onto the bobbin,
as shown inFigure13.18. Significant extensionand thinning of the filamentsoccur whilethe
polymer is still molten, so that the final diameter wound onto the bobbin may be only 1/10
FIGURE 13.18
Melt
spinning of continuous
ﬁlaments.
284
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

of the extruded size. Melt spinning is used for polyesters and nylons; because these are the
most important synthetic fibers, melt spinning is the most important of the three processes
for synthetic fibers.
In dry spinning, the starting polymer is in solution and the solvent can be separated
by evaporation. The extrudate is pulled through a heated chamber that removes the
solvent; otherwise the sequence is similar to the previous. Fibers of cellulose acetate and
acrylic are produced by this process. In wet spinning, the polymer is also in solution—
only the solvent is nonvolatile. To separate the polymer, the extrudate must be passed
through a liquid chemical that coagulates or precipitates the polymer into coherent
strands that are then collected onto bobbins. This method is used to produce rayon
(regenerated cellulose fibers).
Filaments produced by any of the three processes are usually subjected to further cold
drawing to align the crystal structure along the direction of the filament axis. Extensions of 2
to 8 are typical [13]. This has the effect of significantly increasing the tensile strength of the
fibers. Drawing is accomplished by pulling the thread between two spools, where the winding
spool is driven at a faster speed than the unwinding spool.
13.5
COATING PROCESSES
Plastic(orrubber)coatinginvolvesapplicationofalayerofthegivenpolymerontoasubstrate
material. Three categories are distinguished [6]: (1) wire and cable coating; (2) planar
coating, which involves the coating of a flat film; and (3) contour coating—the coating of a
three-dimensional object. We have already examined wire and cable coating (Section
13.2.3); it is basically an extrusion process. The other two categories are surveyed in the
following paragraphs. In addition, there is the technology of applying paints, varnishes,
lacquers, and other similar coatings (Section 28.6).
Planar coating is used to coat fabrics, paper, cardboard, and metal foil; these items
are major products for some plastics. The important polymers include polyethylene and
polypropylene, with lesser applications for nylon, PVC, and polyester. In most cases, the
coating is only 0.01 to 0.05 mm (0.0005–0.002 in) thick. The two major planar coating
techniques are illustrated in Figure 13.19. In the roll method, the polymer coating
material is squeezed against the substrate by means of opposing rolls. In the doctor blade
method, a sharp knife edge controls the amount of polymer melt that is coated onto the
FIGURE 13.19
Planar coating processes: (a) roll method, and (b) doctor-blade method.
Section 13.5/Coating Processes
285

substrate. In both cases, the coating material is supplied either by a slit-die extrusion
process or by calendering.
Contour coating of three-dimensional objects can be accomplished by dipping or
spraying. Dipping involves submersion of the object into a suitable bath of polymer melt
or solution, followed by cooling or drying. Spraying (such as spray painting) is an
alternative method for applying a polymer coating to a solid object.
13.6
INJECTION MOLDING
Injection molding is a process in which a polymer is heated to a highly plastic state and
forced to flow under high pressure into a mold cavity, where it solidifies. The molded part,
called a molding, is then removed from the cavity. The process produces discrete
components that are almost always net shape. The production cycle time is typically
in the range of 10 to 30 sec, although cycles of 1 min or longer are not uncommon for large
parts. Also, the mold may contain more than one cavity, so that multiple moldings are
produced each cycle. Many aspects of injection molding are illustrated in the video clip.
VIDEO CLIP
Plastic Injection Molding. This clip contains three segments: (1) plastic materials and
molding, (2) injection molding machines, and (3) injection molds.
Complex and intricate shapes are possible with injection molding. The challenge in
these cases is to fabricate a mold whose cavity is the same geometry as the part and that
also allows for part removal. Part size can range from about 50 g (2 oz) up to about 25 kg
(more than 50 lb), the upper limit represented by components such as refrigerator doors
and automobile bumpers. The mold determines the part shape and size and is the special
tooling in injection molding. For large, complex parts, the mold can cost hundreds of
thousands of dollars. For small parts, the mold can be built to contain multiple cavities,
also making the mold expensive. Thus, injection molding is economical only for large
production quantities.
Injection molding is the most widely used molding process for thermoplastics.
Some thermosets and elastomers are injection molded, with modifications in equipment
and operating parameters to allow for cross-linking of these materials. We discuss these
and other variations of injection molding in Section 13.6.6.
13.6.1 PROCESS AND EQUIPMENT
Equipment for injection molding evolved from metal die casting (Historical Note 13.1).
A large injection molding machine is shown in Figure 13.20. As illustrated in the
schematic in Figure 13.21, an injection molding machine consists of two principal
components: (1) the plastic injection unit and (2) the mold clamping unit. The injection
unit is much like an extruder. It consists of a barrel that is fed from one end by a hopper
containing a supply of plastic pellets. Inside the barrel is a screw whose operation
surpasses that of an extruder screw in the following respect: in addition to turning for
mixing and heating the polymer, it also acts as a ram that rapidly moves forward to inject
molten plastic into the mold. A nonreturn valve mounted near the tip of the screw
prevents the melt from flowing backward along the screw threads. Later in the molding
cycle the ram retracts to its former position. Because of its dual action, it is called a
reciprocating screw, a name that also identifies the machine type. Older injection
286
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

molding machines used a simple ram (without screw flights), but the superiority of the
reciprocating screw design has led to its widespread adoption in today’s molding plants.
To summarize, the functions of the injection unit are to melt and homogenize the
polymer, and then inject it into the mold cavity.
The clamping unit is concerned with the operation of the mold. Its functions are to
(1) hold the two halves of the mold in proper alignment with each other; (2) keep the
mold closed during injection by applying a clamping force sufficient to resist the injection
force; and (3) open and close the mold at the appropriate times in the molding cycle. The
clamping unitconsists oftwoplatens, afixedplatenanda moveable platen,andamechanism
for translating the latter. The mechanism is basically a power press that is operated by
hydraulic piston or mechanical toggle devices of various types. Clamping forces of several
thousand tons are available on large machines.
The cycle for injection molding of a thermoplastic polymer proceeds in the
following sequence, illustrated in Figure 13.22. Let us pick up the action with the
mold open and the machine ready to start a new molding: (1) The mold is closed and
clamped. (2) A shot of melt, which has been brought to the right temperature and
viscosity by heating and the mechanical working of the screw, is injected under high pressure
into the mold cavity. The plastic cools and begins to solidify when it encounters the cold
surface of the mold. Ram pressure is maintained to pack additional melt into the cavity to
FIGURE 13.20
A large
(3000-ton capacity)
injection molding
machine. (Courtesy of
Cincinnati Milacron.)
FIGURE 13.21
Diagram of an injection molding machine, reciprocating screw type (some mechanical details are
simpliﬁed).
Section 13.6/Injection Molding
287

compensate for contraction during cooling. (3) The screw is rotated and retracted with the
nonreturn valve open to permit fresh polymer to flow into the forward portion of the
barrel. Meanwhile, the polymer in the mold has completely solidified. (4) The mold is
opened, and the part is ejected and removed.
13.6.2 THE MOLD
The mold is the special tool in injection molding; it is custom designed and fabricated for
the given part to be produced. When the production run for that part is finished, the mold
is replaced with a new mold for the next part. In this section we examine several types of
mold for injection molding.
Two-Plate Mold
The conventional two-plate mold, illustrated in Figure 13.23, consists
of two halves fastened to the two platens of the molding machine’s clamping unit. When
the clamping unit is opened, the two mold halves open, as shown in (b). The most obvious
feature of the mold is the cavity, which is usually formed by removing metal from the
mating surfaces of the two halves. Molds can contain a single cavity or multiple cavities to
produce more than one part in a single shot. The figure shows a mold with two cavities.
The parting surfaces (or parting line in a cross-sectional view of the mold) are where the
mold opens to remove the part(s).
In addition to the cavity, other features of the mold serve indispensable functions
during the molding cycle. A mold must have a distribution channel through which the
polymer melt flows from the nozzle of the injection barrel into the mold cavity. The
distribution channel consists of (1) a sprue, which leads from the nozzle into the mold; (2)
runners, which lead from the sprue to the cavity (or cavities); and (3) gates that constrict
FIGURE13.22
Typicalmoldingcycle:(1)moldisclosed,(2)meltisinjectedintocavity,(3)screwisretracted,and(4)mold
opens, and part is ejected.
288
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

the flow of plastic into the cavity. The constriction increases the shear rate, thereby
reducing the viscosity of the polymer melt. There are one or more gates for each cavity in
the mold.
An ejection system is needed to eject the molded part from the cavity at the end of
the molding cycle. Ejector pins built into the moving half of the mold usually accomplish
this function. The cavity is divided between the two mold halves in such a way that the
natural shrinkage of the molding causes the part to stick to the moving half. When the
mold opens, the ejector pins push the part out of the mold cavity.
A cooling system is required for the mold. This consists of an external pump
connected to passageways in the mold, through which water is circulated to remove
heat from the hot plastic. Air mustbe evacuated from the moldcavity asthepolymer rushes
in. Much of the air passes through the small ejector pin clearances in the mold. In addition,
narrow air vents are often machined into the parting surface; only about 0.03 mm (0.001 in)
deep and 12 to 25 mm (0.5 to 1.0 in) wide, these channels permit air to escape to the outside
but are too small for the viscous polymer melt to flow through.
To summarize, a mold consists of (1) one or more cavities that determine part
geometry, (2) distribution channels through which the polymer melt flows to the cavities,
(3) an ejection system for part removal, (4) a cooling system, and (5) vents to permit
evacuation of air from the cavities.
Other Mold Types
The two-plate mold is the most common mold in injection molding.
An alternative is a three-plate mold, shown in Figure 13.24, for the same part geometry as
before. There are advantages to this mold design. First, the flow of molten plastic is
through a gate located at the base of the cup-shaped part, rather than at the side. This
allows more even distribution of melt into the sides of the cup. In the side gate design in
the two-plate mold of Figure 13.23, the plastic must flow around the core and join on the
opposite side, possibly creating a weakness at the weld line. Second, the three-plate mold
allows more automatic operation of the molding machine. As the mold opens, it divides
into three plates with two openings between them. This action separates the runner from
the parts, which drop by gravity into containers beneath the mold.
FIGURE 13.23
Details of a two-plate mold for thermoplastic injection molding: (a) closed and (b) open. Mold has two
cavities to produce two cup-shaped parts (cross section shown) with each injection shot.
Section 13.6/Injection Molding
289

The sprue and runner in a conventional two- or three-plate mold represent waste
material. In many instances they can be ground and reused; however, in some cases the
product must be made of ‘‘virgin’’ plastic (plastic that has not been previously molded). The
hot-runner mold eliminates the solidification of the sprue and runner by locating heaters
around the corresponding runner channels. Although the plastic in the mold cavity
solidifies, the material in the sprue and runner channels remains molten, ready to be
injected into the cavity in the next cycle.
13.6.3 INJECTION MOLDING MACHINES
Injection molding machines differ in both injection unit and clamping unit. This section
discusses the important types of machines available today. The name of the injection
molding machine is generally based on the type of injection unit used.
Injection Units
Two types of injection units are widely used today. The reciprocating-
screw machine (Section 13.6.1, Figures 13.21 and 13.22) is the most common. This design
uses the same barrel for melting and injection of plastic. The alternative unit involves the
use of separate barrels for plasticizing and injecting the polymer, as shown in Figure 13.25
(a). This type is called a screw-preplasticizer machine or two-stage machine. Plastic
pellets are fed from a hopper into the first stage, which uses a screw to drive the polymer
forward and melt it. This barrel feeds a second barrel, which uses a plunger to inject the
melt into the mold. Older machines used one plunger-driven barrel to melt and inject the
plastic. These machines are referred to as plunger-type injection molding machines
(Figure 13.25(b)).
Clamping Units
Clamping designs are of three types [11]: toggle, hydraulic, and hydro-
mechanical. Toggle clamps include various designs, one of which is illustrated in Figure
13.26(a). An actuator moves the crosshead forward, extending the toggle links to push the
moving platen toward a closed position. At the beginning of the movement, mechanical
advantage is low and speed is high; but near the end of the stroke, the reverse is true. Thus,
toggle clamps provide both high speed and high force at different points in the cycle when
they are desirable. They are actuated either by hydraulic cylinders or ball screws driven by
electric motors. Toggle-clamp units seem most suited to relatively low tonnage machines.
FIGURE 13.24
Three-plate mold: (a) closed, and (b) open.
290
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

Hydraulic clamps, shown in Figure 13.26(b), are used on higher-tonnage injection molding
machines, typically in the range 1300 to 8900 kN (150 to 1000 tons). These units are also
more flexible than toggle clamps in terms of setting the tonnage at given positions during
the stroke. Hydromechanical clamps are designed for large tonnages, usually above 8900
kN (1000 tons). They operate by (1) using hydraulic cylinders to rapidly move the mold
toward closing position, (2) locking the position by mechanical means, and (3) using high-
pressure hydraulic cylinders to finally close the mold and build tonnage.
FIGURE 13.25
Two alternative injection systems to the reciprocating screw shown in Figure 13.21: (a) screw
preplasticizer, and (b) plunger type.
FIGURE 13.26
Two clamping designs: (a) one possible toggle clamp design: (1) open and (2) closed; and (b) hydraulic
clamping: (1) open, and (2) closed. Tie rods used to guide moving platens not shown.
Section 13.6/Injection Molding
291

13.6.4 SHRINKAGE AND DEFECTS IN INJECTION MOLDING
Polymers have high thermal expansion coefficients, and significant shrinkage can occur
during cooling of the plastic in the mold. Contraction of crystalline plastics tends to be
greater than for amorphous polymers. Shrinkage is usually expressed as the reduction in
linear size that occurs during cooling to room temperature from the molding temperature
for the given polymer. Appropriate units are therefore mm/mm (in/in) of the dimension
under consideration. Typical values for selected polymers are given in Table 13.1.
Fillers in the plastic tend to reduce shrinkage. In commercial molding practice,
shrinkage values for the specific molding compound should be obtained from the
producer before making the mold. To compensate for shrinkage, the dimensions of
the mold cavity must be made larger than the specified part dimensions. The following
formula can be used [14]:
Dc ¼ Dp þ DpS þ DpS2
ð13:19Þ
where Dc ¼ dimension of cavity, mm (in); Dp ¼ molded part dimension, mm (in), and S ¼
shrinkage values obtained from Table 13.1.
The third term on the right-hand side corrects for shrinkage that occurs in the
shrinkage.
Example 13.3
Shrinkage in
Injection Molding
The nominal length of a part made of polyethylene is to be 80 mm. Determine the
corresponding dimension of the mold cavity that will compensate for shrinkage.
Solution:
FromTable13.1,theshrinkageforpolyethyleneisS¼0.025.UsingEq.(13.19),
the mold cavity diameter should be:
Dc ¼ 80:0 þ 80:0 0:025
ð
Þ þ 80:0 0:025
ð
Þ2
¼ 80:0 þ 2:0 þ 0:05 ¼ 82:05 mm
n
Because of differences in shrinkage among plastics, mold dimensions must be
determined for the particular polymer to be molded. The same mold will produce
different part sizes for different polymer types.
Values in Table 13.1 represent a gross simplification of the shrinkage issue. In reality,
shrinkage is affected by a number of factors, any of which can alter the amount of
contraction experienced by a given polymer. The most important factors are injection
pressure, compaction time, molding temperature, and part thickness. As injection pressure
is increased, forcing more material into the mold cavity, shrinkage is reduced. Increasing
compaction time has a similar effect, assuming the polymer in the gate does not solidify and
seal off the cavity; maintaining pressure forces more material into the cavity while
shrinkage is taking place. Net shrinkage is thereby reduced.
Molding temperature refers to the temperature of the polymer in the cylinder
immediately before injection. One might expect that a higher polymer temperature
would increase shrinkage, on the reasoning that the difference between molding and
TABLE 13.1
Typical values of shrinkage for moldings of selected thermoplastics.
Plastic
Shrinkage,
mm/mm (in/in)
Plastic
Shrinkage,
mm/mm (in/in)
ABS
0.006
Polyethylene
0.025
Nylon-6,6
0.020
Polystyrene
0.004
Polycarbonate
0.007
PVC
0.005
Compiled from [14].
292
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

room temperatures is greater. However, shrinkage is actually lower at higher molding
temperatures. The explanation is that higher temperatures significantly lower the
viscosity of the polymer melt, allowing more material to be packed into the mold;
the effect is the same as higher injection pressures. Thus, the effect on viscosity more than
compensates for the larger temperature difference.
Finally, thicker parts show greater shrinkage. A molding solidifies from the outside;
the polymer in contact with the mold surface forms a skin that grows toward the center
of the part. At some point during solidification, the gate solidifies, isolating the material
in the cavity from the runner system and compaction pressure. When this happens, the
molten polymer inside the skin accounts for most of the remaining shrinkage that occurs
in the part. A thicker part section experiences greater shrinkage because it contains a
higher proportion of molten material.
In addition to the shrinkage issue, other things can also go wrong. Here are some of
the common defects in injection molded parts:

Short shots. As in casting, a short shot is a molding that has solidified before
completely filling the cavity. The defect can be corrected by increasing temperature
and/or pressure. The defect may also result from use of a machine with insufficient
shot capacity, in which case a larger machine is needed.

Flashing. Flashing occurs when the polymer melt is squeezed into the parting
surface between mold plates; it can also occur around ejection pins. The defect is
usually caused by (1) vents and clearances in the mold that are too large; (2) injection
pressure too high compared with clamping force; (3) melt temperature too high; or
(4) excessive shot size.

Sink marks and voids. These are defects usually related to thick molded sections. A
sink mark occurs when the outer surface on the molding solidifies, but contraction of
the internal material causes the skin to be depressed below its intended profile. Avoid
is caused by the same basic phenomenon; however, the surface material retains its form
and the shrinkage manifests itself as an internal void because of high tensile stresses on
the still-molten polymer. These defects can be addressed by increasing the packing
pressure after injection. A better solution is to design the part to have uniform section
thicknesses and use thinner sections.

Weld lines. Weld lines occur when polymer melt flows around a core or other convex
detail in themold cavity and meets from opposite directions; the boundary thus formed
is called a weld line, and it may have mechanical properties that are inferior to those in
the rest of the part. Higher melt temperatures, higher injection pressures, alternative
gating locations on the part, and better venting are ways of dealing with this defect.
13.6.5 OTHER INJECTION MOLDING PROCESSES
The vast majority of injection molding applications involve thermoplastics. Several
variants of the process are described in this section.
Thermoplastic Foam Injection Molding
Plastic foams have a variety of applications,
and we discuss these materials and their processing in Section 13.11. One of the processes,
sometimes called structural foam molding, is appropriate to discuss here because it is
injection molding. It involves the molding of thermoplastic parts that possess a dense
outer skin surrounding a lightweight foam center. Such parts have high stiffness-to-
weight ratios suitable for structural applications.
A structural foam part can be produced either by introducing a gas into the molten
plastic in the injection unit or by mixing a gas-producing ingredient with the starting pellets.
During injection, an insufficient amount of melt is forced into the mold cavity, where it
Section 13.6/Injection Molding
293

expands (foams) to fill the mold. The foam cells in contact with the cold mold surface
collapse to form a dense skin, while the material in the core retains its cellular structure.
Items made of structural foam include electronic cases, business machine housings,
furniture components, and washing machine tanks. Advantages cited for structural
foammoldingincludelowerinjectionpressuresandclampingforces,andthusthecapability
to produce large components, as suggested by the preceding list. A disadvantage of the
process is that the resulting part surfaces tend to be rough, with occasional voids. If good
surface finish is needed for the application, then additional processing is required, such as
sanding, painting, and adhesion of a veneer.
Multi-Injection Molding Processes
Unusual effects can be achieved by multiple
injection of different polymers to mold a part. The polymers are injected either
simultaneously or sequentially, and there may be more than one mold cavity involved.
Several processes fall under this heading, all characterized by two or more injection
units—thus, the equipment for these processes is expensive.
Sandwich molding involves injection of two separate polymers—one is the outer skin
of the part and the other is the inner core, which is typically a polymer foam. A specially
designed nozzlecontrolstheflow sequenceofthe twopolymersintothe mold. The sequence
isdesigned so thatthe corepolymer iscompletelysurroundedbythe skinmaterial inside the
mold cavity. The final structure is similar to that of a structural foam molding. However,
the molding possesses a smooth surface, thus overcoming one of the major shortcomings of
the previous process. In addition, it consists of two distinct plastics, each with its own
characteristics suited to the application.
Another multi-injection molding process involves sequential injection of two
polymers into a two-position mold. With the mold in the first position, the first polymer
is injected into the cavity. Then the mold opens to the second position, and the second
melt is injected into the enlarged cavity. The resulting part consists of two integrally
connected plastics. Bi-injection molding is used to combine plastics of two different
colors (e.g., automobile tail light covers) or to achieve different properties in different
sections of the same part.
Injection Molding of Thermosets
Injection molding is used for thermosetting (TS)
plastics, with certain modifications in equipment and operating procedure to allow for
cross-linking. The machines for thermoset injection molding are similar to those used for
thermoplastics. They use a reciprocating-screw injection unit, but the barrel length is
shorter to avoid premature curing and solidification of the TS polymer. For the same
reason, temperatures in the barrel are kept at relatively low levels, usually 50C to 125C
(120F to 260F), depending on the polymer. The plastic, usually in the form of pellets or
granules, is fed into the barrel through a hopper. Plasticizing occurs by the action of the
rotating screwasthematerialismoved forwardtowardthenozzle. When sufficient melt has
accumulated ahead of the screw, it is injected into a mold that is heated to 150C to 230C
(300F to450F), where cross-linking occurs to harden theplastic. Themoldisthen opened,
and the part is ejected and removed. Molding cycle times typically range from 20 sec to 2
min, depending on polymer type and part size.
Curing is the most time-consuming step in the cycle. In many cases, the part can be
removed from the mold before curing is completed, so that final hardening occurs because
of retained heat within a minute or two after removal. An alternative approach is to use a
multiple-mold machine, in which two or more molds are attached to an indexing head
served by a single injection unit.
The principal thermosets for injection molding are phenolics, unsaturated polyesters,
melamines, epoxies, and urea-formaldehyde. Elastomers are also injected molded (Section
14.1.4). More than 50% of the phenolic moldings currently produced in the United States
are made by this process [11], representing a shift away from compression and transfer
294
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

molding, the traditional processes used for thermosets (Section 13.7). Most of the TS
molding materials containlargeproportionsoffillers(upto70%byweight),including glass
fibers, clay, wood fibers, and carbon black. In effect, these are composite materials that are
being injected molded.
Reaction Injection Molding
Reaction injection molding (RIM) involves the mixing of
two highly reactive liquid ingredients and immediately injecting the mixture into a mold
cavity, where chemical reactions leading to solidification occur. The two ingredients form
the components used in catalyst-activated or mixing-activated thermoset systems (Section
8.3.1).Urethanes, epoxies, and urea-formaldehyde areexamples of these systems. RIM was
developed with polyurethane to produce large automotive components such as bumpers,
spoilers, and fenders. These kinds of parts still constitute the major application of the
process. RIM-molded polyurethane parts typically possess a foam internal structure
surrounded by a dense outer skin.
As shown in Figure 13.27, liquid ingredients are pumped in precisely measured
amounts from separate holding tanks into a mixing head. The ingredients are rapidly
mixed and then injected into the mold cavity at relatively low pressure where polymeri-
zation and curing occur. A typical cycle time is around 2 min. For relatively large cavities
the molds for RIM are much less costly than corresponding molds for conventional
injection molding. This is because of the low clamping forces required in RIM and the
opportunity to use lightweight components in the molds. Other advantages of RIM
include (1) low energy is required in the process; (2) equipment costs are less than
injection molding; (3) a variety of chemical systems are available that enable specific
properties to be obtained in the molded product; and (4) the production equipment is
reliable, and the chemical systems and machine relationships are well understood [17].
13.7
COMPRESSION AND TRANSFER MOLDING
Discussed in this section are two molding techniques widely used for thermosetting
polymers and elastomers. For thermoplastics, these techniques cannot match the effi-
ciency of injection molding, except for very special applications.
FIGURE 13.27
Reaction
injection molding (RIM)
system, shown
immediately after
ingredients A and B have
been pumped into the
mixing head prior to
injection into the mold
cavity (some details of
processing equipment
omitted).
Section 13.7/Compression and Transfer Molding
295

13.7.1 COMPRESSION MOLDING
Compression molding is an old and widely used molding process for thermosetting
plastics. Its applications also include rubber tires and various polymer matrix composite
parts. The process, illustrated in Figure 13.28 for a TS plastic, consists of (1) loading a
precise amount of molding compound, called the charge, into the bottom half of a heated
mold; (2) bringing the mold halves together to compress the charge, forcing it to flow and
conform to the shape of the cavity; (3) heating the charge by means of the hot mold to
polymerize and cure the material into a solidified part; and (4) opening the mold halves
and removing the part from the cavity.
The initial charge of molding compound can be any of several forms, including
powders or pellets, liquid, or preform. The amount of polymer must be precisely controlled
to obtain repeatable consistency in the molded product. It has become common practice to
preheat the charge before its placement into the mold; this softens the polymer and
shortens the production cycle time. Preheating methods include infrared heaters, convec-
tion heating in an oven, and use of a heated rotating screw in a barrel. The latter technique
(borrowed from injection molding) is also used to meter the amount of the charge.
Compression molding presses are oriented vertically and contain two platens to
which the mold halves are fastened. The presses involve either of two types of actuation:
(1) upstroke of the bottom platen or (2) downstroke of the top platen, the former being
the more common machine configuration. They are generally powered by a hydraulic
cylinder that can be designed to provide clamping capacities up to several hundred tons.
Molds for compression molding are generally simpler than their injection mold
counterparts. There is no sprue and runner system in a compression mold, and the process
itself is generally limited to simpler part geometries because of the lower flow capabilities
of the starting thermosetting materials. However, provision must be made for heating the
mold, usually accomplished by electric resistance heating, steam, or hot oil circulation.
Compression molds can be classified as hand molds, used for trial runs; semiautomatic,
in which the press follows a programmed cycle but the operator manually loads and
unloads the press; and automatic, which operate under a fully automatic press cycle
(including automatic loading and unloading).
FIGURE 13.28
Compression molding for thermosetting plastics: (1) charge is loaded; (2) and (3) charge is compressed
and cured; and (4) part is ejected and removed (some details omitted).
296
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

Materials for compression molding include phenolics, melamine, urea-formaldehyde,
epoxies, urethanes, and elastomers. Typical moldings include electric plugs and sockets,
pot handles, and dinnerware plates. Advantages of compression molding in these
applications include (1) molds that are simpler and less expensive, (2) less scrap, and (3)
low residual stresses in the molded parts. A typical disadvantage is longer cycle times
and therefore lower production rates than injection molding.
13.7.2 TRANSFER MOLDING
In this process, a thermosetting charge is loaded into a chamber immediately ahead of the
mold cavity, where it is heated; pressure is then applied to force the softened polymer to
flow into the heated mold where curing occurs. There are two variants of the process,
illustrated in Figure 13.29: (a) pot transfer molding, in which the charge is injected from a
FIGURE13.29
(a)Pottransfermolding,and(b)plungertransfermolding. Cycleinbothprocessesis:(1)chargeisloaded
into pot, (2) softened polymer is pressed into mold cavity and cured, and (3) part is ejected.
Section 13.7/Compression and Transfer Molding
297

‘‘pot’’ through a vertical sprue channel into the cavity; and (b) plunger transfer molding, in
which the charge is injected by means of a plunger from a heated well through lateral
channels into the mold cavity. In both cases, scrap is produced each cycle in the form of
the leftover material in the base of the well and lateral channels, called the cull. In
addition, the sprue in pot transfer is scrap material. Because the polymers are thermo-
setting, the scrap cannot be recovered.
Transfer molding is closely related to compression molding, because it is used on the
same polymer types (thermosets and elastomers). One can also see similarities to injection
molding, inthe waythecharge ispreheatedinaseparate chamberandthen injectedintothe
mold. Transfer molding is capable of molding part shapes that are more intricate than
compression molding but not as intricate as injection molding. Transfer molding also lends
itself to molding with inserts, in which a metal or ceramic insert is placed into the cavity
before injection, and the heated plastic bonds to the insert during molding.
13.8
BLOW MOLDING AND ROTATIONAL MOLDING
Both of these processes are used to make hollow, seamless parts out of thermoplastic
polymers. Rotational molding can also be used for thermosets. Parts range in size from
small plastic bottles of only 5 mL (0.15 oz) to large storage drums of 38,000-L (10,000-gal)
capacity. Although the two processes compete in certain cases, generally they have found
their own niches. Blow molding is more suited to the mass production of small disposable
containers, whereas rotational molding favors large, hollow shapes.
13.8.1 BLOW MOLDING
Blow molding is a molding process in which air pressure is used to inflate soft plastic
inside a mold cavity. It is an important industrial process for making one-piece hollow
plastic parts with thin walls, such as bottles and similar containers. Because many of these
items are used for consumer beverages for mass markets, production is typically
organized for very high quantities. The technology is borrowed from the glass industry
(Section 12.2.1) with which plastics compete in the disposable and recyclable bottle
market.
Blow molding is accomplished in two steps: (1) fabrication of a starting tube of
molten plastic, called a parison (same as in glass-blowing); and (2) inflation of the tube to
the desired final shape.
Forming the parison is accomplished by either extrusion or
injection molding. The video clip on plastic blow molding illustrates the two categories.
VIDEO CLIP
Plastic Blow Molding. This clip contains three segments: (1) blow molding materials and
processes, (2) extrusion blow molding, and (3) injection blow molding.
Extrusion Blow Molding
This form of blow molding consists of the cycle illustrated in
Figure 13.30. In most cases, the process is organized as a very high production operation
for making plastic bottles. The sequence is automated and often integrated with down-
stream operations such as bottle filling and labeling.
It is usually a requirement that the blown container be rigid, and rigidity depends on
wall thickness among other factors. We can relate wall thickness of the blown container to
the starting extruded parison [12], assuming a cylindrical shape for the final product. The
effect of die swell on the parison is shown in Figure 13.31. The mean diameter of the tube as
298
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

it exits the die is determined by the mean die diameter Dd. Die swell causes expansion to a
mean parison diameter Dp. At the same time, wall thickness swells from td to tp. The swell
ratio of the parison diameter and wall thickness is given by
rs ¼ Dp
Dd
¼ tp
td
ð13:20Þ
When the parison is inflated to the blow mold diameter Dm, there is a corresponding
reduction in wall thickness to tm. Assuming constant volume of cross section, we have
pDptp ¼ pDmtm
ð13:21Þ
Solving for tm, we obtain
tm ¼ Dptp
Dm
FIGURE 13.30
Extrusion blow molding: (1) extrusion of parison; (2) parison is pinched at the top and sealed at the
bottom around a metal blow pin as the two halves of the mold come together; (3) the tube is inﬂated so that it takes the
shape of the mold cavity; and (4) mold is opened to remove the solidiﬁed part.
FIGURE 13.31
(1) Dimensions of
extrusion die, showing
parisonafterdieswell;and
(2) ﬁnal blow-molded
container in extrusion
blow molding.
Section 13.8/Blow Molding and Rotational Molding
299

Substituting Eq. (13.20) into this equation, we get
tm ¼ r2
stdDd
Dm
ð13:22Þ
The amount of die swell in the initial extrusion process can be measured by direct
observation; and the dimensions of the die are known. Thus, we can determine the wall
thickness on the blow-molded container.
Injection Blow Molding
In this process, the starting parison is injection molded rather
than extruded. A simplified sequence is outlined in Figure 13.32. Compared to its
extrusion-based competitor, injection blow molding usually has the following advan-
tages: (1) higher production rate, (2) greater accuracy in the final dimensions, (3) lower
scrap rates, and (4) less wasteful of material. On the other hand, larger containers can be
produced with extrusion blow molding because the mold in injection molding is so
expensive for large parisons. Also, extrusion blow molding is technically more feasible
and economical for double-layer bottles used for storing certain medicines, personal care
products, and various chemical compounds.2
In a variation of injection blow molding, called stretch blow molding (Figure 13.33),
the blowing rod extends downward into the injection molded parison during step 2, thus
stretching the soft plastic and creating a more favorable stressing of the polymer than
conventional injection blow molding or extrusion blow molding. The resulting structure is
more rigid, with higher transparency and better impact resistance. The most widely used
material for stretch blow molding is polyethylene terephthalate (PET), a polyester that has
very low permeability and is strengthened by the stretch-blow-molding process. The
combination of properties makes it ideal as a container for carbonated beverages (e.g.,
2-L soda bottles).
Materials and Products
Blow molding is limited to thermoplastics. Polyethylene is the
polymer most commonly used for blow molding—in particular, high density and high
molecular weight polyethylene (HDPE and HMWPE). In comparing their properties with
those of low density PE given the requirement for stiffness in the final product, it is more
FIGURE 13.32
Injection blow molding: (1) parison is injected molded around a blowing rod; (2) injection
mold is opened and parison is transferred to a blow mold; (3) soft polymer is inﬂated to conform to the blow
mold; and (4) blow mold is opened, and blown product is removed.
2The author is indebted to Tom Walko, plant manager at one of Graham Packaging Company’s blow
molding plants for providing the preceding comparisons between extrusion and injection blow molding.
300
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

economical to use these more expensive materials because the container walls can be made
thinner. Other blow moldings are made of polypropylene (PP), polyvinylchloride (PVC),
and polyethylene terephthalate.
Disposable containers for packaging liquid consumer goods constitute the major
share of products made by blow molding; but they are not the only products. Other items
include large shipping drums (55-gal) for liquids and powders, large storage tanks (2000-
gal), automotive gasoline tanks, toys, and hulls for sail boards and small boats. In the
latter case, two boat hulls are made in a single blow molding and subsequently cut into
two open hulls.
13.8.2 ROTATIONAL MOLDING
Rotational molding uses gravity inside a rotating mold to achieve a hollow form. Also
calledrotomolding,itisanalternativetoblowmoldingformakinglarge,hollowshapes.Itis
used principally for thermoplastic polymers, but applications for thermosets and elasto-
mers are becoming more common. Rotomolding tends to favor more complex external
geometries, larger parts, and lower production quantities than blow molding. The process
consists of the following steps: (1) A predetermined amount of polymer powder is loaded
into the cavity of a split mold. (2) The mold is then heated and simultaneously rotated on
two perpendicular axes, so that the powder impinges on all internal surfaces of the mold,
gradually forming a fused layer of uniform thickness. (3) While still rotating, the mold is
cooled so that the plastic skin solidifies. (4) The mold is opened, and the part is unloaded.
Rotational speeds used in the process are relatively slow. It is gravity, not centrifugal force,
that causes uniform coating of the mold surfaces.
Molds in rotational molding are simple and inexpensive compared with injection
molding or blow molding, but the production cycle is much longer, lasting perhaps 10 min
or more. To balance these advantages and disadvantages in production, rotational
molding is often performed on a multicavity indexing machine, such as the three-station
machine shown in Figure 13.34. The machine is designed so that three molds are indexed
in sequence through three workstations. Thus, all three molds are working simulta-
neously. The first workstation is an unload–load station in which the finished part is
unloaded from the mold, and the powder for the next part is loaded into the cavity. The
second station consists of a heating chamber where hot-air convection heats the mold
while it is simultaneously rotated. Temperatures inside the chamber are around 375C
FIGURE 13.33
Stretch blow molding: (1) injection molding of parison, (2) stretching, and (3) blowing.
Section 13.8/Blow Molding and Rotational Molding
301

(700F), depending on the polymer and the item being molded. The third station cools the
mold, using forced cold air or water spray, to cool and solidify the plastic molding inside.
A fascinating variety of articles are made by rotational molding. The list includes
hollow toys such as hobby horses and playing balls; boat and canoe hulls, sandboxes, small
swimming pools; buoys and other flotation devices; truck body parts, automotive dash-
boards, fuel tanks; luggage pieces, furniture, garbage cans; fashion mannequins; large
industrial barrels, containers, and storage tanks; portable outhouses, and septic tanks. The
most popular molding material is polyethylene, especially HDPE. Other plastics include
polypropylene, ABS, and high-impact polystyrene.
13.9
THERMOFORMING
Thermoforming is a process in which a flat thermoplastic sheet is heated and deformed
into the desired shape. The process is widely used in packaging of consumer products and
fabricating large items such as bathtubs, contoured skylights, and internal door liners for
refrigerators.
Thermoforming consists of two main steps: heating and forming. Heating is usually
accomplished by radiant electric heaters, located on one or both sides of the starting plastic
sheetatadistanceofroughly125mm(5in).Durationoftheheatingcycleneededtosufficiently
softenthesheetdependsonthepolymer—itsthicknessandcolor.Methodsbywhichformingis
accomplished can be classified into three basic categories: (1) vacuum thermoforming, (2)
pressure thermoforming, and (3) mechanical thermoforming. In our discussion of these
methods, we describe the forming of sheet stock, but in the packaging industry most
thermoforming operations are performed on thin films.
Vacuum Thermoforming
This was the first thermoforming process (simply called
vacuum forming when it was developed in the 1950s). Negative pressure is used to draw a
preheated sheet into a mold cavity. The process is explained in Figure 13.35 in its most
FIGURE 13.34
Rotational molding cycle
performed on a
three-station indexing
machine: (1) unload–load
station; (2) heat and rotate
mold; (3) cool the mold.
302
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

basic form. The holes for drawing the vacuum in the mold are on the order of 0.8 mm
(0.031 in) in diameter, so their effect on the plastic surface is minor.
Pressure Thermoforming
An alternative to vacuum forming involves positive pres-
sure to force the heated plastic into the mold cavity. This is called pressure thermoforming
or blow forming; its advantage over vacuum forming is that higher pressures can be
developed because the latter is limited to a theoretical maximum of 1 atm. Blow-forming
pressures of 3 to 4 atm are common. The process sequence is similar to the previous, the
difference being that the sheet is pressurized from above into the mold cavity. Vent holes
are provided in the mold to exhaust the trapped air. The forming portion of the sequence
(steps 2 and 3) is illustrated in Figure 13.36.
At this point it is useful to distinguish between negative and positive molds. The
molds shown in Figures 13.35 and 13.36 are negative molds because they have concave
cavities. A positive mold has a convex shape. Both types are used in thermoforming. In
the case of the positive mold, the heated sheet is draped over the convex form and
negative or positive pressure is used to force the plastic against the mold surface. A
positive mold is shown in Figure 13.37 for vacuum thermoforming.
The difference between positive and negative molds may seem unimportant,
because the part shapes are the same in the diagrams. However, if the part is drawn
into the negative mold, then its exterior surface will have the exact surface contour of the
mold cavity. The inside surface will be an approximation of the contour and will possess a
finish corresponding to that of the starting sheet. By contrast, if the sheet is draped over a
positive mold, then its interior surface will be identical to that of the convex mold; and its
outside surface will follow approximately. Depending on the requirements of the
product, this distinction might be important.
FIGURE 13.35
Vacuum
thermoforming: (1) a ﬂat
plastic sheet is softened
by heating; (2) the soft-
enedsheetisplacedovera
concave mold cavity; (3) a
vacuum draws the sheet
into the cavity; and (4) the
plastichardensoncontact
with the cold mold
surface, and the part is
removed and
subsequently trimmed
from the web.
Section 13.9/Thermoforming
303

Another difference is in the thinning of the plastic sheet, one of the problems in
thermoforming. Unless the contour of the mold is very shallow, there will be significant
thinning of the sheet as it is stretched to conform to the mold contour. Positive and
negative molds produce a different pattern of thinning in a given part. Consider the tub-
shaped part in our figures. In the positive mold, as the sheet is draped over the convex
form, the portion making contact with the top surface (corresponding to the base of the
tub) solidifies quickly and experiences virtually no stretching. This results in a thick base
but significant thinning in the walls of the tub. By contrast, a negative mold results in a
more even distribution of stretching and thinning in the sheet before contact is made with
the cold surface.
Away to improve the thinning distribution with a positive mold is to prestretch the
sheet before draping it over the convex form. As shown in Figure 13.38, the heated plastic
sheet is stretched uniformly by vacuum pressure into a spherical shape before drawing it
over the mold.
The first step depicted in frame (1) of Figure 13.38 can be used alone as a method to
produce globe-shaped parts such as skylight windows and transparent domes. In the
process, closely controlled air pressure is applied to inflate the soft sheet. The pressure is
maintained until the blown shape has solidified.
FIGURE 13.36
Pressure thermoforming. The sequence is similar to the previous ﬁgure, the difference being:
(2) sheet is placed over a mold cavity; and (3) positive pressure forces the sheet into the cavity.
FIGURE 13.37
Use of a
positive mold in vacuum
thermoforming: (1) the
heated plastic sheet is
positioned above the
convex mold and (2) the
clamp is lowered into po-
sition, draping the sheet
overthemoldasavacuum
forces the sheet against
the mold surface.
304
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

Mechanical Thermoforming
The third method, called mechanical thermoforming,
uses matching positive and negative molds that are brought together against the heated
plastic sheet, forcing it to assume their shape. In pure mechanical forming, air pressure is
not used at all. The process is illustrated in Figure 13.39. Its advantages are better
dimensional control and the opportunity for surface detailing on both sides of the part.
The disadvantage is that two mold halves are required; therefore, the molds for the other
two methods are less costly.
Applications
Thermoforming is a secondary shaping process, the primary process being
that which produces the sheet or film (Section 13.3). Only thermoplastics can be thermo-
formed, because extruded sheets of thermosetting or elastomeric polymers have already
been cross-linked and cannot be softened by reheating. Common thermoforming plastics
are polystyrene, cellulose acetate and cellulose acetate butyrate, ABS, PVC, acrylic
(polymethylmethacrylate), polyethylene, and polypropylene.
FIGURE 13.38
Prestretching the sheet
in (1) prior to draping and
vacuuming it over a
positive mold in (2).
FIGURE 13.39
Mechanical
thermoforming:(1)heated
sheet placed above a
negative mold, and
(2) mold is closed to shape
the sheet.
Section 13.9/Thermoforming
305

Massproductionthermoformingoperationsare performedinthepackagingindustry.
The starting sheet or film is rapidly fed through a heating chamber and then mechanically
formed into the desired shape. The operations are often designed to produce multiple parts
with each stroke of thepressusing molds with multiple cavities. In some cases, the extrusion
machine that produces the sheet or film is located directly upstream from the thermoform-
ing process, thereby eliminating the need to reheat the plastic. For best efficiency, the filling
process to put the consumable food item into the container is placed immediately down-
stream from thermoforming.
Thin film packaging items that are mass produced by thermoforming include blister
packs and skin packs. They offer an attractive way to display certain commodity products
such as cosmetics, toiletries, small tools, and fasteners (nails, screws, etc.). Thermoform-
ing applications include large parts that can be produced from thicker sheet stock.
Examples include covers for business machines, boat hulls, shower stalls, diffusers for
lights, advertising displays and signs, bathtubs, and certain toys. Contoured skylights and
internal door liners for refrigerators are made, respectively, out of acrylic (because of its
transparency) and ABS (because of its ease in forming and resistance to oils and fats
found in refrigerators).
13.10
CASTING
In polymer shaping, casting involves pouring of a liquid resin into a mold, using gravity to
fill the cavity, and allowing the polymer to harden. Both thermoplastics and thermosets are
cast. Examples of the former include acrylics, polystyrene, polyamides (nylons), and vinyls
(PVC). Conversion of the liquid resin into a hardened thermoplastic can be accomplished
in several ways, which include (1) heating the thermoplastic resin to a highly fluid state so
that it readily pours and fills the mold cavity, and then permitting it to cool and solidify in
the mold; (2) using a low-molecular-weight prepolymer (or monomer) and polymerizing it
in the mold to form a high-molecular-weight thermoplastic; and (3) pouring a plastisol (a
liquid suspension of fine particles of a thermoplastic resin such as PVC in a plasticizer) into
a heated mold so that it gels and solidifies.
Thermosetting polymers shaped by casting include polyurethane, unsaturated
polyesters, phenolics, and epoxies. The process involves pouring the liquid ingredients
that form the thermoset into a mold so that polymerization and cross-linking occur. Heat
and/or catalysts may be required depending on the resin system. The reactions must be
sufficiently slow to allow mold pouring to be completed. Fast-reacting thermosetting
systems, such as certain polyurethane systems, require alternative shaping processes like
reaction injection molding (Section 13.6.5).
Advantages of casting over alternative processes such as injection molding include:
(1) the mold is simpler and less costly, (2) the cast item is relatively free of residual stresses
and viscoelastic memory, and (3) the process is suited to low production quantities.
Focusing on advantage (2), acrylic sheets (Plexiglas, Lucite) are generally cast between
two pieces of highly polished plate glass. The casting process permits a high degree of
flatness and desirable optical qualities to be achieved in the clear plastic sheets. Such
flatness and clarity cannot be obtained by flat sheet extrusion. A disadvantage in some
applications is significant shrinkage of the cast part during solidification. For example,
acrylic sheets undergo a volumetric contraction of about 20% when cast. This is much
more than in injection molding, in which high pressures are used to pack the mold cavity to
reduce shrinkage.
Slush casting is an alternative to conventional casting, borrowed from metal casting
technology. In slush casting, a liquid plastisol is poured into the cavity of a heated split
mold, so that a skin forms at the surface of the mold. After a duration that depends on the
306
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

desired thickness of the skin, the excess liquid is poured out of the mold; the mold is then
opened for part removal. The process is also referred to as shell casting [6].
An important application of casting in electronics is encapsulation, in which items
such as transformers, coils, connectors, and other electrical components are encased in
plastic by casting.
13.11
POLYMER FOAM PROCESSING AND FORMING
A polymer foam is a polymer-and-gas mixture, which gives the material a porous or
cellular structure. Other terms used for polymer foams include cellular polymer, blown
polymer, and expanded polymer. The most common polymer foams are polystyrene
(Styrofoam) and polyurethane. Other polymers used to make foams include natural
rubber (‘‘foamed rubber’’) and polyvinylchloride (PVC).
The characteristic properties of a foamed polymer include (1) low density, (2) high
strength per unit weight, (3) good thermal insulation, and (4) good energy absorbing
qualities. The elasticity of the base polymer determines the corresponding property of
the foam. Polymer foams can be classified [6] as (1) elastomeric, in which the matrix
polymer is a rubber, capable of large elastic deformation; (2) flexible, in which the matrix
is a highly plasticized polymer such as soft PVC; and (3) rigid, in which the polymer is a
stiff thermoplastic such as polystyrene or a thermosetting plastic such as a phenolic.
Depending on chemical formulation and degree of cross-linking, polyurethanes can
range over all three categories.
The characteristic properties of polymer foams, and the ability to control their
elastic behavior through selection of the base polymer, make these materials highly
suitable for certain types of applications, including hot beverage cups, heat insulating
structural materials and cores for structural panels, packaging materials, cushion materi-
als for furniture and bedding, padding for automobile dashboards, and products requiring
buoyancy.
Common gases used in polymer foams are air, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide. The
proportion of gas can range up to 90% or more. The gas is introduced into the polymer by
several methods, called foaming processes. These include (1) mixing a liquid resin with air
by mechanical agitation, then hardening the polymer by means of heat or chemical
reaction; (2) mixing a physical blowing agent with the polymer—a gas such as nitrogen
(N2) or pentane (C5H12), which can be dissolved in the polymer melt under pressure, so
that the gas comes out of solution and expands when the pressure is subsequently
reduced; and (3) mixing the polymer with chemical compounds, called chemical blowing
agents, that decompose at elevated temperatures to liberate gases such as CO2 or N2
within the melt.
The way the gas is distributed throughout the polymer matrix distinguishes two
basic foam structures, illustrated in Figure 13.40: (a) closed cell, in which the gas pores
are roughly spherical and completely separated from each other by the polymer matrix;
and (b) open cell, in which the pores are interconnected to some extent, allowing passage
of a fluid through the foam. A closed cell structure makes a satisfactory life jacket; an
open cell structure would become waterlogged. Other attributes that characterize the
structure include the relative proportions of polymer and gas (already mentioned) and
the cell density (number of cells per unit volume), which is inversely related to the size of
the individual air cells in the foam.
There are many shaping processes for polymer foam products. Because the two
most important foams are polystyrene and polyurethane, this discussion is limited to
shaping processes for these two materials. Because polystyrene is a thermoplastic and
polyurethane can be either a thermoset or an elastomer (it can also be a thermoplastic but
Section 13.11/Polymer Foam Processing and Forming
307

is less important in this form), the processes covered here for these materials are
representative of those used for other polymer foams.
Polystyrene foams are shaped by extrusion and molding. In extrusion, a physical or
chemical blowing agent is fed into the polymer melt near the die end of the extruder
barrel; thus, the extrudate consists of the expanded polymer. Large sheets and boards are
made in this way and are subsequently cut to size for heat insulation panels and sections.
Severalmoldingprocessesareavailableforpolystyrenefoam.Wepreviouslydiscussed
structuralfoammoldingandsandwichmolding(Section13.6.5).Amorewidelyusedprocess
is expandable foam molding, in which the molding material usually consists of prefoamed
polystyrenebeads. Theprefoamedbeads areproducedfrom pelletsofsolid polystyrenethat
have been impregnated with a physical blowing agent. Prefoaming is performed in a large
tankbyapplying steamheattopartiallyexpandthepellets, simultaneouslyagitating themto
preventfusion.Then,inthemoldingprocess,theprefoamedbeadsarefedintoamoldcavity,
where they are further expanded and fused together to form the molded product. Hot
beverage cups of polystyrene foam are produced in this way. In some processes, the
prefoaming step is omitted, and the impregnated beads are fed directly into the mold cavity,
wheretheyareheated,expanded,andfused.Inotheroperations,theexpandablefoamisfirst
formedintoaflatsheetbytheblown-filmextrusionprocess(Section13.3)andthenshapedby
thermoforming (Section 13.9) into packaging containers such as egg cartons.
Polyurethane foam products are made in a one-step process in which the two liquid
ingredients (polyol and isocyanate) are mixed and immediately fed into a mold or other
form, so that the polymer is synthesized and the part geometry is created at the same time.
Shaping processes for polyurethane foam can be divided into two basic types [11]: spraying
and pouring. Spraying involves use of a spray gun into which the two ingredients are
continuously fed, mixed, and then sprayed onto a target surface. The reactions leading to
polymerization and foaming occur after application on the surface. This method is used to
apply rigid insulating foams onto construction panels, railway cars, and similar large items.
Pouringinvolvesdispensingtheingredientsfromamixingheadintoanopenorclosedmold
in which the reactions occur. An open mold can be a container with the required contour (e.
g., for an automobile seat cushion) or a long channel that is slowly moved past the pouring
spout to make long, continuous sections of foam. The closed mold is a completely enclosed
cavity into which a certain amount of the mixture is dispensed. Expansion of the reactants
completely fills the cavity to shape the part. For fast-reacting polyurethanes, the mixture
must be rapidly injected into the mold cavity using reaction injection molding (Section
13.66). The degree of cross-linking, controlled by the starting ingredients, determines the
relative stiffness of the resulting foam.
13.12
PRODUCT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
Plastics are an important design material, but the designer must be aware of their
limitations. This section lists some design guidelines for plastic components, beginning
with those that apply in general, and then ones applicable to extrusion and molding
(injection molding, compression molding, and transfer molding).
FIGURE 13.40
Two
polymer foam structures: (a)
closed cell, and (b) open cell.
308
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

Several general guidelines apply, irrespective of the shaping process. They are
mostly limitations of plastic materials that must be considered by the designer.

Strength and stiffness. Plastics are not as strong or stiff as metals. They should not be
used in applications in which high stresses will be encountered. Creep resistance is
also a limitation. Strength properties vary significantly among plastics, and strength-
to-weight ratios for some plastics are competitive with metals in certain applications.

Impact resistance. The capacity of plastics to absorb impact is generally good;
plastics compare favorably with most metals.

Servicetemperaturesofplasticsarelimitedrelative toengineeringmetalsandceramics.

Thermal expansion is greater for plastics than metals; so dimensional changes owing
to temperature variations are much more significant than for metals.

Many types of plastics are subject to degradation from sunlight and certain other forms
of radiation. Also, some plastics degrade in oxygen and ozone atmospheres. Finally,
plastics are soluble inmanycommon solvents. Onthepositiveside, plasticsareresistant
to conventional corrosion mechanisms that afflict many metals. The weaknesses of
specific plastics must be taken into account by the designer.
Extrusion is one of the most widely used plastic shaping processes. Several design
recommendationsarepresentedhereforconventionalextrusion(compiledmostlyfrom[3]).

Wall thickness. Uniform wall thickness is desirable in an extruded cross section.
Variations in wall thickness result in nonuniform plastic flow and uneven cooling that
tend to warp the extrudate.

Hollow sections. Hollow sections complicate die design and plastic flow. It is
desirable to use extruded cross sections that are not hollow yet satisfy functional
requirements.

Corners. Sharp corners, inside and outside, should be avoided in the cross section,
because they result in uneven flow during processing and stress concentrations in the
final product.
The following guidelines apply to injection molding (the most popular molding
process), compression molding, and transfer molding (compiled from Bralla [3], McCrum
[10], and other sources).

Economic production quantities. Each molded part requires a unique mold, and the
mold for any of these processes can be costly, particularly for injection molding.
Minimum production quantities for injection molding are usually around 10,000
pieces; for compression molding, minimum quantities are around 1000 parts, because
of the simpler mold designs involved. Transfer molding lies between the other two.

Part complexity. Although more complex part geometries mean more costly molds,
it may nevertheless be economical to design a complex molding if the alternative
involves many individual components assembled together. An advantage of plastic
molding is that it allows multiple functional features to be combined into one part.

Wall thickness. Thick cross sections are generally undesirable; they are wasteful of
material, more likely to cause warping caused by shrinkage, and take longer to
harden. Reinforcing ribs can be used in molded plastic parts to achieve increased
stiffness without excessive wall thickness. The ribs should be made thinner than the
walls they reinforce, to minimize sink marks on the outside wall.

Corner radii and fillets. Sharp corners, both external and internal, are undesirable in
molded parts; they interrupt smooth flow of the melt, tend to create surface defects,
and cause stress concentrations in the finished part.
Section 13.12/Product Design Considerations
309


Holes. Holes are quite feasible in plastic moldings, but they complicate mold design
and part removal. They also cause interruptions in melt flow.

Draft. A molded part should be designed with a draft on its sides to facilitate
removal from the mold. This is especially important on the inside wall of a cup-
shaped part because the molded plastic contracts against the positive mold shape.
The recommended draft for thermosets is around 1/2 to 1; for thermoplastics it
usually ranges between 1/8 and 1/2. Suppliers of plastic molding compounds
provide recommended draft values for their products.

Tolerances. Tolerances specify the allowable manufacturing variations for a part.
Although shrinkage is predictable under closely controlled conditions, generous
tolerances are desirable for injection moldings because of variations in process
parameters that affect shrinkage and diversity of part geometries encountered. Table
13.2 lists typical tolerances for molded part dimensions of selected plastics.
REFERENCES
[1] Baird, D. G., and Collias, D. I. Polymer Processing
Principles and Design, John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 1998.
[2] Billmeyer, Fred, W., Jr. Textbook of Polymer Sci-
ence, 3rd ed. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1984.
[3] Bralla, J. G.(editor in chief). Design for Manufactur-
ability Handbook, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York, 1998.
[4] Briston, J. H. Plastic Films, 3rd ed. Longman Group
U.K., Essex, England, 1989.
[5] Chanda, M., and Roy, S. K. Plastics Technology
Handbook, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1998.
[6] Charrier, J-M. Polymeric Materials and Processing,
Oxford University Press, New York, 1991.
[7] Engineering Materials Handbook, Vol. 2, Engineering
Plastics, ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio, 1988.
[8] Hall, C. Polymer Materials, 2nd ed. John Wiley &
Sons. New York, 1989.
[9] Hensen,F.(ed.).PlasticExtrusionTechnology,Hanser
Publishers, Munich, FRG, 1988. (Distributed in United
States by Oxford University Press, New York.)
[10] McCrum, N. G., Buckley, C. P., and Bucknall, C. B.
Principles of Polymer Engineering, 2nd ed., Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK, 1997.
[11] Modern Plastics Encyclopedia, Modern Plastics,
McGraw-Hill, Hightstown, New Jersey, 1991.
[12] Morton-Jones, D. H. Polymer Processing, Chapman
and Hall, London, UK, 1989.
[13] Pearson, J. R. A. Mechanics of Polymer Processing,
Elsevier
Applied
Science
Publishers,
London,
1985.
[14] Rubin, I. I. Injection Molding: Theory and Practice,
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1973.
[15] Rudin, A. The Elements of Polymer Science and
Engineering, 2nd ed., Academic Press, Orlando,
Florida, 1999.
[16] Strong, A. B. Plastics: Materials and Processing, 3rd
ed. Pearson Educational, Upper Saddle River, New
Jersey, 2006.
[17] Sweeney, F. M. Reaction Injection Molding Ma-
chinery and Processes, Marcel Dekker, Inc., New
York, 1987.
TABLE 13.2
Typical tolerances on molded parts for selected plastics.
Tolerances for:a
Tolerances for:a
Plastic
50-mm
Dimension
10-mm Hole
Plastic
50-mm
Dimension
10-mm Hole
Thermoplastic:
Thermosetting:
ABS
0.2 mm
(0.007 in)
0.08 mm
(0.003 in)
Epoxies
0.15 mm
(0.006 in)
0.05 mm
(0.002 in)
Polyethylene
0.3 mm
(0.010 in)
0.13 mm
(0.005 in)
Phenolics
0.2 mm
(0.008 in)
0.08 mm
(0.003 in)
Polystyrene
0.15 mm
(0.006 in)
0.1 mm
(0.004 in)
Values represent typical commercial molding practice. Compiled from [3], [7], [14], and [19].
aFor smaller sizes, tolerances can be reduced. For larger sizes, more generous tolerances are required.
310
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

[18] Tadmor, Z., and Gogos, C. G. Principles of Polymer
Processing,
John
Wiley
&
Sons,
New
York,
1979.
[19] Wick, C., Benedict, J. T., and Veilleux, R. F. Tool and
Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol.
II: Forming. Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
Dearborn, Michigan, 1984, Chapter 18.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
13.1.
What are some of the reasons why plastic shaping
processes are important?
13.2.
Identify the main categories of plastics shaping
processes, as classified by the resulting product
geometry.
13.3.
Viscosity is an important property of a polymer
melt in plastics shaping processes. Upon what
parameters does viscosity depend?
13.4.
How does the viscosity of a polymer melt differ
from most fluids that are Newtonian.
13.5.
What does viscoelasticity mean, when applied to a
polymer melt?
13.6.
Define die swell in extrusion.
13.7.
Briefly describe the plastic extrusion process.
13.8.
The barrel and screw of an extruder are generally
divided into three sections; identify the sections.
13.9.
What are the functions of the screen pack and
breaker plate at the die end of the extruder barrel?
13.10.
What are the various forms of extruded shapes and
corresponding dies?
13.11.
What is the distinction between plastic sheet and
film?
13.12.
What is the blown-film process for producing film
stock?
13.13.
Describe the calendering process.
13.14.
Polymer fibers and filaments are used in several
applications; what is the most important applica-
tion commercially?
13.15.
Technically, what is the difference between a fiber
and a filament?
13.16.
Among the synthetic fiber materials, which are the
most important?
13.17.
Briefly describe the injection molding process.
13.18.
An injection-molding machine is divided into two
principal components. Name them.
13.19.
What are the two basic types of clamping units?
13.20.
What is the function of gates in injection molds?
13.21.
What are the advantages of a three-plate mold over
a two-plate mold in injection molding?
13.22.
Discuss some of the defects that can occur in plastic
injection molding.
13.23.
Describe structural-foam molding.
13.24.
What are the significant differences in the equip-
ment and operating procedures between injection
molding of thermoplastics and injection molding of
thermosets?
13.25.
What is reaction injection molding?
13.26.
What kinds of products are produced by blow
molding?
13.27.
What is the form of the starting material in
thermoforming?
13.28.
What is the difference between a positive mold and
a negative mold in thermoforming?
13.29.
Why are the molds generally more costly in me-
chanical thermoforming than in pressure or vac-
uum thermoforming?
13.30.
What are the processes by which polymer foams
are produced?
13.31.
What are some of the general considerations that
product designers must keep in mind when design-
ing components out of plastics?
13.32.
(Video) According to the injection molding videos,
what are the four primary elements that influence
the injection molding process?
13.33.
(Video) According to the injection molding video,
name the four types of mold design most common
in industry.
13.34.
(Video) According to the injection molding video,
what is the most common type of injection molding
machine used in industry?
13.35.
(Video) According to the blow molding video, what
materials are used in blow molding? Name three.
13.36.
(Video) List the four most common blow-molding
processes according to the video on blow molding.
13.37.
(Video) List the stages of extrusion blow molding
according to the video.
13.38.
(Video) Name the four types of finishing opera-
tions performed on plastics, according to the plas-
tics finishing video.
13.39.
(Video) What are the different processes that can
be used to apply decorations to plastic parts
according to the plastics finishing video?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 29 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
Multiple Choice Quiz
311

omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
13.1.
The forward movement of polymer melt in an
extruder barrel is resisted by drag flow, which is
caused by the resistance to flow through the die
orifice: (a) true or (b) false?
13.2.
Which of the following are sections of a conven-
tional extruder barrel for thermoplastics (three
best answers): (a) compression section, (b) die
section, (c) feed section, (d) heating section,
(e) metering section, and (f) shaping section?
13.3.
Which of the following processes are associated
with the production of plastic sheet and film (three
correct answers): (a) blown-film extrusion process,
(b) calendering, (c) chill-roll extrusion, (d) doctor
blade method, (e) spinning, (f) thermoforming, and
(g) transfer molding?
13.4.
The principal components of an injection molding
machine are which two of the following: (a) clamp-
ing unit, (b) hopper, (c) injection unit, (d) mold, and
(e) part ejection unit?
13.5.
The parting line in injection molding is which
one of the following: (a) the lines formed where
polymer melt meets after flowing around a core in
the mold, (b) the narrow gate sections where the
parts are separated from the runner, (c) where
the clamping unit is joined to the injection unit
in the molding machine, or (d) where the two mold
halves come together?
13.6.
The function of the ejection system is which one of
the following: (a) move polymer melt into the mold
cavity, (b) open the mold halves after the cavity is
filled, (c) remove the molded parts from the runner
system after molding, or (d) separate the part from
the cavity after molding?
13.7.
A three-plate mold offers which of the following
advantages when compared to a two-plate mold
(two best answers): (a) automatic separation of
parts from runners, (b) gating is usually at the
base of the part to reduce weld lines, (c) sprue
does not solidify, and (d) stronger molded parts?
13.8.
Which of the following defects or problems is
associated with injection molding (three correct
answers): (a) bambooing, (b) die swell, (c) drag
flow, (d) flash, (e) melt fracture, (f) short shots, or
(g) sink marks?
13.9.
In rotational molding, centrifugal force is used to
force the polymer melt against the surfaces of the
mold cavity where solidification occurs: (a) true or
(b) false?
13.10.
Use of a parison is associated with which one of the
following plastic shaping processes: (a) bi-injection
molding, (b) blow molding, (c) compression mold-
ing, (d) pressure thermoforming, or (e) sandwich
molding?
13.11.
A thermoforming mold with a convex form is called
which one of the following: (a) a die, (b) a negative
mold, (c) a positive mold, or (d) a three-plate mold?
13.12.
The term encapsulation refers to which one of the
following plastics shaping processes: (a) casting, (b)
compression molding, (c) extrusion of hollow
forms, (d) injection molding in which a metal insert
is encased in the molded part, or (e) vacuum
thermoforming using a positive mold?
13.13.
The two most common polymer foams are which
of the following: (a) polyacetal, (b) polyethylene,
(c)
polystyrene,
(d)
polyurethane,
and
(e)
polyvinylchloride?
13.14.
In which of the following properties do plastic parts
often compare favorably with metals (two best
answers): (a) impact resistance, (b) resistance to
ultraviolet radiation, (c) stiffness, (d) strength, (e)
strength-to-weight
ratio,
and
(f)
temperature
resistance?
13.15.
Which of the following processes are generally
limited
to
thermoplastic
polymers
(two
best
answers): (a) blow molding, (b) compression mold-
ing, (c) reaction injection molding, (d) thermo-
forming, (e) transfer molding, and (f) wire coating?
13.16.
Which of the following processes would be appli-
cable to produce hulls for small boats (three best
answers): (a) blow molding, (b) compression mold-
ing, (c) injection molding, (d) rotational molding,
and (e) vacuum thermoforming?
PROBLEMS
Extrusion
13.1.
The diameter of an extruder barrel is 65 mm and its
length ¼ 1.75 m. The screw rotates at 55 rev/min.
The screw channel depth ¼ 5.0 mm, and the flight
angle ¼ 18. The head pressure at the die end of the
barrel is 5.0  106 Pa. The viscosity of the polymer
melt is given as 100 Pa-s. Find the volume flow rate
of the plastic in the barrel.
13.2.
An extruder has a diameter of 5.0 in and a length to
diameter ratio of 26. The barrel heats the poly-
propylene melt to 450F, which provides a melt
312
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

viscosity of 0.0025 lb-s/in2. The pitch of the screw is
4.2 in and the channel depth is 0.15 in. In operation
the screw rotates at 50 rev/min and a head pressure
of 450 lb/in2 is generated. What is the volume flow
rate of polypropylene from the die at the end of the
barrel?
13.3.
An extruder barrel has a diameter of 110 mm and a
length of 3.0 m. The screw channel depth ¼ 7.0 mm,
and its pitch ¼ 95 mm. The viscosity of the polymer
melt is 105 Pa-s, and the head pressure in the barrel
is 4.0 MPa. What rotational speed of the screw is
required to achieve a volumetric flow rate of 90
cm3/s?
13.4.
An extruder has a barrel diameter of 2.5 in and a
length of6.0ft. Thescrewhas a channeldepthof 0.25
in,aflightangleof20,androtatesat55rev/min.The
material being extruded is polypropylene. At the
present settings, the volumetric flow rate of the
polymer melt is 1.50 in3/sec and the head pressure
is 500 lb/in2. (a) Under these operating character-
istics, what is the viscosity of the polypropylene? (b)
Using Figure 13.2, approximate the temperature in
F of the polypropylene.
13.5.
An extruder has diameter ¼ 80 mm and length ¼ 2.0
m.Itsscrew has a channel depth ¼ 5 mm, flight angle
¼ 18 degrees, and it rotates at 1 rev/sec. The plastic
melt has a shear viscosity ¼ 150 Pa-s. Determine the
extruder characteristic by computing Qmax and pmax
and then finding the equation of the straight line
between them.
13.6.
Determine the helix angle A such that the screw
pitch p is equal to the screw diameter D. This is
called the ‘‘square’’ angle in plastics extrusion - the
angle that provides a ﬂight advance equal to one
diameter for each rotation of the screw.
13.7.
An extruder barrel has a diameter of 2.5 in. The
screw rotates at 60 rev/min; its channel depth ¼
0.20 in, and its flight angle ¼ 17.5. The head
pressure at the die end of the barrel is 800 lb/in2
and the length of the barrel is 50 in. The viscosity of
the polymer melt is 122  104 lb-sec/in2. Deter-
mine the volume flow rate of the plastic in the
barrel.
13.8.
An extruder barrel has a diameter of 4.0 in and an
L/D ratio of 28. The screw channel depth ¼ 0.25 in,
and its pitch ¼ 4.8 in. It rotates at 60 rev/min. The
viscosity of the polymer melt is 100  104 lb-sec/
in2. What head pressure is required to obtain a
volume flow rate ¼ 150 in3/min?
13.9.
An extrusion operation produces continuous tub-
ing with outside diameter ¼ 2.0 in and inside
diameter ¼ 1.7 in. The extruder barrel has a diam-
eter ¼ 4.0 in and length ¼ 10 ft. The screw rotates at
50 rev/min; it has a channel depth ¼ 0.25 in and
flight angle ¼ 16. The head pressure has a value of
350 lb/in2 and the viscosity of the polymer melt is 80
 104 lb-sec/in2. Under these conditions, what is
the production rate in length of tube/min, assuming
the extrudate is pulled at a rate that eliminates the
effect of die swell (i.e., the tubing has the same OD
and ID as the die profile)?
13.10.
Continuous tubing is produced in a plastic extru-
sion operation through a die orifice whose outside
diameter ¼ 2.0 in and inside diameter ¼ 1.5 in. The
extruder barrel diameter ¼ 5.0 in and length ¼ 12
ft. The screw rotates at 50 rev/min; it has a channel
depth ¼ 0.30 in and flight angle ¼ 16. The head
pressure has a value of 350 lb/in2 and the viscosity
of the polymer melt is 90  104 lb-sec/in2. Under
these conditions, what is the production rate in
length of tube/min, given that the die swell ratio
is 1.25.
13.11.
An extruder has barrel diameter and length of 100
mm and 2.8 m, respectively. The screw rotational
speed ¼ 50 rev/min, channel depth ¼ 7.5 mm, and
flight angle ¼ 17. The plastic melt has a shear
viscosity ¼ 175 Pa-s. Determine: (a) the extruder
characteristic, (b) the shape factor Ks for a circular
die opening with diameter ¼ 3.0 mm and length ¼
12.0 mm, and (c) the operating point (Q and p).
13.12.
For Problem 01, assume the material is acrylic. (a)
Using Figure 13.2, determine the temperature of
the polymer melt. (b) If the temperature is lowered
20C, estimate the resulting viscosity of the poly-
mer melt. (Hint: the y-axis of Figure 13.2 is a log
scale, not linear).
13.13.
Consider an extruder in which the barrel diameter ¼
4.5 in and length ¼ 11 ft. The extruder screw rotates
at 60 rev/min; it has channel depth ¼ 0.35 in and
flight angle ¼ 20. The plastic melt has a shear
viscosity ¼ 125  104 lb-sec/in2. Determine: (a)
Qmax and pmax; (b) the shape factor Ks for a circular
die opening in which Dd ¼ 0.312 in and Ld ¼ 0.75 in;
and (c) the values of Q and p at the operating point.
13.14.
An extruder has a barrel diameter ¼ 5.0 in and
length ¼ 12 ft. The extruder screw rotates at 50 rev/
min; it has channel depth ¼ 0.30 in and flight angle
¼ 17.7. The plastic melt has a shear viscosity ¼ 100
 104 lb-sec/in2. Find: (a) the extruder character-
istic, (b) the values of Q and p at the operating
point, given that the die characteristic is Qx ¼
0.00150 p.
13.15.
Given the data in Problem 13.14, except that the
flight angle of the extruder screw is a variable
instead of a constant 17.7. Use a spreadsheet
calculator to determine the value of the flight angle
that maximizes the volumetric flow rate Qx.
Explore values of flight angle between 10 and
20. Determine the optimum value to the nearest
tenth of a degree.
Problems
313

13.16.
An extruder has a barrel diameter of 3.5 in and a
length of 5.0 ft. It has a screw channel depth of 0.16
in and a flight angle of 22. The extruder screw
rotates at 75 rev/min. The polymer melt has a shear
viscosity ¼ 65  104 lb-sec/in2 at the operating
temperature of 525F. The specific gravity of the
polymer is 1.2 and its tensile strength is 8000 lb/in2.
A T-shaped cross section is extruded at a rate of
0.11 lb/sec. The density of water is 62.5 lb/ft3. (a)
Find the equation for the extruder characteristic.
(b) Find the operating point (Q and p), and (c) the
die characteristic that is indicated by the operating
point.
Injection Molding
13.17.
Compute the percentage volumetric contraction of
a polyethylene molded part, based on the value of
shrinkage given in Table 13.1.
13.18.
The specified dimension ¼ 225.00 mm for a certain
injection molded part made of ABS. Compute the
corresponding dimension to which the mold cavity
should be machined, using the value of shrinkage
given in Table 13.1.
13.19.
The part dimension for a certain injection molded
part made of polycarbonate is specified as 3.75 in.
Compute the corresponding dimension to which
the mold cavity should be machined, using the
value of shrinkage given in Table 13.1.
13.20.
The foreman in the injection molding department
says that a polyethylene part produced in one of the
operations
has
greater
shrinkage
than
the
calculations indicate it should have. The important
dimension of the part is specified as 112.5  0.25
mm. However, the actual molded part measures
112.02 mm. (a) As a first step, the corresponding
mold cavity dimension should be checked. Com-
pute the correct value of the mold dimension, given
that the shrinkage value for polyethylene is 0.025
(from Table 13.1). (b) What adjustments in process
parameters could be made to reduce the amount of
shrinkage?
13.21.
An injection molded polyethylene part has a di-
mension of 2.500 in. A new material, poly-
carbonate, is used in the same mold. What is the
expected corresponding dimension of the poly-
carbonate molding?
Other Molding Operations and Thermoforming
13.22.
The extrusion die for a polyethylene parison used
in blow molding has a mean diameter of 18.0 mm.
The size of the ring opening in the die is 2.0 mm.
The mean diameter of the parison is observed to
swell to a size of 21.5 mm after exiting the die
orifice. If the diameter of the blow molded con-
tainer is to be 150 mm, determine (a) the corre-
sponding wall thickness of the container and
(b) the wall thickness of the parison.
13.23.
A parison is extruded from a die with outside
diameter ¼ 11.5 mm and inside diameter ¼ 7.5
mm. The observed die swell is 1.25. The parison
is used to blow mold a beverage container whose
outside diameter ¼ 112 mm (a standard size 2-L
soda bottle). (a) What is the corresponding
wall thickness of the container? (b) Obtain an
empty 2-L plastic soda bottle and (carefully) cut
it across the diameter. Using a micrometer, mea-
sure the wall thickness to compare with your
answer in (a).
13.24.
A blow-molding operation is used to produce a
bottle with a diameter of 2.250 in and a wall
thickness of 0.045 in. The parison has a thickness
of 0.290 in. The observed die swell ratio is 1.30.
(a) What is the required diameter of the parison?
(b) What is the diameter of the die?
13.25.
An extrusion operation is used to produce a par-
ison whose mean diameter ¼ 27 mm. The inside
and outside diameters of the die that produced the
parison are 18 mm and 22 mm, respectively. If the
minimum wall thickness of the blow-molded con-
tainer is to be 0.40 mm, what is the maximum
possible diameter of the blow mold?
13.26.
A rotational molding operation is to be used to mold
a hollow playing ball out of polypropylene. The ball
will be 1.25 ft in diameter and its wall thickness
should be 3/32 in. What weight of PP powder should
be loaded into the mold to meet these specifica-
tions? The specific gravity of the PP grade is 0.90,
and the density of water is 62.4 lb/ft3.
13.27.
The problem in a certain thermoforming operation
is that there is too much thinning in the walls of the
large cup-shaped part. The operation is conven-
tional pressure thermoforming using a positive
mold, and the plastic is an ABS sheet with an initial
thickness of 3.2 mm. (a) Why is thinning occurring
in the walls of the cup? (b) What changes could be
made in the operation to correct the problem?
314
Chapter 13/Shaping Processes for Plastics

14
RUBBER-
PROCESSING
TECHNOLOGY
Chapter Contents
14.1
Rubber Processing and Shaping
14.1.1
Production of Rubber
14.1.2
Compounding
14.1.3
Mixing
14.1.4
Shaping and Related Processes
14.1.5
Vulcanization
14.2
Manufacture of Tires and Other Rubber
Products
14.2.1
Tires
14.2.2
Other Rubber Products
14.2.3
Processing of Thermoplastic
Elastomers
14.3
Product Design Considerations
Many of the shaping processes used for plastics (Chapter 13)
are also applicable to rubbers. However, rubber-processing
technology is different in certain respects, and the rubber
industry is largely separate from the plastics industry. The
rubber industry and goods made of rubber are dominated by
one product: tires. Tires are used in large numbers for
automobiles, trucks, aircraft, and bicycles. Although pneu-
matic tires date from the late 1880s, rubber technology can
be traced to the discovery in 1839 of vulcanization (Histori-
cal Note 8.2), the process by which raw natural rubber is
transformed into a usable material through cross–linking of
the polymer molecules. During its first century, the rubber
industry was concerned only with the processing of natural
rubber. Around World War II, synthetic rubbers were de-
veloped (Historical Note 8.3); today they account for the
majority of rubber production.
14.1
RUBBER PROCESSING
AND SHAPING
Production of rubber goods can be divided into two basic
steps: (1) production of the rubber itself, and (2) processing
of the rubber into finished goods. Production of rubber
differs, depending on whether it is natural or synthetic. The
difference results from the source of the raw materials.
Natural rubber (NR) is produced as an agricultural crop,
whereas most synthetic rubbers are made from petroleum.
Production of rubber is followed by processing into
final products; this consists of (1) compounding, (2) mixing,
(3) shaping, and (4) vulcanizing. Processing techniques for
natural and synthetic rubbers are virtually the same, differ-
ences being in the chemicals used to effect vulcanization
(cross–linking). This sequence does not apply to thermo-
plastic elastomers, whose shaping techniques are the same
as for other thermoplastic polymers.
315

There are several distinct industries involved in the production and processing of
rubber. Production of raw natural rubber might be classified as farming because latex, the
starting ingredient for natural rubber, is grown on large plantations located in tropical
climates. By contrast, synthetic rubbers are produced by the petrochemical industry.
Finally, the processing of these materials into tires, shoe soles, and other rubber products
occurs at processor (fabricator) plants. The processors are commonly known as the rubber
industry. Some of the great names in this industry include Goodyear, B. F. Goodrich, and
Michelin. The importance of the tire is reflected in these names.
14.1.1 PRODUCTION OF RUBBER
In this section we briefly survey the production of rubber before it goes to the processor.
Our coverage distinguishes natural rubber and synthetic rubber.
Natural Rubber
Natural rubber is tapped from rubber trees (Hevea brasiliensis) as
latex. The trees are grown on plantations in Southeast Asia and other parts of the world.
Latex is a colloidal dispersion of solid particles of the polymer polyisoprene (Section
8.4.2) in water. Polyisoprene is the chemical substance that comprises rubber, and its
content in the emulsion is about 30%. The latex is collected in large tanks, thus blending
the yield of many trees together.
The preferred method of recovering rubber from the latex involves coagulation. The
latex is first diluted with water to about half its natural concentration. An acid such as
formic acid (HCOOH) or acetic acid (CH3COOH) is added to cause the latex to coagulate
after about 12 hours. The coagulum, now in the form of soft solid slabs, is then squeezed
through a series of rolls that drive out most of the water and reduce the thickness to about 3
mm (1/8 in). The final rolls have grooves that impart a criss-cross pattern to the resulting
sheets. The sheets are then draped over wooden frames and dried in smokehouses. The hot
smoke contains creosote, which prevents mildew and oxidation of the rubber. Several days
are normally required to complete the drying process. The resulting rubber, now in a form
called ribbedsmoked sheet,isfoldedintolargebales for shipmenttotheprocessor. This raw
rubber has a characteristic dark brown color. In some cases, the sheets are dried in hot air
rather than smokehouses, and the term air-dried sheet is applied; this is considered to be a
better grade of rubber. A still better grade, called pale crepe rubber, involves two
coagulation steps; the first removes undesirable components of the latex, then the resulting
coagulum is subjected to a more involved washing and mechanical working procedure,
followed by warm air drying. The color of pale crepe rubber approaches a light tan.
Synthetic Rubber
The various types of synthetic rubber were identified in Section 8.4.3.
Most synthetics are produced from petroleum by the same polymerization techniques used
to synthesize other polymers (Section 8.1.1). However, unlike thermoplastic and thermo-
setting polymers, which are normally supplied to the fabricator as pellets or liquid resins,
synthetic rubbers are supplied to rubber processors in the form of large bales. The industry
has developed a long tradition of handling natural rubber in these unit loads.
14.1.2 COMPOUNDING
Rubber is always compounded with additives. It is through compounding that the specific
rubber is designed to satisfy the given application in terms of properties, cost, and
processability. Compounding adds chemicals for vulcanization. Sulfur has traditionally
316
Chapter 14/Rubber-Processing Technology

been used for this purpose. The vulcanization process and the chemicals used to
accomplish it are discussed in Section 14.1.5.
Additives include fillers that act either to enhance the rubber’s mechanical
properties (reinforcing fillers) or to extend the rubber to reduce cost (nonreinforcing
fillers). The single most important reinforcing filler in rubber is carbon black, a colloidal
form of carbon, black in color, obtained from the thermal decomposition of hydro-
carbons (soot). Its effect is to increase tensile strength and resistance to abrasion and
tearing of the final rubber product. Carbon black also provides protection from ultra-
violet radiation. These enhancements are especially important in tires. Most rubber parts
are black in color because of their carbon black content.
Although carbon black is the most important filler, others are also used. They
include china clays—hydrous aluminum silicates (Al2Si2O5(OH)4), which provide less
reinforcing than carbon black but are used when the black color is not acceptable;
calcium carbonate (CaCO3), which is a nonreinforcing filler; and silica (SiO2), which can
serve reinforcing or nonreinforcing functions, depending on particle size; and other
polymers, such as styrene, PVC, and phenolics. Reclaimed (recycled) rubber is also added
as a filler in some rubber products, but usually not in proportions exceeding 10%.
Other additives compounded with the rubber include antioxidants, to retard aging by
oxidation; fatigue- and ozone-protective chemicals; coloring pigments; plasticizers and
softening oils; blowing agents in the production of foamed rubber; and mold-release
compounds.
Many products require filament reinforcement to reduce extensibility but retain the
otherdesirablepropertiesofrubber.Tiresandconveyorbeltsarenotableexamples.Filaments
usedforthispurposeincludecellulose,nylon,andpolyester.Fiberglassandsteelarealsoused
as reinforcements (e.g., steel-belted radial tires). These continuous fiber materials must be
added as part of the shaping process; they are not mixed with the other additives.
14.1.3 MIXING
The additives must be thoroughly mixed with the base rubber to achieve uniform
dispersion of the ingredients. Uncured rubbers possess high viscosity. Mechanical work-
ing experienced by the rubber can increase its temperature up to 150C (300F). If
vulcanizing agents were present from the start of mixing, premature vulcanization would
result—the rubber processor’s nightmare [7]. Accordingly, a two-stage mixing process is
usually employed. In the first stage, carbon black and other nonvulcanizing additives are
combined with the raw rubber. The term masterbatch is used for this first-stage mixture.
After thorough mixing has been accomplished, and time for cooling has been allowed,
the second stage is carried out in which the vulcanizing agents are added.
Equipment for mixing includes the two-roll mill and internal mixers such as the
Banbury mixer (Figure 14.1). The two-roll mill consists of two parallel rolls, supported in
a frame so they can be brought together to obtain a desired ‘‘nip’’ (gap size), and driven to
rotate at the same or slightly different speeds. An internal mixer has two rotors encased
in a jacket, as in Figure 14.1(b) for the Banbury-type internal mixer. The rotors have
blades and rotate in opposite directions at different speeds, causing a complex flow
pattern in the contained mixture.
14.1.4 SHAPING AND RELATED PROCESSES
Shaping processes for rubber products can be divided into four basic categories: (1)
extrusion, (2) calendering, (3) coating, and (4) molding and casting.
Most of these
Section 14.1/Rubber Processing and Shaping
317

processes are discussed in the previous chapter. We will examine the special issues that
arise when they are applied to rubber. Some products require several basic processes plus
assembly work in their manufacture, for example, tires.
Extrusion
Extrusion of polymers is discussed in the preceding chapter. Screw extruders
are generally used for extrusion of rubber. As with extrusion of thermosetting plastics,
the L/D ratio of the extruder barrels is less than for thermoplastics, typically in the range
10 to 15, to reduce the risk of premature cross–linking. Die swell occurs in rubber
extrudates, because the polymer is in a highly plastic condition and exhibits the memory
property. It has not yet been vulcanized.
Calendering
This process involves passing rubber stock through a series of gaps of
decreasing size made by a stand of rotating rolls (Section 13.3). The rubber process must be
operated at lower temperatures than for thermoplastic polymers, to avoid premature
vulcanization. Also, equipment used in the rubber industry is of heavier construction than
that used for thermoplastics, because rubber is more viscous and harder to form. The
output of the process is a rubber sheet of thickness determined by the final roll gap; again,
swelling occurs in the sheet, causing its thickness to be slightly greater than the gap size.
Calendering can also be used to coat or impregnate textile fabrics to produce rubberized
fabrics.
There are problems in producing thick sheet by either extrusion or calendering.
Thickness control is difficult in the former process, and air entrapment occurs in the latter.
These problems are largely solved when extrusion and calendering are combined in the
roller die process (Figure 14.2). The extruder die is a slit that feeds the calender rolls.
Coating
Coating or impregnating fabrics with rubber is an important process in the
rubber industry. These composite materials are used in automobile tires, conveyor belts,
inflatable rafts, and waterproof cloth for tarpaulins, tents, and rain coats. The coating of
rubber onto substrate fabrics includes a variety of processes. We have previously indicated
FIGURE 14.1
Mixers used in rubber processing: (a) two-roll mill and (b) Banbury-type internal mixer.
These machines can also be used for mastication of natural rubber.
318
Chapter 14/Rubber-Processing Technology

that calendering is one of the coating methods. Figure 14.3 illustrates one possible way in
which the fabric is fed into the calendering rolls to obtain a reinforced rubber sheet.
Alternatives to calendering include skimming, dipping, and spraying. In the
skimming process, a thick solution of rubber compound in an organic solvent is applied
to the fabric as it is unreeled from a supply spool. The coated fabric passes under a doctor
blade that skims the solvent to the proper thickness, and then moves into a steam
chamber where the solvent is driven off by heat. As its name suggests, dipping involves
temporary immersion of the fabric into a highly fluid solution of rubber, followed by
drying. Likewise, in spraying, a spray gun is used to apply the rubber solution.
Molding and Casting
Molded articles include shoe soles and heels, gaskets and seals,
suction cups, and bottle stops. Many foamed rubber parts are produced by molding. In
addition, molding is an important process in tire production. Principal molding processes
for rubber are (1) compression molding, (2) transfer molding, and (3) injection molding.
Compression molding is the most important technique because of its use in tire manufac-
ture. Curing (vulcanizing) is accomplished in the mold in all three processes, this
representing a departure from the shaping methods already discussed, which require a
separate vulcanizing step. With injection molding of rubber, there are risks of premature
curing similar to those faced in the same process when applied to thermosetting plastics.
Advantages of injection molding over traditional methods for producing rubber parts
include better dimensional control, less scrap, and shorter cycle times. In addition to its use
in the molding of conventional rubbers, injection molding is also applied for thermoplastic
elastomers. Because of high mold costs, large production quantities are required to justify
injection molding.
Aformofcasting,calleddipcasting,isusedforproducingrubberglovesandovershoes.
It involves submersion of a positive mold in a liquid polymer (or a heated form into plastisol)
for a certain duration (the process may involve repeated dippings) to form the desired
thickness. The coating is then stripped from the form and cured to cross–link the rubber.
FIGURE 14.3
Coating
of fabric with rubber
using a calendering
process.
FIGURE 14.2
Roller die process
rubber extrusion followed by rolling.
Section 14.1/Rubber Processing and Shaping
319

14.1.5 VULCANIZATION
Vulcanization is the treatment that accomplishes cross–linking of elastomer molecules, so
that the rubber becomes stiffer and stronger but retains extensibility. It is a critical step in
the rubber processing sequence. On a submicroscopic scale, the process can be pictured
as in Figure 14.4, in which the long-chain molecules of the rubber become joined at
certain tie points, the effect of which is to reduce the ability of the elastomer to flow. A
typical soft rubber has one or two cross–links per thousand units (mers). As the number
of cross–links increases, the polymer becomes stiffer and behaves more like a thermo-
setting plastic (hard rubber).
Vulcanization, as it was first invented by Goodyear, involved the use of sulfur (about
8 parts by weight of S mixed with 100 parts of natural rubber) at a temperature of 140C
(280F) for about 5 hours. No other chemicals were included in the process. Vulcanization
with sulfur alone is no longer used as a commercial treatment today, because of the long
curing times. Various other chemicals, including zinc oxide (ZnO) and stearic acid
(C18H36O2), are combined with smaller doses of sulfur to accelerate and strengthen the
treatment. The resulting cure time is 15 to 20 minutes for a typical passenger car tire. In
addition, various nonsulfur vulcanizing treatments have been developed.
In rubber-molding processes, vulcanization is accomplished in the mold by main-
taining the mold temperature at the proper level for curing. In the other forming processes,
vulcanization is performed after the part has been shaped. The treatments generally divide
between batch processes and continuous processes. Batch methods include the use of an
autoclave, a steam-heated pressure vessel; and gas curing, in which a heated inert gas such
as nitrogencures the rubber. Many of thebasic processes make a continuous product, and if
the output is not cut into discrete pieces, continuous vulcanization is appropriate. Continu-
ous methods include high-pressure steam, suited to the curing of rubber coated wire and
cable; hot-air tunnel, for cellular extrusions and carpet underlays [3]; and continuous drum
cure, in which continuous rubber sheets (e.g., belts and flooring materials) pass through one
or more heated rolls to effect vulcanization.
14.2
MANUFACTURE OF TIRES AND OTHER RUBBER PRODUCTS
Tires are the principal product of the rubber industry, accounting for about three fourths
of total tonnage. Other important products include footwear, hose, conveyor belts, seals,
shock-absorbing components, foamed rubber products, and sports equipment.
FIGURE 14.4
Effect of
vulcanization on the
rubber molecules: (1) raw
rubber; (2) vulcanized
(cross–linked) rubber.
Variations of (2) include
(a) soft rubber, low
degree of cross–linking;
and (b) hard rubber, high
degree of cross–linking.
Long-chain
rubber molecules
Crosslinks
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
320
Chapter 14/Rubber-Processing Technology

14.2.1 TIRES
Pneumatic tires are critical components of the vehicles on which they are used. They are
used on automobiles, trucks, buses, farm tractors, earth-moving equipment, military
vehicles, bicycles, motorcycles, and aircraft. Tires support the weight of the vehicle and
the passengers and cargo on board; they transmit the motor torque to propel the vehicle
(except on aircraft); and they absorb vibrations and shock to provide a comfortable ride.
Tire Construction and Production Sequence
A tire is an assembly of many parts,
whose manufacture is unexpectedly complex. A passenger car tire consists of about 50
individual pieces; a large earthmover tire may have as many as 175. To begin with, there are
three basic tire constructions: (a)diagonal ply, (b) belted bias, and (c) radial ply, pictured in
Figure 14.5. In all three cases, the internal structure of the tire, known as the carcass,
consists of multiple layers of rubber-coated cords, called plies. The cords are strands of
various materials such as nylon, polyester, fiberglass, and steel, which provide inexten-
sibility to reinforce the rubber in the carcass. The diagonal ply tire has the cords running
diagonally, but in perpendicular directions in adjacent layers. A typical diagonal ply tire
may have four plies. The belted bias tire is constructed of diagonal plies with opposite bias
but adds several more layers around the outside periphery of the carcass. These belts
increase the stiffness of the tire in the tread area and limit its diametric expansion during
inflation. The cords in the belt also run diagonally, as indicated in the sketch.
A radial tire has plies running radially rather than diagonally; it also uses belts
around theperipheryfor support. A steel-belted radial isa tire inwhich thecircumferential
FIGURE 14.5
Three principal tire constructions: (a) diagonal ply, (b) belted bias, and (c) radial ply.
Section 14.2/Manufacture of Tires and Other Rubber Products
321

belts have cords made of steel. The radial construction provides a more flexible sidewall,
which tends to reduce stress on the belts and treads as they continually deform on contact
with the flat road surface during rotation. This effect is accompanied by greater tread life,
improved cornering and driving stability, and a better ride at high speeds.
In each construction, the carcass is covered by solid rubber that reaches a maximum
thickness in the tread area. The carcass is also lined on the inside with a rubber coating.
For tires with inner tubes, the inner liner is a thin coating applied to the innermost ply
during its fabrication. For tubeless tires, the inner liner must have low permeability
because it holds the air pressure; it is generally a laminated rubber.
Tire production can be summarized in three steps: (1) preforming of components,
(2) building the carcass and adding rubber strips to form the sidewalls and treads, and
(3) molding and curing the components into one integral piece. The descriptions of these
steps that follow are typical; there are variations in processing depending on construction,
tire size, and type of vehicle on which the tire will be used.
Preforming of Components
As Figure 14.5 shows, the carcass consists of a number of
separate components, most of which are rubber or reinforced rubber. These, as well as the
sidewall and tread rubber, are produced by continuous processes and then pre-cut to size
and shape for subsequent assembly. The components, labeled in Figure 14.5, and the
preforming processes to fabricate them are:

Bead coil. Continuous steel wire is rubber-coated, cut, coiled, and the ends joined.

Plies. Continuous fabric (textile, nylon, fiber glass, steel) is rubber coated in a
calendering process and pre-cut to size and shape.

Inner lining. For tube tires, the inner liner is calendered onto the innermost ply. For
tubeless tires, the liner is calendered as a two-layered laminate.

Belts. Continuous fabric is rubber coated (similar to plies), but cut at different angles
for better reinforcement; then made into a multi-ply belt.

Tread. Extruded as continuous strip; then cut and preassembled to belts.

Sidewall. Extruded as continuous strip; then cut to size and shape.
Building the Carcass
The carcass is traditionally assembled using a machine known as a
building drum, whose main element is a cylindrical arbor that rotates. Pre-cut strips that
form the carcass are built up around this arbor in a step-by-step procedure. The layered
plies that form the cross section of the tire are anchored on opposite sides of the rim by two
bead coils. The bead coils consist of multiple strands of high-strength steel wire. Their
function is to provide a rigid support when the finished tire is mounted on the wheel rim.
Other components are combined with the plies and bead coils. These include various
wrappingsand fillerpiecesto givethetire the properstrength,heat resistance, air retention,
and fitting to the wheel rim. After these parts are placed around the arbor and the proper
number of plies have been added, the belts are applied. This is followed by the outside
rubber that will become the sidewall and tread.1 At this point in the process, the treads are
rubber strips of uniform cross section—the tread design is added later in molding. The
building drum is collapsible, so that the unfinished tire can be removed when finished. The
form of the tire at this stage is roughly tubular, as portrayed in Figure 14.6.
Molding and Curing
Tire molds are usually two-piece construction (split molds) and
contain the tread pattern to be impressed on the tire. The mold is bolted into a press, one
half attached to the upper platen (the lid) and the bottom half fastened to the lower
1Technically, the tread and sidewall are not usually considered to be components of the carcass.
322
Chapter 14/Rubber-Processing Technology

platen (the base). The uncured tire is placed over an expandable diaphragm and inserted
between the mold halves, as in Figure 14.7. The press is then closed and the diaphragm
expanded, so that the soft rubber is pressed against the cavity of the mold. This causes the
tread pattern to be imparted to the rubber. At the same time, the rubber is heated, both
from the outside by the mold and from the inside by the diaphragm. Circulating hot water
or steam under pressure are used to heat the diaphragm. The duration of this curing step
depends on the thickness of the tire wall. A typical passenger tire can be cured in about 15
minutes. Bicycle tires cure in about 4 minutes, whereas tires for large earth-moving
equipment take several hours to cure. After curing is completed, the tire is cooled and
removed from the press.
14.2.2 OTHER RUBBER PRODUCTS
Most other rubber products are made by less complex processes. Rubber belts are widely
used in conveyors and mechanical power transmission systems. As with tires, rubber is an
ideal material for these products, but the belt must have flexibility but little or no
extensibility to function. Accordingly, it is reinforced with fibers, commonly polyester
or nylon. Fabrics of these polymers are usually coated in calendering operations, assembled
together to obtain the required number of plies and thickness, and subsequently vulcanized
by continuous or batch heating processes.
Rubber hose can be either plain or reinforced. Plain hose is extruded tubing.
Reinforced tube consists of an inner tube, a reinforcing layer (sometimes called
the carcass), and a cover. The internal tubing is extruded of a rubber that has been
FIGURE 14.7
Tire
molding (tire is shown in
cross-sectional view):
(1) the uncured tire is
placed over expandable
diaphragm; (2) the mold is
closedandthediaphragm
is expanded to force un-
cured rubber against
mold cavity, impressing
tread pattern into rubber;
mold and diaphragm are
heated to cure rubber.
FIGURE 14.6
Tire just
before removal from
building drum, before
molding and curing.
Section 14.2/Manufacture of Tires and Other Rubber Products
323

compounded for the particular substance that will flow through it. The reinforcement
layer is applied to the tube in the form of a fabric, or by spiraling, knitting, braiding, or
other application method. The outer layer is compounded to resist environmental
conditions. It is applied by extrusion, using rollers, or other techniques.
Footwear components include soles, heels, rubber overshoes, and certain upper
parts. Various rubbers are used to make footwear components (Section 8.4). Molded
parts are produced by injection molding, compression molding, and certain special
molding techniques developed by the shoe industry; the rubbers include both solid
and foamed varieties. In some cases, for low volume production, manual methods are
used to cut rubber from flat stock.
Rubber is widely used in sports equipment and supplies, including ping pong paddle
surfaces, golf club grips, football bladders, and sports balls of various kinds. Tennis balls,
for example, are made in significant numbers. Production of these sports products relies
on the various shaping processes discussed in Section 14.1.4, as well as special techniques
that have been developed for particular items.
14.2.3 PROCESSING OF THERMOPLASTIC ELASTOMERS
A thermoplastic elastomer (TPE) is a thermoplastic polymer that possesses the
properties of a rubber (Section 8.4.3); the term thermoplastic rubber is also used.
TPEs can be processed like thermoplastics, but their applications are those of an
elastomer. The most common shaping processes are injection molding and extrusion,
which are generally more economical and faster than the traditional processes used for
rubbers that must be vulcanized. Molded products include shoe soles, athletic footwear,
and automotive components such as fender extensions and corner panels (but not
tires—TPEs have been found to be unsatisfactory for that application). Extruded items
include insulation coating for electrical wire, tubing for medical applications, conveyor
belts, sheet and film stock. Other shaping techniques for TPEs include blow molding
and thermoforming (Sections 13.8 and 13.9); these processes cannot be used for
vulcanized rubbers.
14.3
PRODUCT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
Many of the same guidelines used for plastics apply to rubber products. There are
differences, owing to the elastomeric properties of rubber. The following are compiled
largely from Bralla [4]; they apply to conventional soft rubber, not hard rubber.

Economic production quantities. Rubber parts produced by compression molding
(the traditional process) can often be produced in quantities of a thousand or less.
The mold cost is relatively low compared with other molding methods. Injection
molding, as with plastic parts, requires higher production quantities to justify the
more expensive mold.

Draft. Draft is usually unnecessary for rubber molded parts. The flexibility of the
material allows it to deform for removal from the mold. Shallow undercuts, although
undesirable, are possible with rubber-molded parts for the same reason. The low
stiffness and high elasticity of the material permits removal from the mold.

Holes. Holes are difficult to cut into the rubber after initial forming, due the
flexibility of the material. It is generally desirable to mold holes into the rubber
during the primary shaping process.
324
Chapter 14/Rubber-Processing Technology


Screw threads. Screw threads are generally not incorporated into molded rubber
parts; the elastic deformability of rubber makes it difficult to assemble parts using the
threads, and stripping is a problem once inserted.
REFERENCES
[1] Alliger, G., and Sjothun, I. J. (eds.). Vulcanization of
Elastomers. Krieger Publishing, New York, 1978.
[2] Billmeyer, Fred, W., Jr. Textbook of Polymer Sci-
ence. 3rd ed. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1984.
[3] Blow, C. M., and Hepburn, C. Rubber Technology
and Manufacture. 2nd ed. Butterworth-Heinemann,
London, 1982.
[4] Bralla, J. G. (ed.). Design for Manufacturability
Handbook. 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999.
[5] Hofmann, W. Rubber Technology Handbook. Hanser-
Gardner Publications, Cincinnati, Ohio, 1989.
[6] Mark, J. E., and Erman, B. (eds.), Science and
Technology of Rubber, 3rd ed. Academic Press,
Orlando, Florida, 2005.
[7] Morton-Jones, D. H. Polymer Processing. Chapman
and Hall, London, 1989.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
14.1. How is the rubber industry organized?
14.2. How is raw rubber recovered from the latex that is
tapped from a rubber tree?
14.3. What is the sequence of processing steps required to
produce finished rubber goods?
14.4. What are some of the additives that are combined
with rubber during compounding?
14.5. Name the four basic categories of processes used to
shape rubber.
14.6. What does vulcanization do to the rubber?
14.7. Name the three basic tire constructions and briefly
identify the differences in their construction.
14.8. What are the three basic steps in the manufacture of
a pneumatic tire?
14.9. What is the purpose of the bead coil in a pneumatic
tire?
14.10. What is a TPE?
14.11. Many of the design guidelines that are applicable
to plastics are also applicable to rubber. However,
the extreme flexibility of rubber results in certain
differences. What are some examples of these
differences?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 10 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
14.1. The most important rubber product is which one
of the following: (a) footwear, (b) conveyor belts,
(c) pneumatic tires, or (d) tennis balls?
14.2. The chemical name of the ingredient recovered
from the latex of the rubber tree is which one of
the following: (a) polybutadiene, (b) polyisobuty-
lene, (c) polyisoprene, or (d) polystyrene?
14.3. Of the following rubber additives, which one would
rank as the single most important: (a) antioxidants,
(b) carbon black, (c) clays and other hydrous
aluminum silicates, (d) plasticizers and softening
oils, or (e) reclaimed rubber?
14.4. Which one of the following molding processes is
the most important in the production of products
made of conventional rubber: (a) compression
molding, (b) injection molding, (c) thermoforming,
or (d) transfer molding?
14.5. Which of the following ingredients do not con-
tribute to the vulcanizing process (two correct
Multiple Choice Quiz
325

answers): (a) calcium carbonate, (b) carbon black,
(c) stearic acid, (d) sulfur, and (e) zinc oxide?
14.6. How many minutes are required to cure (vulcanize)
a modern passenger car tire: (a) 5, (b) 15, (c) 25, or
(d) 45?
14.7. When is the tread pattern imprinted onto the cir-
cumference of the tire: (a) during preforming,
(b) while building the carcass, (c) during molding,
or (d) during curing?
14.8. Which of the following are not normally used in
the processing of thermoplastic elastomers (two
correct answers): (a) blow molding, (b) compression
molding, (c) extrusion, (d) injection molding, or
(e) vulcanization?
326
Chapter 14/Rubber-Processing Technology

15
SHAPING
PROCESSES FOR
POLYMER MATRIX
COMPOSITES
Chapter Contents
15.1
Starting Materials for PMCs
15.1.1
Polymer Matrix
15.1.2
Reinforcing Agent
15.1.3
Combining Matrix and Reinforcement
15.2
Open Mold Processes
15.2.1
Hand Lay-Up
15.2.2
Spray-Up
15.2.3
Automated Tape-Laying Machines
15.2.4
Curing
15.3
Closed Mold Processes
15.3.1
Compression Molding PMC Processes
15.3.2
Transfer Molding PMC Processes
15.3.3
Injection Molding PMC Processes
15.4
Filament Winding
15.5
Pultrusion Processes
15.5.1
Pultrusion
15.5.2
Pulforming
15.6
Other PMC Shaping Processes
In this chapter we consider manufacturing processes by
which polymer matrix composites are shaped into useful
components and products. A polymer matrix composite
(PMC) is a composite material consisting of a polymer
embedded with a reinforcing phase such as fibers or pow-
ders. The technological and commercial importance of the
processes in this chapter derives from the growing use of
this class of material, especially fiber-reinforced polymers
(FRPs). In popular usage, PMC generally refers to fiber-
reinforced polymers. FRP composites can be designed with
very high strength-to-weight and stiffness-to-weight ratios.
These features make them attractive in aircraft, cars,
trucks, boats, and sports equipment.
Some of the shaping processes described in this chap-
ter are slow and labor intensive. In general, techniques for
shaping composites are less efficient than manufacturing
processes for other materials. There are two reasons for this:
(1) composite materials are more complex than other mate-
rials, consisting as they do of two or more phases and the
need to orient the reinforcing phase in the case of fiber-
reinforced plastics; and (2) processing technologies for
composites have not been the object of improvement and
refinement over as many years as processes for other
materials.
The variety of shaping methods for fiber-reinforced
polymers is sometimes bewildering to students on first
reading. Let us provide a road map for the reader entering
this new territory. FRP composite shaping processes
can be divided into five categories, as organized in Fig-
ure 15.1: (1) open mold processes, (2) closed mold pro-
cesses, (3) filament winding, (4) pultrusion processes, and
(5) other. Open mold processes include some of the original
manual procedures for laying resins and fibers onto forms.
Closed mold processes are much the same as those used in
327

plastic molding; the reader will recognize the names—compression molding, transfer
molding, and injection molding—although the names are sometimes changed and modifi-
cations are sometimes made for PMCs. In filament winding, continuous filaments that
have been dipped in liquid resin are wrapped around a rotating mandrel; when the resin
cures, a rigid, hollow, generally cylindrical shape is created. Pultrusion is a shaping process
for producing long, straight sections of constant cross section; it is similar to extrusion, but
adapted to include continuous fiber reinforcement. The ‘‘other’’ category includes several
operations that do not fit into the previous categories.
Some of these processes are used to shape composites with continuous fibers,
whereas others are used for short fiber PMCs. Figure 15.1 provides an overview of the
processes in each division. Let us begin our coverage by exploring how the individual
phases in a PMC are produced and how these phases are combined into the starting
materials for shaping. For a good overview of the PMC processes, the reader should
view the video clip titled Composite Materials and Manufacturing.
VIDEO CLIP
Composite Materials and Manufacturing. This clip contains three segments: (1) composite
materials, (2) composites manufacturing processes, and (3) composites overview. Segment
(2) is especially relevant to this chapter.
FIGURE 15.1
Classiﬁcation of
manufacturing processes
for ﬁber-reinforced
polymer composites.
Continuous
laminating
Centrifugal
casting
Injection
molding
Transfer
molding
Compression
molding
Resin transfer
molding
Open mold
processes
Closed mold
processes
Filament
winding
Pultrusion
processes
FRP shaping
processes
Open mold
processes
Closed mold
processes
Processes for
short-fiber
PMCs
Processes for
continuous-fiber
PMCs
Other
Other
Compression
molding
Automated
tape laying
Spray-up
Tube rolling
Hand lay-up
328
Chapter 15/Shaping Processes for Polymer Matrix Composites

15.1
STARTING MATERIALS FOR PMCS
In a PMC, the starting materials are a polymer and a reinforcing phase. They are
processed separately before becoming phases in the composite. This section considers
how these materials are produced before being combined, and then how they are
combined to make the composite part.
15.1.1 POLYMER MATRIX
All three of the basic polymer types—thermoplastics, thermosets, and elastomers—are
used as matrices in PMCs. Thermosetting (TS) polymers are the most common matrix
materials. The principal TS polymers are phenolics, unsaturated polyesters, and epoxies.
Phenolics are associated with the use of particulate reinforcing phases, whereas poly-
esters and epoxies are more closely associated with FRPs. Thermoplastic (TP) polymers
are also used in PMCs, and in fact, most molding compounds are composite materials that
include fillers and/or reinforcing agents. Most elastomers are composite materials
because nearly all rubbers are reinforced with carbon black. Shaping processes for
rubbers are covered in Chapter 14. In this chapter, coverage is limited to the processing of
PMCs that use TS and TP polymers as the matrix. Many of the polymer shaping processes
discussed in Chapter 13 are applicable to polymer matrix composites. However, com-
bining the polymer with the reinforcing agent sometimes complicates the operations.
15.1.2 REINFORCING AGENT
The reinforcing phase can be any of several geometries and materials. The geometries
include fibers, particles, and flakes, and the materials are ceramics, metals, other
polymers, or elements such as carbon or boron. The role of the reinforcing phase and
some of its technical features are discussed in Section 9.1.2.
Fibers
Common fiber materials in FRPs are glass, carbon, and the polymer Kevlar.
Fibers of these materials are produced by various techniques, some of which we have
covered in other chapters. Glass fibers are produced by drawing through small orifices
(Section 12.2.3). For carbon, a series of heating treatments is performed to convert a
precursor filament containing a carbon compound into a more pure carbon form. The
precursor can be any of several substances, including polyacrylonitrile (PAN), pitch (a
black carbon resin formed in the distillation of coal tar, wood tar, petroleum, etc.), or
rayon (cellulose). Kevlar fibers are produced by extrusion combined with drawing
through small orifices in a spinneret (Section 13.4).
Starting as continuous filaments, the fibers are combined with the polymer matrix in
any of severalforms, dependingonthepropertiesdesiredinthe materialand theprocessing
method to be used to shape the composite. In some fabrication processes, the filaments are
continuous, whereas in others they are chopped into short lengths. In the continuous form,
individual filaments are usually available as rovings. A roving is a collection of untwisted
(parallel) continuous strands; this is a convenient form for handling and processing.
Rovings typically contain from 12 to 120 individual strands. By contrast, a yarn is a twisted
collection of filaments. Continuous rovings are used in several PMC processes, including
filament winding and pultrusion.
The most familiar form of continuous fiber is a cloth—a fabric of woven yarns. Very
similar to a cloth, but distinguished here, is a woven roving, a fabric consisting of
untwisted filaments rather than yarns. Woven rovings can be produced with unequal
Section 15.1/Starting Materials for PMCS
329

numbers of strands in the two directions so that they possess greater strength in one
direction than the other. Such unidirectional woven rovings are often preferred in
laminated FRP composites.
Fibers can also be prepared in the form of a mat—a felt consisting of randomly
oriented short fibers held loosely together with a binder, sometimes in a carrier fabric.
Mats are commercially available as blankets of various weights, thicknesses, and widths.
Mats can be cut and shaped for use as preforms in some of the closed mold processes.
During molding, the resin impregnates the preform and then cures, thus yielding a fiber-
reinforced molding.
Particles and Flakes
Particles and flakes are really in the same class. Flakes are
particles whose length and width are large relative to thickness. We discuss these and
other issues on characterization of engineering powders in Section 16.1. Production
methods for metal powders are discussed in Section 16.2, and techniques for producing
ceramic powders are discussed in Section 17.1.1.
15.1.3 COMBINING MATRIX AND REINFORCEMENT
Incorporation of the reinforcing agent into the polymer matrix either occurs during the
shaping process or beforehand. In the first case, the starting materials arrive at the
fabricating operation as separate entities and are combined into the composite during
shaping. Examples of this case are filament winding and pultrusion. The starting re-
inforcement in these processes consists of continuous fibers. In the second case, the two
componentmaterials arecombinedintosomepreliminary formthat isconvenientforusein
the shaping process. Nearly all of the thermoplastics and thermosets used in the plastic
shaping processes are really polymers combined with fillers (Section 8.1.5). The fillers are
either short fibers or particulate (including flakes).
Of greatest interest in this chapter are the starting forms used in processes designed
for FRP composites. We might think of the starting forms as prefabricated composites
that arrive ready for use at the shaping process. These forms are molding compounds and
prepregs.
Molding Compounds
Molding compounds are similar to those used in plastic molding.
They are designed for use in molding operations, and so they must be capable of flowing.
Most molding compounds for composite processing are thermosetting polymers. Accord-
ingly, they have not been cured before shape processing. Curing is done during and/or after
final shaping. FRP composite molding compounds consist of the resin matrix with short,
randomly dispersed fibers. They come in several forms.
Sheet molding compound (SMC) is a combination of TS polymer resin, fillers and
other additives, and chopped glass fibers (randomly oriented) all rolled into a sheet of
typical thickness ¼ 6.5 mm (0.250 in). The most common resin is unsaturated polyester;
fillers are usually mineral powders such as talc, silica, limestone; and the glass fibers are
typically 12 to 75 mm (0.5 to 3.0 in) long and account for about 30% of the SMC by
volume. SMCs are very convenient for handling and cutting to proper size as molding
charges. Sheet molding compounds are generally produced between thin layers of
polyethylene to limit evaporation of volatiles from the thermosetting resin. The protec-
tive coating also improves surface finish on subsequent molded parts. The process for
fabricating continuous SMC sheets is depicted in Figure 15.2.
Bulk molding compound (BMC) consists of similar ingredients as those in SMC,
but the compounded polymer is in billet form rather than sheet. The fibers in BMC are
shorter, typically 2 to 12 mm (0.1 to 0.5 in), because greater fluidity is required in
the molding operations for which these materials are designed. Billet diameter is usually
330
Chapter 15/Shaping Processes for Polymer Matrix Composites

25 to 50 mm (1 to 2 in). The process for producing BMC is similar to that for SMC, except
extrusion is used to obtain the final billet form. BMC is also known as dough molding
compound (DMC), because of its dough-like consistency. Other FRP molding com-
pounds include thick molding compound (TMC), similar to SMC but thicker—up to 50
mm (2 in); and pelletized molding compounds—basically conventional plastic molding
compounds containing short fibers.
Prepregs
Another prefabricated form for FRP shaping operations is prepreg, which
consists of fibers impregnated with partially cured thermosetting resins to facilitate shape
processing. Completion of curing must be accomplished during and/or after shaping.
Prepregs are available in the form of tapes or cross-plied sheets or fabrics. The advantage
of prepregs is that they are fabricated with continuous filaments rather than chopped
random fibers, thus increasing strength andmodulus of thefinal product. Prepreg tapes and
sheets are associated with advanced composites (reinforced with boron, carbon/graphite,
and Kevlar) as well as fiberglass.
15.2
OPEN MOLD PROCESSES
The distinguishing feature of this family of FRP shaping processes is its use of a single
positive or negative mold surface (Figure 15.3) to produce laminated FRP structures.
Other names for open mold processes include contact lamination and contact molding.
The starting materials (resins, fibers, mats, and woven rovings) are applied to the mold in
layers, building up to the desired thickness. This is followed by curing and part removal.
Common resins are unsaturated polyesters and epoxies, using fiberglass as the re-
inforcement. The moldings are usually large (e.g., boat hulls). The advantage of using
an open mold is that the mold costs much less than if two matching molds were used. The
disadvantage is that only the part surface in contact with the mold surface is finished; the
FIGURE 15.2
Process
for producing sheet
molding compound
(SMC).
FIGURE 15.3
Types of open
mold: (a) positive and (b) negative.
Section 15.2/Open Mold Processes
331

other side is rough. For the best possible part surface on the finished side, the mold itself
must be very smooth.
There are several important open mold FRP processes. The differences are in the
methods of applying the laminations to the mold, alternative curing techniques, and other
variations. In this section we describe the family of open mold processes for shaping fiber-
reinforced plastics: (1) hand lay-up, (2) spray-up, (3) automated tape-laying machines,
and (4) bag molding.
We treat hand lay-up as the base process and the others as
modifications and refinements.
15.2.1 HAND LAY-UP
Hand lay-up is the oldest open mold method for FRP laminates, dating to the 1940s when it
was first used to fabricate boathulls. Itisalso the mostlabor-intensivemethod.Asthename
suggests, hand lay-up is a shaping method in which successive layers of resin and
reinforcementare manuallyappliedtoanopenmoldtobuildthelaminatedFRPcomposite
structure. The basic procedure consists of five steps, illustrated in Figure 15.4. The finished
molding must usually be trimmed with a power saw to size the outside edges. In general,
these same five steps are required for all of the open mold processes; the differences
between methods occur in steps 3 and 4.
In step 3, each layer of fiber reinforcement is dry when placed onto the mold. The
liquid (uncured) resin is then applied by pouring, brushing, or spraying. Impregnation of
resin into the fiber mat or fabric is accomplished by hand rolling. This approach is referred
to as wet lay-up. An alternative approach is to use prepregs, in which the impregnated
layers of fiber reinforcement are first prepared outside the mold and then laid onto the
mold surface. Advantages cited for the prepregs include closer control over fiber–resin
mixture and more efficient methods of adding the laminations [11].
Molds for open mold contact laminating can be made of plaster, metal, glass fiber-
reinforced plastic, or other materials. Selection of material depends on economics, surface
quality, and other technical factors. For prototype fabrication, in which only one part is
produced, plaster molds are usually adequate. For medium quantities, the mold can be
FIGURE 15.4
Hand
lay-up procedure: (1) mold
is cleaned and treated
with a mold release agent;
(2) a thin gel coat (resin,
possibly pigmented to
color) is applied, which
will become the outside
surface of the molding;
(3) when the gel coat has
partially set, successive
layersofresinandﬁberare
applied, the ﬁber being in
the form of mat or cloth;
each layer is rolled to fully
impregnate the ﬁber with
resin and remove air
bubbles; (4) the part is
cured; and (5) the fully
hardened part is removed
from the mold.
332
Chapter 15/Shaping Processes for Polymer Matrix Composites

made of fiberglass-reinforced plastic. High production generally requires metal molds.
Aluminum, steel, and nickel are used, sometimes with surface hardening on the mold face
to resist wear. An advantage of metal, in addition to durability, is its high thermal
conductivity that can be used to implement a heat-curing system, or simply to dissipate
heat from the laminate while it cures at room temperature.
Products suited to hand lay-up are generally large in size but low in production
quantity. In addition to boat hulls, other applications include swimming pools, large
container tanks, stage props, radomes, and other formed sheets. Automotive parts have
also been made, but the method is not economical for high production. The largest
moldings ever made by this process were ship hulls for the British Royal Navy: 85 m
(280 ft) long [2].
15.2.2 SPRAY-UP
This representsanattempt tomechanizetheapplication ofresin-fiberlayersand reducethe
time for lay-up. It is an alternative for step 3 in the hand lay-up procedure. In the spray-up
method, liquid resin and chopped fibers are sprayed onto an open mold to build successive
FRP laminations, as in Figure 15.5. The spray gun is equipped with a chopper mechanism
that feeds in continuous filament rovings and cuts them into fibers of length 25 to 75 mm
(1to3in)thatareaddedtotheresinstreamasitexitsthenozzle.Themixingactionresultsin
random orientation of the fibers in the layer—unlike hand lay-up, in which the filaments
can be oriented if desired. Another difference is that the fiber content in spray-up is limited
to about 35% (compared with a maximum of around 65% in hand lay-up). This is a
shortcoming of the spraying and mixing process.
Spraying can be accomplished manually using a portable spray gun or by an automated
machine in which the path of the spray gun is preprogrammed and computer controlled. The
automated procedure is advantageous for labor efficiency and environmental protection.
Some of the volatile emissions from the liquid resins are hazardous, and the path-controlled
machines can operate in sealed-off areas without humans present. However, rolling is
generally required for each layer, as in hand lay-up.
Products made by the spray-up method include boat hulls, bathtubs, shower
stalls, automobile and truck body parts, recreational vehicle components, furniture,
large structural panels, and containers. Movie and stage props are sometimes made by
this method. Because products made by spray-up have randomly oriented short fibers,
they are not as strong as those made by lay-up, in which the fibers are continuous and
directed.
FIGURE 15.5
Spray-up
method.
Section 15.2/Open Mold Processes
333

15.2.3 AUTOMATED TAPE-LAYING MACHINES
This is another attempt to automate and accelerate step 3 in the lay-up procedure.
Automated tape-laying machines operate by dispensing a prepreg tape onto an open
mold following a programmed path. The typical machine consists of an overhead gantry,
to which is attached the dispensing head, as shown in Figure 15.6. The gantry permitsx-y-z
travel of the head, for positioning and following a defined continuous path. The head itself
has several rotational axes, plus a shearing device to cut the tape at the end of each path.
Prepreg tape widthsarecommonly 75 mm (3 in), although 300 mm(12in) widths have been
reported [10]; thickness is around 0.13 mm (0.005 in). The tape is stored on the machine in
rolls, which are unwound and deposited along the defined path. Each lamination is placed
byfollowing a series ofback-and-forth passes acrossthemoldsurfaceuntil the parallel rows
of tape complete the layer.
Much of the work to develop automated tape-laying machines has been pioneered
by the aircraft industry, which is eager to save labor costs and at the same time achieve the
highest possible quality and uniformity in its manufactured components. The dis-
advantage of this and other computer numerically controlled machines is that it must
be programmed, and programming takes time.
15.2.4 CURING
Curing (step 4) is required of all thermosetting resins used in FRP laminated composites.
Curing accomplishes cross-linking of the polymer, transforming it from its liquid or
highly plastic condition into a hardened product. There are three principal process
parameters in curing: time, temperature, and pressure.
Curing normally occurs at room temperature for the TS resins used in hand lay-up
and spray-up procedures. Moldings made by these processes are often large (e.g., boat
hulls), and heating would be difficult for such parts. In some cases, days are required
before room temperature curing is sufficiently complete to remove the part. If feasible,
heat is added to speed the curing reaction.
FIGURE 15.6
Automated tape-laying
machine. (Courtesy of
Cincinnati Milacron.)
334
Chapter 15/Shaping Processes for Polymer Matrix Composites

Heating is accomplished by several means. Oven curing provides heat at closely
controlled temperatures; some curing ovens are equipped to draw a partial vacuum.
Infrared heating can be used in applications in which it is impractical or inconvenient to
place the molding in an oven.
Curing in an autoclave provides control over both temperature and pressure. An
autoclave is an enclosed chamber equipped to apply heat and/or pressure at controlled
levels. In FRP composites processing, it is usually a large horizontal cylinder with doors at
either end. The term autoclave molding is sometimes used to refer to the curing of a
prepreg laminate in an autoclave. This procedure is used extensively in the aerospace
industry to produce advanced composite components of very high quality.
15.3
CLOSED MOLD PROCESSES
These molding operations are performed in molds consisting of two sections that open and
close during each molding cycle. The name matched die molding is used for some of these
processes. One might think that a closed mold is about twice the cost of a comparable open
mold. However, tooling cost is even greater owing to the more complex equipment required
in these processes. Despite their higher cost, advantages of a closed mold are (1) good finish
on all part surfaces, (2) higher production rates,
(3) closer control over tolerances, and
(4) more complex three-dimensional shapes are possible.
We divide the closed mold processes into three classes based on their counterparts
in conventional plastic molding, even though the terminology is often different when
polymer matrix composites are molded: (1) compression molding, (2) transfer molding,
and (3) injection molding.
15.3.1 COMPRESSION MOLDING PMC PROCESSES
In compression molding of conventional molding compounds (Section 13.7.1), a charge is
placed in the lower mold section, and the sections are brought together under pressure,
causing the charge to take the shape of the cavity. The mold halves are heated to cure the
thermosetting polymer. When the molding is sufficiently cured, the mold is opened and
the part is removed. There are several shaping processes for PMCs based on compression
molding; the differences are mostly in the form of the starting materials. The flow of the
resin, fibers, and other ingredients during the process is a critical factor in compression
molding of FRP composites.
SMC, TMC, and BMC Molding
Several of the FRP molding compounds, namely sheet
molding compound (SMC), bulk molding compound (BMC), and thick molding com-
pound (TMC), can be cut to proper size and used as the starting charge in compression
molding. Refrigeration is often required to store these materials prior to shape process-
ing. The names of the molding processes are based on the starting molding compound
(i.e., SMC molding is when the starting charge is precut sheet molding compound; BMC
molding uses BMC cut to size as the charge; and so on).
Preform Molding
Another form of compression molding, called preform molding [11],
involves placement of a precut mat into the lower mold section along with a polymer
resin charge (e.g., pellets or sheet). The materials are then pressed between heated mold
halves, causing the resin to flow and impregnate the fiber mat to produce a fiber
reinforced molding. Variations of the process use either thermoplastic or thermosetting
polymers.
Section 15.3/Closed Mold Processes
335

Elastic Reservoir Molding
The starting charge in elastic reservoir molding (ERM) is a
sandwich consisting of a center of polymer foam between two dry fiber layers. The foam
core is commonly open-cell polyurethane, impregnated with liquid resin such as epoxy or
polyester, and the dry fiber layers can be cloth, woven roving, or other starting fibrous
form. As depicted in Figure 15.7, the sandwich is placed in the lower mold section and
pressed at moderate pressure—around 0.7 MPa (100 lb/in2). As the core is compressed, it
releases the resin to wet the dry surface layers. Curing produces a lightweight part
consisting of a low-density core and thin FRP skins.
15.3.2 TRANSFER MOLDING PMC PROCESSES
In conventional transfer molding (Section 13.7.2), a charge of thermosetting resin is
placed in a pot or chamber, heated, and squeezed by ram action into one or more mold
cavities. The mold is heated to cure the resin. The name of the process derives from the
fact that the fluid polymer is transferred from the pot into the mold. It can be used to
mold TS resins in which the fillers include short fibers to produce an FRP composite part.
Another form of transfer molding for PMCs is called resin transfer molding (RTM) [4],
[11]; it refers to a closed mold process in which a preform mat is placed in the lower mold
section, the mold is closed, and a thermosetting resin (e.g., polyester resin) is transferred
into the cavity under moderate pressure to impregnate the preform. To confuse matters,
RTM is sometimes called resin injection molding [4], [13]. (The distinction between
transfer molding and injection molding is blurry anyway, as the reader may have noted in
Chapter 13.) RTM has been used to manufacture such products as bathtubs, swimming
pool shells, bench and chair seats, and hulls for small boats.
Several enhancements of the basic RTM process have been developed [5]. One
enhancement, called advanced RTM, uses high-strength polymers such as epoxy resins and
continuous fiber reinforcement instead of mats. Applications include aerospace compo-
nents, missile fins, and snow skis. Two additional processes are thermal expansion resin
transfer molding and ultimately reinforced thermoset resin injection. Thermal expansion
resin transfer molding (TERTM) is a patented process of TERTM, Inc. that consists of the
following steps [5]: (1) A rigid polymer foam (e.g., polyurethane) is shaped into a preform.
(2) The preform is enclosed in a fabric reinforcement and placed in a closed mold. (3) A
thermosetting resin (e.g., epoxy) is injected into the mold to impregnate the fabric and
surround the foam. (4) The mold is heated to expand the foam, fill the mold cavity, and
cure the resin. Ultimately, reinforced thermoset resin injection (URTRI) is similar to
TERTM except that the starting foam core is cast epoxy embedded with miniature hollow
glass spheres.
FIGURE 15.7
Elastic reservoir molding: (1) foam is placed into mold between two ﬁber layers; (2) mold is closed,
releasing resin from foam into ﬁber layers.
336
Chapter 15/Shaping Processes for Polymer Matrix Composites

15.3.3 INJECTION MOLDING PMC PROCESSES
Injection molding is noted for low-cost production of plastic parts in large quantities.
Although it is most closely associated with thermoplastics, the process can also be
adapted to thermosets (Section 13.6.5).
Conventional Injection Molding
In PMC shape processing, injection molding is used
for both TP- and TS-type FRPs. In the TP category, virtually all thermoplastic polymers
can be reinforced with fibers. Chopped fibers must be used; if continuous fibers were
used, they would be reduced anyway by the action of the rotating screw in the barrel.
During injection from the chamber into the mold cavity, the fibers tend to become
aligned during their journey through the nozzle. Designers can sometimes exploit this
feature to optimize directional properties through part design, location of gates, and
cavity orientation relative to the gate [8].
Whereas TP molding compounds are heated and then injected into a cold mold, TS
polymers are injected into a heated mold for curing. Control of the process with
thermosets is trickier because of the risk of premature cross-linking in the injection
chamber. Subject to the same risk, injection molding can be applied to fiber-reinforced
TS plastics in the form of pelletized molding compound and dough molding compound.
Reinforced Reaction Injection Molding
Some thermosets cure by chemical reaction
rather than heat; these resins can be molded by reaction injection molding (Section
13.6.5). In RIM, two reactive ingredients are mixed and immediately injected into a mold
cavity where curing and solidification of the chemicals occur rapidly. A closely related
process includes reinforcing fibers, typically glass, in the mixture. In this case, the process
is called reinforced reaction injection molding (RRIM). Its advantages are similar to
those in RIM, with the added benefit of fiber reinforcement. RRIM is used extensively in
auto body and truck cab applications for bumpers, fenders, and other body parts.
15.4
FILAMENT WINDING
Filament winding is a process in which resin-impregnated continuous fibers are wrapped
around a rotating mandrel that hastheinternal shapeof thedesiredFRP product. The resin
is subsequently cured and the mandrel removed. Hollow axisymmetric components
(usually circular in cross section) are produced, as well as some irregular shapes. The
most common form of the process is depicted in Figure 15.8. A band of fiber rovings is
pulled through a resin bath immediately before being wound in a helical pattern onto a
cylindrical mandrel. Continuation of the winding pattern finally completes a surface layer
of one filament thickness on the mandrel. The operation is repeated to form additional
layers, each having a criss-cross pattern with the previous, until the desired part thickness
has been obtained.
There are several methods by which the fibers can be impregnated with resin:
(1) wet winding, in which the filament is pulled through the liquid resin just before wind-
ing, as in the figure; (2) prepreg winding (also called dry winding), in which filaments
preimpregnated with partially cured resin are wrapped around a heated mandrel; and
(3) postimpregnation, in which filaments are wound onto a mandrel and then impreg-
nated with resin by brushing or other technique.
Two basic winding patterns are used in filament winding: (a) helical and (b) polar
(Figure 15.9). In helical winding, the filament band is applied in a spiral pattern around
themandrel, ata helix angleu. Ifthe bandis wrappedwith ahelix angleapproaching 90, so
that the winding advance is one bandwidth per revolution (and the filaments form nearly
Section 15.4/Filament Winding
337

circular rings around the mandrel), this is referred to as a hoop winding; it is a special case
of helical winding. In polar winding, the filament is wrapped around the long axis of the
mandrel, as in Figure 15.9(b); after each longitudinal revolution, the mandrel is indexed
(partially rotated) by one bandwidth, so that a hollow enclosed shape is gradually created.
Hoop and polar patterns can be combined in successive windings of the mandrel to
produce adjacent layers with filament directions that are approximately perpendicular;
this is called a bi-axial winding [2].
Filament winding machines have motion capabilities similar to those of an engine
lathe (Section 22.2.3). The typical machine has a drive motor to rotate the mandrel and a
powered feed mechanism to move the carriage. Relative motion between mandrel and
carriage must be controlled to accomplish a given winding pattern. In helical winding, the
relationship between helix angle and the machine parameters can be expressed as follows:
tan u ¼
vc
pDN
ð15:1Þ
where u ¼ helix angle of the windings on the mandrel, as in Figure 15.9(a); vc ¼ speed at
which the carriage traverses in the axial direction, m/s (in/sec); D ¼ diameter of the
mandrel, m (in); and N ¼ rotational speed, 1/s (rev/sec).
Various types of control are available in filament winding machines. Modern
equipment uses computer numerical control (CNC, Section 38.3), in which mandrel
rotation and carriage speed are independently controlled to permit greater adjustment
and flexibility in the relative motions. CNC is especially useful in helical winding of
contoured shapes, as in Figure 15.10. As indicated in Eq. (15.1), the ratio vc/DN must
remain fixed to maintain a constant helix angle u. Thus, either vc and/or N must be
adjusted on-line to compensate for changes in D.
The mandrel is the special tooling that determines the geometry of the filament-
wound part. For part removal, mandrels must be capable of collapsing after winding and
curing. Various designs are possible, including inflatable/deflatable mandrels, collapsible
metal mandrels, and mandrels made of soluble salts or plasters.
FIGURE 15.8
Filament
winding.
Drive box
Rotating mandrel
Carriage
Pulleys
Resin bath
Continuous
roving
FIGURE 15.9
Two basic
winding patterns in
ﬁlament winding:
(a) helical and (b) polar.
θ
(a)
(b)
338
Chapter 15/Shaping Processes for Polymer Matrix Composites

Applications of filament winding are often classified as aerospace or commercial [10],
the engineering requirements being more demanding in the first category. Aerospace
applications include rocket-motor cases, missile bodies, radomes, helicopter blades, and
airplane tail sections and stabilizers. These components are made of advanced composites
and hybrid composites (Section 9.4.1), with epoxy resins being most common and reinforced
with fibers of carbon, boron, Kevlar, and glass. Commercial applications include storage
tanks, reinforced pipes and tubing, drive shafts, wind-turbine blades, and lightning rods; these
are made of conventional FRPs. Polymers include polyester, epoxy, and phenolicresins; glass
is the common reinforcing fiber.
15.5
PULTRUSION PROCESSES
The basic pultrusion process was developed around 1950 for making fishing rods of glass
fiber–reinforced polymer (GFRP). The process is similar to extrusion (hence the
similarity in name), but it involves pulling of the workpiece (so the prefix ‘‘pul-’’ is
used in place of ‘‘ex-’’). Like extrusion, pultrusion produces continuous, straight sections
of constant cross section. A related process, called pulforming, can be used to make parts
that are curved and may have variations in cross section throughout their lengths.
15.5.1 PULTRUSION
Pultrusion is a process in which continuous fiber rovings are dipped into a resin bath and
pulled through a shaping die where the impregnated resin cures. The setup is sketched in
Figure15.11,whichshowsthecuredproductbeingcutintolong,straightsections.Thesections
arereinforcedthroughouttheirlengthbycontinuousfibers.Likeextrusion,thepieceshavea
constant cross section, whose profile is determined by the shape of the die opening.
The process consists of five steps (identified in the sketch) performed in a
continuous sequence [2]: (1) filament feeding, in which the fibers are unreeled from
FIGURE 15.10
Filament
winding machine.
(Courtesy of Cincinnati
Milacron.)
Section 15.5/Pultrusion Processes
339

a creel (shelves with skewers that hold filament bobbins); (2) resin impregnation, in
which the fibers are dipped in the uncured liquid resin; (3) pre-die forming—the
collection of filaments is gradually shaped into the approximate cross section desired;
(4) shaping and curing, in which the impregnated fibers are pulled through the heated die
whose length is 1 to 1.5 m (3 to 5 ft) and whose inside surfaces are highly polished; and (5)
pullingand cutting—pullers are used to draw the cured length through the die, after which
it is cut by a cut-off wheel with SiC or diamond grits.
Common resins used in pultrusion are unsaturated polyesters, epoxies, and silicones,
all thermosetting polymers. There are difficulties in processing with epoxy polymers
because of sticking on the die surface. Thermoplastics have also been studied for possible
applications [2]. E-glass is by far the most widely used reinforcing material; proportions
range from 30% to 70%. Modulus of elasticity and tensile strength increase with
reinforcement content. Products made by pultrusion include solid rods, tubing, long
and flat sheets, structural sections (such as channels, angled and flanged beams), tool
handles for high-voltage work, and third-rail covers for subways.
15.5.2 PULFORMING
The pultrusion process is limited to straight sections of constant cross section. There is also a
need for long parts with continuous fiber reinforcement that are curved rather than straight
and whose cross sections may vary throughout the length. The pulforming process is suited
totheseless-regularshapes.Pulformingcanbedefinedaspultrusionwithadditionalstepsto
form the length into a semicircular contour and alter the cross section at one or more
locations along the length. A sketch of the equipment is illustrated in Figure 15.12. After
exiting the shaping die, the continuous workpiece is fed into a rotating table with negative
molds positioned around its periphery. The work is forced into the mold cavities by a
dieshoe, which squeezes thecrosssection atvarious locationsand forms the curvatureinthe
length. The diameter of the table determines the radius of the part. As the work leaves
the die table, it is cut to length to provide discrete parts. Resins and fibers similar to those for
pultrusion are used in pulforming. An important application of the process is production of
automobile leaf springs.
FIGURE 15.11
Pultrusion process (see
text for interpretation of
sequence numbers).
340
Chapter 15/Shaping Processes for Polymer Matrix Composites

15.6
OTHER PMC SHAPING PROCESSES
Additional PMC shaping processes worth noting include centrifugal casting, tube rolling,
continuous laminating, and cutting. In addition, many of the traditional thermoplastic
shaping processes are applicable to (short-fiber) FRPs based on TP polymers; these
include blow molding, thermoforming, and extrusion.
Centrifugal Casting
This process is ideal for cylindrical products such as pipes and
tanks. The process is the same as its counterpart in metal casting (Section 11.3.5).
Chopped fibers combined with liquid resin are poured into a fast-rotating cylindrical
mold. Centrifugal force presses the ingredients against the mold wall, where curing takes
place. The resulting inner surfaces are quite smooth. Part shrinkage or use of split molds
permits part removal.
Tube Rolling
FRP tubes can be fabricated from prepreg sheets by a rolling technique [7],
shown in Figure 15.13. Such tubes are used in bicycle frames and space trusses. In the process,
a precut prepreg sheet iswrapped around a cylindrical mandrel several times to obtain a tube
wall of multiple sheet thicknesses. The rolled sheets are then encased in a heat-shrinking
sleeve and oven cured. As the sleeve contracts, entrapped gases are squeezed out the ends of
the tube. When curing is complete, the mandrel is removed to yield a rolled FRP tube. The
operation is simple, and tooling cost is low. There are variations in the process, such as using
different wrapping methods or using a steel mold toenclose the rolledprepreg tube for better
dimensional control.
FIGURE 15.12
Pulforming process (not
shown in the sketch is
the cut-off of the
pulformed part).
FIGURE 15.13
Tube
rolling, showing (a) one
possible means of
wrapping FRP prepregs
around a mandrel, and
(b) the completed tube
after curing and removal
of mandrel.
Section 15.6/Other PMC Shaping Processes
341

Continuous Laminating
Fiber-reinforced plastic panels, sometimes translucent and/or
corrugated, are used in construction. The process to produce them consists of (1)
impregnating layers of glass fiber mat or woven fabric by dipping in liquid resin or
by passing beneath a doctor blade; (2) gathering between cover films (cellophane,
polyester, or other polymer); and (3) compacting between squeeze rolls and curing.
Corrugation (4) is added by formed rollers or mold shoes.
Cutting Methods
FRP laminated composites must be cut in both uncured and cured
states. Uncured materials (prepregs, preforms, SMCs, and other starting forms) must be cut
to size for lay-up, molding, and so on. Typical cutting tools include knives, scissors, power
shears, and steel-rule blanking dies. Also used are nontraditional cutting methods, such as
laser beam cutting and water jet cutting (Chapter 26).
Cured FRPs are hard, tough, abrasive, and difficult to cut; but cutting is necessary
in many FRP shaping processes to trim excess material, cut holes and outlines, and for
other purposes. For fiberglass-reinforced plastics, cemented carbide cutting tools and
high-speed steel saw blades must be used. For some advanced composites (e.g., boron-
epoxy), diamond cutting tools obtain best results. Water jet cutting is also used with good
success on cured FRPs; this process reduces the dust and noise problems associated with
conventional sawing methods.
REFERENCES
[1] ASM Handbook, Vol. 21: Composites, ASM Inter-
national, Materials Park, Ohio, 2001.
[2] Bader, M. G., Smith, W., Isham, A. B., Rolston, J. A.,
and Metzner, A. B. Delaware Composites Design
Encyclopedia. Vol. 3. Processing and Fabrication
Technology. Technomic Publishing Co., Lancaster,
Pennsylvania, 1990.
[3] Chawla, K. K. Composite Materials: Science and
Engineering,3rded.,Springer-Verlag,NewYork,2008.
[4] Charrier, J-M. Polymeric Materials and Processing.
Oxford University Press, New York, 1991.
[5] Coulter, J. P.‘‘Resin Impregnation During the Man-
ufacture of Composite Materials,’’ PhD Disserta-
tion. University of Delaware, 1988.
[6] Engineering Materials Handbook. Vol. 1. Compo-
sites. ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio, 1987.
[7] Mallick, P. K. Fiber-Reinforced Composites: Mate-
rials, Manufacturing, and Design. 2nd ed. Marcel
Dekker, New York, 1993.
[8] McCrum, N. G., Buckley, C. P., and Bucknall, C. B.
Principles of Polymer Engineering. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Inc., Oxford, U.K., 1988.
[9] Morton-Jones, D. H. Polymer Processing. Chapman
and Hall, London, 1989.
[10] Schwartz, M. M. Composite Materials Handbook.
2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1992.
[11] Strong, A. B. Fundamentals of Composites Manu-
facturing: Materials, Methods, and Applications.
2nd ed. Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dear-
born, Michigan, 2007.
[12] Wick, C., Benedict, J. T., and Veilleux, R. F. (eds.).
Tool and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook. 4th
ed. Vol. II. Forming, 1984.
[13] Wick, C., and Veilleux, R. F. (eds.). Tool and Man-
ufacturing Engineers Handbook. 4th ed. Vol. III.
Materials, Finishing, and Coating, 1985.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
15.1.
What are the principal polymers used in fiber-
reinforced polymers?
15.2.
What is the difference between a roving and a yarn?
15.3.
In the context of fiber reinforcement, what is a mat?
15.4.
Why are particles and flakes members of the same
basic class of reinforcing material?
15.5.
What is sheet molding compound (SMC)?
15.6.
Howisaprepregdifferentfromamoldingcompound?
15.7.
Why are laminated FRP products made by the
spray-up method not as strong as similar products
made by hand lay-up?
342
Chapter 15/Shaping Processes for Polymer Matrix Composites

15.8.
What is the difference between the wet lay-up ap-
proach and the prepreg approach in hand lay-up?
15.9.
What is an autoclave?
15.10.
What are some of the advantages of the closed mold
processes for PMCs relative to open mold processes?
15.11.
Identify some of the different forms of polymer
matrix composite molding compounds.
15.12.
What is preform molding?
15.13.
Describe reinforced reaction injection molding
(RRIM).
15.14.
What is filament winding?
15.15.
Describe the pultrusion process.
15.16.
How does pulforming differ from pultrusion?
15.17.
With what kinds of products is tube rolling
associated?
15.18.
How are FRPs cut?
15.19.
(Video) According to the video on composites, list
the primary purpose of the matrix and the re-
inforcement in a composite.
15.20.
(Video) List the primary methods of fiber re-
inforced thermoset polymer composite production
according to the composite video.
15.21.
(Video) What are the advantages and disadvan-
tages of using prepreg material for lay-up of com-
posites according to the composite video?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 14 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
15.1.
Which one of the following is the most common poly-
mer type in fiber-reinforced polymer composites: (a)
elastomers, (b) thermoplastics, or (c) thermosets?
15.2.
Most rubber products are properly classified into
which of the following categories (three best
answers): (a) elastomer reinforced with carbon
black, (b) fiber-reinforced composite, (c) parti-
cle-reinforced composite, (d) polymer matrix com-
posite, (e) pure elastomer, and (f) pure polymer?
15.3.
Other names for open mold processes include which
of the following (two best answers): (a) compression
molding, (b) contact lamination, (c) contact mold-
ing, (d) filament winding, (e) matched die molding,
(f) preform molding, and (g) pultrusion?
15.4.
Hand lay-up is classified in which of the following
general categories of PMC shaping processes (two
best answers): (a) closed mold process, (b) com-
pression molding, (c) contact molding, (d) filament
winding, or (e) open mold process?
15.5.
A positive mold with a smooth surface will produce
a good finish on which surface of the laminated
product in the hand lay-up method:(a) inside sur-
face or (b) outside surface?
15.6.
A molding operation that uses sheet-molding com-
pound (SMC) is a form of which one of the follow-
ing: (a) compression molding, (b) contact molding,
(c) injection molding, (d) open mold processing,
(e) pultrusion, or (f) transfer molding?
15.7.
Filament winding involves the use of which one of
the following fiber reinforcements: (a) continuous
filaments, (b) fabrics, (c) mats, (d) prepregs,
(e) short fibers, or (f) woven rovings?
15.8.
Infilament winding, when the continuous filament is
wound around the cylindrical mandrel at a helix
angle close to 90, it is called which of the following
(one best answer): (a) bi-axial winding, (b) helical
winding, (c) hoop winding, (d) perpendicular wind-
ing, (e) polar winding, or (f) radial winding?
15.9.
Pultrusion is most similar to which one of the
following plastic shaping processes: (a) blow-mold-
ing,
(b)
extrusion,
(c)
injection
molding,
or
(d) thermoforming?
15.10.
Water jet cutting is one of several ways of cutting or
trimming uncured or cured FRPs; in the case of
cured FRPs, the process is noted for its reduction of
dust and noise: (a) true or (b) false?
Multiple Choice Quiz
343

Part IV
Particulate
Processing of Metals
and Ceramics
16
POWDER
METALLURGY
Chapter Contents
16.1
Characterization of Engineering Powders
16.1.1
Geometric Features
16.1.2
Other Features
16.2
Production of Metallic Powders
16.2.1
Atomization
16.2.2
Other Production Methods
16.3
Conventional Pressing and Sintering
16.3.1
Blending and Mixing of the Powders
16.3.2
Compaction
16.3.3
Sintering
16.3.4
Secondary Operations
16.3.5
Heat Treatment and Finishing
16.4
Alternative Pressing and Sintering Techniques
16.4.1
Isostatic Pressing
16.4.2
Powder Injection Molding
16.4.3
Powder Rolling, Extrusion, and
Forging
16.4.4
Combined Pressing and Sintering
16.4.5
Liquid Phase Sintering
16.5
Materials and Products for Powder Metallurgy
16.6
Design Considerations in Powder Metallurgy
This part of the book is concerned with the processing of
metals and ceramics that are in the form of powders—very
small particulate solids. In the case of traditional ceramics,
the powders are produced by crushing and grinding common
materials that are found in nature, such as silicate minerals
(clay) and quartz. In the case of metals and the new ceramics,
the powders are produced by a varietyofindustrial processes.
We cover the powder-making processes as well as the meth-
ods used to shape products out of powders in two chapters:
Chapter 16 on powder metallurgy and Chapter 17 on partic-
ulate processing of ceramics and cermets.
Powder metallurgy (PM) is a metal processing tech-
nology in which parts are produced from metallic powders.
In the usual PM production sequence, the powders are
compressed into the desired shape and then heated to cause
bonding of the particles into a hard, rigid mass. Compres-
sion, called pressing, is accomplished in a press-type ma-
chine using tools designed specifically for the part to be
manufactured. The tooling, which typically consists of a die
and one or more punches, can be expensive, and PM is
therefore most appropriate for medium and high produc-
tion. The heating treatment, called sintering, is performed
at a temperature below the melting point of the metal. The
video
clip
titled
Powder
Metallurgy
illustrates
PM
344

production technology. Considerations that make powder metallurgy an important
commercial technology include:

PM parts can be mass produced to net shape or near net shape, eliminating or
reducing the need for subsequent processing.

The PM process itself involves very little waste of material; about 97% of the
starting powders are converted to product. This compares favorably with casting
processes in which sprues, runners, and risers are wasted material in the production
cycle.

Owing to the nature of the starting material in PM, parts having a specified level of
porosity can be made. This feature lends itself to the production of porous metal parts
such as filters and oil-impregnated bearings and gears.

Certain metals that are difficult to fabricate by other methods can be shaped by
powder metallurgy. Tungsten is an example; tungsten filaments used in incandescent
lamp bulbs are made using PM technology.

Certain metal alloy combinations and cermets can be formed by PM that cannot be
produced by other methods.

PM compares favorably with most casting processes in terms of dimensional control
of the product. Tolerances of 0.13 mm (0.005 in) are held routinely.

PM production methods can be automated for economical production.
VIDEO CLIP
Powder Metallurgy. This clip contains two segments: (1) powder metal parts production
and (2) PM overview.
There are limitations and disadvantages associated with PM processing. These
include the following: (1) tooling and equipment costs are high, (2) metallic powders are
expensive, and (3) there are difficulties with storing and handling metal powders (such as
degradation of the metal over time, and fire hazards with particular metals). Also, (4)
there are limitations on part geometry because metal powders do not readily flow
laterally in the die during pressing, and allowances must be provided for ejection of the
part from the die after pressing. In addition, (5) variations in material density throughout
the part may be a problem in PM, especially for complex part geometries.
Although parts as large as 22 kg (50 lb) can be produced, most PM components are
less than 2.2 kg (5 lb). A collection of typical PM parts is shown in Figure 16.1. The largest
tonnage of metals for PM are alloys of iron, steel, and aluminum. Other PM metals
include copper, nickel, and refractory metals such as molybdenum and tungsten. Metallic
carbides such as tungsten carbide are often included within the scope of powder
metallurgy; however, because these materials are ceramics, we defer their consideration
until the next chapter.
The development of the modern field of powder metallurgy dates back to the 1800s
(Historical Note 16.1). The scope of the modern technology includes not only parts
production, but also preparation of the starting powders. Success in powder metallurgy
dependstoalargedegreeonthecharacteristicsofthestartingpowders;wediscussthistopic
in Section 16.1. Later sections describe powder production, pressing, and sintering. There is
a close correlation between PM technology and aspects of ceramics processing (Chap-
ter 17). In ceramics (except glass), the starting material is also powder, so the methods for
characterizing the powders are closely related to those in PM. Several of the shape-forming
methods are similar, also.
Chapter 16 /Powder Metallurgy
345

Historical Note 16.1
Powder metallurgy
Powders of metals such as gold and copper, as well
as some of the metallic oxides, have been used for
decorative purposes since ancient times. The uses
included decorations on pottery, bases for paints, and in
cosmetics. It is believed that the Egyptians used PM to
make tools as far back as 3000 BCE.
The modern ﬁeld of powder metallurgy dates to the
early nineteenth century, when there was a strong
interest in the metal platinum. Around 1815, Englishman
William Wollaston developed a technique for preparing
platinum powders, compacting them under high
pressure, and baking (sintering) them at red heat. The
Wollaston process marks the beginning of powder
metallurgy as it is practiced today.
U.S. patents were issued in 1870 to S. Gwynn that
relate to PM self-lubricating bearings. He used a mixture
of 99% powdered tin and 1% petroleum, mixing,
heating, and ﬁnally subjecting the mixture to extreme
pressures to form it into the desired shape inside a mold
cavity.
By the early 1900s, the incandescent lamp had
become an important commercial product. A variety
of ﬁlament materials had been tried, including
carbon, zirconium, vanadium, and osmium; but it was
concluded that tungsten was the best ﬁlament
material. The problem was that tungsten was difﬁcult
to process because of its high melting point and
unique properties. In 1908, William Coolidge
developed a procedure that made production of
tungsten incandescent lamp ﬁlaments feasible. In his
process, ﬁne powders of tungsten oxide (WO3) were
reduced to metallic powders, pressed into compacts,
presintered, hot-forged into rounds, sintered, and
ﬁnally drawn into ﬁlament wire. The Coolidge process
is still used today to make ﬁlaments for incandescent
light bulbs.
In the 1920s, cemented carbide tools (WC–Co) were
being fabricated by PM techniques (Historical Note 7.2).
Self-lubricating bearings were produced in large
quantities starting in the 1930s. Powder metal gears and
other components were mass produced in the 1960s and
1970s, especially in the automotive industry; and in the
1980s, PM parts for aircraft turbine engines were
developed.
FIGURE 16.1
A
collection of powder
metallurgy parts. (Courtesy
of Dorst America, Inc.)
346
Chapter 16/Powder Metallurgy

16.1
CHARACTERIZATION OF ENGINEERING POWDERS
A powder can be defined as a finely divided particulate solid. In this section we
characterize metallic powders. However, most of the discussion applies to ceramic
powders as well.
16.1.1 GEOMETRIC FEATURES
The geometry of the individual powders can be defined by the following attributes: (1)
particlesizeanddistribution,(2)particleshapeandinternalstructure,and(3)surfacearea.
Particle Size and Distribution
Particle size refers to the dimensions of the individual
powders. If the particle shape is spherical, a single dimension is adequate. For other
shapes, two or more dimensions are needed. There are various methods available to
obtain particle size data. The most common method uses screens of different mesh sizes.
The term mesh count is used to refer to the number of openings per linear inch of screen.
Higher mesh count indicates smaller particle size. A mesh count of 200 means there are
200 openings per linear inch. Because the mesh is square, the count is the same in both
directions, and the total number of openings per square inch is 2002 ¼ 40,000.
Particles are sorted by passing them through a series of screens of progressively
smaller mesh size. The powders are placed on a screen of a certain mesh count and
vibrated so that particles small enough to fit through the openings pass through to the
next screen below. The second screen empties into a third, and so forth, so that the
particles are sorted according to size. A certain powder size might be called size 230
through 200, indicating that the powders have passed through the 200 mesh, but not
230. To make the specification easier, we simply say that the particle size is 200. The
procedure of separating the powders by size is called classification.
The openings in the screen are less than the reciprocal of the mesh count because of
the thickness of the wire in the screen, as illustrated in Figure 16.2. Assuming that the
limiting dimension of the particle is equal to the screen opening, we have
PS ¼
1
MC  tw
ð16:1Þ
where PS ¼ particle size, in; MC ¼ mesh count, openings per linear inch; and tw ¼ wire
thickness of screen mesh, in.
The figure shows how smaller particles would pass through the openings, whereas
larger powders would not. Variations occur in the powder sizes sorted by screening owing
to differences in particle shapes, the range of sizes between mesh count steps, and
variations in screen openings within a given mesh count. Also, the screening method has a
FIGURE 16.2
Screen
mesh for sorting particle
sizes.
Section 16.1/Characterization of Engineering Powders
347

practical upper limit of MC ¼ 400 (approximately), because of both the difficulty in
making such fine screens and agglomeration of the small powders. Other methods to
measure particle size include microscopy and X-ray techniques.
Typical particle sizes used in conventional powder metallurgy (press and sinter)
range between 25 and 300 mm (0.001 and 0.012 in).1 The high end of this range corresponds
to a mesh count of around 65. The low end of the range is too small to be measured by the
mesh count method.
Particle Shape and Internal Structure
Metal powder shapes can be cataloged into
various types, several of which are illustrated in Figure 16.3. There will be a variation in the
particle shapes in a collection of powders, just as the particle size will vary. A simple and
useful measure of shape is the aspect ratio—the ratio of maximum dimension to minimum
dimension for a given particle. The aspect ratio for a spherical particle is 1.0, but for an
acicular grain the ratio might be 2 to 4. Microscopic techniques are required to determine
shape characteristics.
Any volume of loose powders will contain pores between the particles. These are
called open pores because they are external to the individual particles. Open pores are
spaces into which a fluid such as water, oil, or a molten metal can penetrate. In addition,
there are closed pores—internal voids in the structure of an individual particle. The
existence of these internal pores is usually minimal, and their effect when they do exist is
minor, but they can influence density measurements, as we shall see later.
Surface Area
Assuming that the particle shape is a perfect sphere, its area A and
volume V are given by
A ¼ pD2
ð16:2Þ
V ¼ pD3
6
ð16:3Þ
where D ¼ diameter of the spherical particle, mm (in). The area-to-volume ratio A/V for
a sphere is then given by
A
V ¼ 6
D
ð16:4Þ
In general, the area-to-volume ratio can be expressed for any particle shape—spherical
or nonspherical—as follows:
A
V ¼ Ks
D
or
Ks ¼ AD
V
ð16:5Þ
1These values are provided by Prof. Wojciech Misiolek, my colleague in Lehigh’s Department of Materials
Science and Engineering. Powder metallurgy is one of his research areas.
FIGURE 16.3
Several of
the possible (ideal) particle
shapes in powder
metallurgy.
348
Chapter 16/Powder Metallurgy

where Ks ¼ shape factor; D in the general case ¼ the diameter of a sphere of equivalent
volume as the nonspherical particle, mm (in).
Thus, Ks ¼ 6.0 for a sphere. For particle shapes other than spherical, Ks > 6.
We can infer the following from these equations. Smaller particle size and higher
shape factor (Ks) mean higher surface area for the same total weight of metal powders.
This means greater area for surface oxidation to occur. Small powder size also leads to
more agglomeration of the particles, which is a problem in automatic feeding of the
powders. The reason for using smaller particle sizes is that they provide more uniform
shrinkage and better mechanical properties in the final PM product.
16.1.2 OTHER FEATURES
Other features of engineering powders include interparticle friction, flow characteristics,
packing, density, porosity, chemistry, and surface films.
Interparticle Friction and Flow Characteristics
Friction between particles affects the
ability of a powder to flow readily and pack tightly. A common measure of interparticle
friction is the angle of repose, which is the angle formed by a pile of powders as they are
poured from a narrow funnel, as in Figure 16.4. Larger angles indicate greater friction
between particles. Smaller particle sizes generally show greater friction and steeper
angles. Spherical shapes result in the lowest interpartical friction; as shape deviates more
from spherical, friction between particles tends to increase.
Flow characteristics are important in die filling and pressing. Automatic die filling
dependsoneasy and consistentflowofthepowders. Inpressing, resistance toflowincreases
density variations in the compacted part; these density gradients are generally undesirable.
A common measure of flow is thetime required for a certain amount of powder (by weight)
to flow through a standard-sized funnel. Smaller flow times indicate easier flow and lower
interparticle friction. To reduce interparticle friction and facilitate flow during pressing,
lubricants are often added to the powders in small amounts.
Packing, Density, and Porosity
Packing characteristics depend on two density mea-
sures. First, true density is the density of the true volume of the material. This is the
density when the powders are melted into a solid mass, values of which are given in Table
4.1. Second, bulk density is the density of the powders in the loose state after pouring,
which includes the effect of pores between particles. Because of the pores, bulk density is
less than true density.
The packing factor is the bulk density divided by the true density. Typical values for
loose powdersrangebetween 0.5 and 0.7. The packing factor depends on particleshapeand
FIGURE 16.4
Interparticle friction as
indicated by the angle of repose of a pile
of powders poured from a narrow funnel.
Larger angles indicate greater
interparticle friction.
Section 16.1/Characterization of Engineering Powders
349

thedistributionofparticlesizes. Ifpowdersofvarioussizesarepresent,thesmallerpowders
will fit into the interstices of the larger ones that would otherwise be taken up by air, thus
resulting in a higher packing factor. Packing can also be increased by vibrating thepowders,
causing themtosettle moretightly. Finally, weshouldnotethatexternalpressure, asapplied
during compaction, greatly increases packing of powders through rearrangement and
deformation of the particles.
Porosity represents an alternative way of considering the packing characteristics of
a powder. Porosity is defined as the ratio of the volume of the pores (empty spaces) in the
powder to the bulk volume. In principle
Porosity þ Packing factor ¼ 1:0
ð16:6Þ
The issue is complicated by the possible existence of closed pores in some of the
particles. If these internal pore volumes are included in the above porosity, then the
equation is exact.
Chemistry and Surface Films
Characterization of the powder would not be complete
without an identification of its chemistry. Metallic powders are classified as either
elemental, consisting of a pure metal, or pre-alloyed, wherein each particle is an alloy.
We discuss these classes and the metals commonly used in PM more thoroughly in
Section 16.5.1.
Surface films are a problem in powder metallurgy because of the large area per unit
weight of metal when dealing with powders. The possible films include oxides, silica,
adsorbed organic materials, and moisture [6]. Generally, these films must be removed
before shape processing.
16.2
PRODUCTION OF METALLIC POWDERS
In general, producers of metallic powders are not the same companies as those that make
PM parts. The powder producers are the suppliers; the plants that manufacture compo-
nents out of powder metals are the customers. It is therefore appropriate to separate the
discussion of powder production (this section) from the processes used to make PM
products (later sections).
Virtually any metal can be made into powder form. There are three principal
methods by which metallic powders are commercially produced, each of which involves
energy input to increase the surface area of the metal. The methods are (1) atomization, (2)
chemical, and (3) electrolytic [13]. In addition, mechanical methods are occasionally used
to reduce powder sizes; however, these methods are much more commonly associated with
ceramic powder production and we treat them in the next chapter.
16.2.1 ATOMIZATION
Thismethodinvolvestheconversionofmoltenmetalintoasprayofdropletsthatsolidifyinto
powders. It is the most versatile and popular method for producing metal powders today,
applicable to almost all metals, alloys as well as pure metals. There are multiple ways of
creating the molten metal spray, several of which are illustrated in Figure 16.5. Two of the
methodsshownarebasedongasatomization,inwhichahighvelocitygasstream(airorinert
gas) is utilized to atomize the liquid metal. In Figure 16.5(a), the gas flows through an
expansion nozzle, siphoning molten metal from the melt below and spraying it into a
container. The droplets solidify into powder form. In a closely related method shown in
Figure 16.5(b), molten metal flows by gravity through a nozzle and is immediately atomized
350
Chapter 16/Powder Metallurgy

byairjets.Theresultingmetalpowders,whichtendtobespherical,arecollectedinachamber
below.
The approach shown in Figure 16.5(c) is similar to (b), except that a high-velocity
water stream is used instead of air. This is known as water atomization and is the most
common of the atomization methods, particularly suited to metals that melt below
1600C (2900F). Cooling is more rapid, and the resulting powder shape is irregular
rather than spherical. The disadvantage of using water is oxidation on the particle surface.
A recent innovation involves the use of synthetic oil rather than water to reduce
oxidation. In both air and water atomization processes, particle size is controlled largely
by the velocity of the fluid stream; particle size is inversely related to velocity.
Several methods are based on centrifugal atomization. In one approach, the
rotating disk method shown in Figure 16.5(d), the liquid metal stream pours onto a
rapidly rotating disk that sprays the metal in all directions to produce powders.
16.2.2 OTHER PRODUCTION METHODS
Other metal powder production methods include various chemical reduction processes,
precipitation methods, and electrolysis.
Chemical reduction includes a variety of chemical reactions by which metallic
compounds are reduced to elemental metal powders. A common process involves liberation
of metals from their oxides by use of reducing agents such as hydrogen or carbon monoxide.
The reducing agent is made to combine with the oxygen in the compound to free the
FIGURE 16.5
Several
atomization methods for
producing metallic
powders: (a) and (b) two
gas atomization methods;
(c) water atomization; and
(d) centrifugal atomization
by the rotating disk
method.
Section 16.2/Production of Metallic Powders
351

metallic element. This approach is used to produce powders of iron, tungsten, and copper.
Another chemical process for iron powders involves the decomposition of iron pentacar-
bonyl (Fe(Co)5) to produce spherical particles of high purity. Powders produced by this
method are illustrated in the photomicrograph of Figure 16.6. Other chemical processes
include precipitation of metallic elements from salts dissolved in water. Powders of copper,
nickel, and cobalt can be produced by this approach.
In electrolysis, an electrolytic cell is set up in which the source of the desired metal
is the anode. The anode is slowly dissolved under an applied voltage, transported through
the electrolyte, and deposited on the cathode. The deposit is removed, washed, and dried
to yield a metallic powder of very high purity. The technique is used for producing
powders of beryllium, copper, iron, silver, tantalum, and titanium.
16.3
CONVENTIONAL PRESSING AND SINTERING
After the metallic powders have been produced, the conventional PM sequence consists
of three steps: (1) blending and mixing of the powders; (2) compaction, in which the
powders are pressed into the desired part shape; and (3) sintering, which involves heating
to a temperature below the melting point to cause solid-state bonding of the particles and
strengthening of the part. The three steps, sometimes referred to as primary operations in
PM, are portrayed in Figure 16.7. In addition, secondary operations are sometimes
performed to improve dimensional accuracy, increase density, and for other reasons.
16.3.1 BLENDING AND MIXING OF THE POWDERS
To achieve successful results in compaction and sintering, the metallic powders must be
thoroughly homogenized beforehand. The terms blending and mixing are both used in this
context. Blending refers to when powders of the same chemical composition but possibly
differentparticlesizes areintermingled.Differentparticlesizesareoftenblendedtoreduce
porosity. Mixing refers to powders of different chemistries being combined. An advantage
of PM technologyistheopportunity to mix various metalsinto alloys that would be difficult
or impossible to produce by other means. The distinction between blending and mixing is
not always precise in industrial practice.
Blending and mixing are accomplished by mechanical means. Four alternatives are
illustrated in Figure 16.8: (a) rotation in a drum; (b) rotation in a double-cone container;
FIGURE 16.6
Iron
powders produced by
decomposition of iron
pentacarbonyl; particle
sizes range from about
0.25 to 3.0 mm (10–125
m-in). (Photo courtesy of
GAF Chemicals
Corporation, Advanced
Materials Division.)
352
Chapter 16/Powder Metallurgy

(c) agitation in a screw mixer; and (d) stirring in a blade mixer. There is more science to
these devices than one would suspect. Best results seem to occur when the container is
between 20% and 40% full. The containers are usually designed with internal baffles or
other ways of preventing free-fall during blending of powders of different sizes, because
variations in settling rates between sizes result in segregation—just the opposite of what
is wanted in blending. Vibration of the powder is undesirable, because it also causes
segregation.
Other ingredients are usually added to the metallic powders during the blending and/
or mixing step. These additives include (1) lubricants, such as stearates of zinc and
aluminum, in small amounts to reduce friction between particles and at the die wall during
compaction; (2) binders, which are required in some cases to achieve adequate strength in
the pressed but unsintered parts; and (3) deflocculants, which inhibit agglomeration of
powders for better flow characteristics during subsequent processing.
FIGURE 16.7
The
conventional powder
metallurgy production
sequence: (1) blending,
(2) compacting, and
(3) sintering; (a) shows
the condition of the
particles, whereas (b)
shows the operation and/
or workpart during the
sequence.
FIGURE 16.8
Several blending and mixing devices: (a) rotating drum, (b) rotating double-cone,
(c) screw mixer, and (d) blade mixer.
Section 16.3/Conventional Pressing and Sintering
353

16.3.2 COMPACTION
In compaction, high pressure is applied to the powders to form them into the required
shape. The conventional compaction method is pressing, in which opposing punches
squeeze the powders contained in a die. The steps in the pressing cycle are shown in
Figure 16.9. The workpart after pressing is called a green compact, the word green
meaning not yet fully processed. As a result of pressing, the density of the part, called the
green density, is much greater than the starting bulk density. The green strength of the
part when pressed is adequate for handling but far less than that achieved after sintering.
The applied pressure in compaction results initially in repacking of the powders into
a more efficient arrangement, eliminating ‘‘bridges’’ formed during filling, reducing pore
space, and increasing the number of contacting points between particles. As pressure
increases, the particles are plastically deformed, causing interparticle contact area to
increase and additional particles to make contact. This is accompanied by a further
reduction in pore volume. The progression is illustrated in three views in Figure 16.10
FIGURE 16.9
Pressing,
the conventional method
of compacting metal
powders in PM: (1) ﬁlling
the die cavity with
powder, done by
automatic feed in
production, (2) initial,
and (3) ﬁnal positions of
upper and lower punches
during compaction, and
(4) ejection of part.
FIGURE 16.10
(a) Effect
of applied pressure
during compaction:
(1) initial loose powders
after ﬁlling, (2) repacking,
and (3) deformation of
particles; and (b) density
of the powders as a
function of pressure. The
sequence here
corresponds to steps 1,
2, and 3 in Figure 16.9.
354
Chapter 16/Powder Metallurgy

forstartingparticlesofsphericalshape.Alsoshownistheassociateddensityrepresentedby
the three views as a function of applied pressure.
Presses used in conventional PM compaction are mechanical, hydraulic, or a
combination of the two. A 450 kN (50 ton) hydraulic unit is shown in Figure 16.11. Because
of differences in part complexity and associated pressing requirements, presses can be
distinguished as (1) pressing from one direction, referred to as single-action presses; or (2)
pressing from two directions, any of several types including opposed ram, double-action,
and multiple action. Current available press technology can provide up to 10 separate
action controls to produce parts of significant geometric complexity. We examine part
complexity and other design issues in Section 16.6.
The capacity of a press for PM production is generally given in tons or kN or MN.
The required force for pressing depends on the projected area of the PM part (area in the
horizontal plane for a vertical press) multiplied by the pressure needed to compact the
given metal powders. Reducing this to equation form
F ¼ Appc
ð16:7Þ
where F ¼ required force, N (lb); Ap ¼ projected area of the part, mm2 (in2); and pc ¼
compaction pressure required for the given powder material, MPa (lb/in2).
Compaction pressures typically range from 70 MPa (10,000 lb/in2) for aluminum
powders to 700 MPa (100,000 lb/in2) for iron and steel powders.
16.3.3 SINTERING
After pressing, the green compact lacks strength and hardness; it is easily crumbled under
low stresses. Sintering is a heat treatment operation performed on the compact to bond
FIGURE 16.11
A 450-kN
(50-ton) hydraulic press for
compaction of powder
metallurgy components.
(Photo courtesy of Dorst
America, Inc.)
Section 16.3/Conventional Pressing and Sintering
355

its metallic particles, thereby increasing strength and hardness. The treatment is usually
carried out at temperatures between 0.7 and 0.9 of the metal’s melting point (absolute
scale). The terms solid-state sintering or solid-phase sintering are sometimes used for
this conventional sintering because the metal remains unmelted at these treatment
temperatures.
It is generally agreed among researchers that the primary driving force for sintering
is reduction of surface energy [6], [16]. The green compact consists of many distinct
particles, each with its own individual surface, and so the total surface area contained in
the compact is very high. Under the influence of heat, the surface area is reduced through
the formation and growth of bonds between the particles, with associated reduction in
surface energy. The finer the initial powder size, the higher the total surface area, and the
greater the driving force behind the process.
The series of sketches in Figure 16.12 shows on a microscopic scale the changes that
occur during sintering of metallic powders. Sintering involves mass transport to create the
necks and transform them into grain boundaries. The principal mechanism by which this
occurs is diffusion; other possible mechanisms include plastic flow. Shrinkage occurs
during sintering as a result of pore size reduction. This depends to a large extent on the
density of the green compact, which depends on the pressure during compaction.
Shrinkage is generally predictable when processing conditions are closely controlled.
Because PM applications usually involve medium-to-high production, most sintering
furnaces aredesigned with mechanized flow-through capability for theworkparts. The heat
treatment consists of three steps, accomplished in three chambers in these continuous
furnaces: (1) preheat, in which lubricants and binders are burned off; (2) sinter; and (3)
cool down. The treatment is illustrated in Figure 16.13. Typical sintering temperatures and
times are given for selected metals in Table 16.1.
In modern sintering practice, the atmosphere in the furnace is controlled.
The purposes of a controlled atmosphere include (1) protection from oxidation,
(2) providing a reducing atmosphere to remove existing oxides, (3) providing a carbu-
rizing atmosphere, and (4) assisting in removing lubricants and binders used in pressing.
Common sintering furnace atmospheres are inert gas, nitrogen-based, dissociated am-
monia, hydrogen, and natural gas [6]. Vacuum atmospheres are used for certain metals,
such as stainless steel and tungsten.
16.3.4 SECONDARY OPERATIONS
PM secondary operations include densification, sizing, impregnation, infiltration, heat
treatment, and finishing.
FIGURE 16.12
Sintering
on a microscopic scale:
(1) particle bonding is
initiated at contact points;
(2) contact points grow
into ‘‘necks’’; (3) the
pores between particles
are reduced in size; and
(4) grain boundaries
develop between
particles in place of the
necked regions.
356
Chapter 16/Powder Metallurgy

Densiﬁcation and Sizing
A number of secondary operations are performed to increase
density, improve accuracy, or accomplish additional shaping of the sintered part.
Repressing is a pressing operation in which the part is squeezed in a closed die to
increase density and improve physical properties. Sizing is the pressing of a sintered part
to improve dimensional accuracy. Coining is a pressworking operation on a sintered part
to press details into its surface.
Some PM parts require machining after sintering. Machining is rarely done to size
the part, but rather to create geometric features that cannot be achieved by pressing, such
as internal and external threads, side holes, and other details.
Impregnation and Inﬁltration
Porosity is a unique and inherent characteristic of
powder metallurgy technology. It can be exploited to create special products by filling
the available pore space with oils, polymers, or metals that have lower melting tempera-
tures than the base powder metal.
Impregnation is the term used when oil or other fluid is permeated into the pores of a
sintered PM part. The most common products of this process are oil-impregnated bearings,
FIGURE 16.13
(a) Typical heat treatment
cycle in sintering; and
(b) schematic cross
section of a continuous
sintering furnace.
TABLE 16.1
Typical sintering temperatures and times for selected
powder metals.
Sintering Temperatures
Metal
C
F
Typical Time
Brass
850
1600
25 min
Bronze
820
1500
15 min
Copper
850
1600
25 min
Iron
1100
2000
30 min
Stainless steel
1200
2200
45 min
Tungsten
2300
4200
480 min
Compiled from [10] and [17].
Section 16.3/Conventional Pressing and Sintering
357

gears,andsimilarmachinerycomponents.Self-lubricatingbearings,usuallymadeofbronzeor
ironwith10%to30%oilbyvolume,arewidelyusedintheautomotiveindustry.Thetreatment
is accomplished by immersing the sintered parts in a bath of hot oil.
An alternative application of impregnation involves PM parts that must be made
pressure tight or impervious to fluids. In this case, the parts are impregnated with various
types of polymer resins that seep into the pore spaces in liquid form and then solidify. In
some cases, resin impregnation is used to facilitate subsequent processing, for example, to
permit the use of processing solutions (such as plating chemicals) that would otherwise
soak into the pores and degrade the product, or to improve machinability of the PM
workpart.
Infiltration is an operation in which the pores of the PM part are filled with a molten
metal. The melting point of the filler metal must be below that of the PM part. The process
involvesheatingthefillermetalincontactwiththesinteredcomponentsothatcapillaryaction
draws the filler into the pores. The resulting structure is relatively nonporous, and the
infiltrated part has a more uniform density, as well as improved toughness and strength.
An application of the process is copper infiltration of iron PM parts.
16.3.5 HEAT TREATMENT AND FINISHING
Powder metal components can be heat treated (Chapter 27) and finished (electroplated
or painted, Chapter 28) by most of the same processes used on parts produced by casting
and other metalworking processes. Special care must be exercised in heat treatment
because of porosity; for example, salt baths are not used for heating PM parts. Plating and
coating operations are applied to sintered parts for appearance purposes and corrosion
resistance. Again, precautions must be taken to avoid entrapment of chemical solutions
in the pores; impregnation and infiltration are frequently used for this purpose. Common
platings for PM parts include copper, nickel, chromium, zinc, and cadmium.
16.4
ALTERNATIVE PRESSING AND SINTERING TECHNIQUES
The conventional press and sinter sequence is the most widely used shaping technology in
powder metallurgy. Additional methods for processing PM parts are discussed in this
section.
16.4.1 ISOSTATIC PRESSING
A feature of conventional pressing is that pressure is applied uniaxially. This imposes
limitations on part geometry, because metallic powders do not readily flow in directions
perpendicular to the applied pressure. Uniaxial pressing also leads to density variations in
the compact after pressing. In isostatic pressing, pressure is applied from all directions
against the powders that are contained in a flexible mold; hydraulic pressure is used to
achieve compaction. Isostatic pressing takes two alternative forms: (1) cold isostatic
pressing and (2) hot isostatic pressing.
Cold isostatic pressing (CIP) involves compaction performed at room tempera-
ture. The mold, made of rubber or other elastomer material, is oversized to compensate
for shrinkage. Water or oil is used to provide the hydrostatic pressure against the mold
inside the chamber. Figure 16.14 illustrates the processing sequence in cold isostatic
pressing. Advantages of CIP include more uniform density, less expensive tooling, and
greater applicability to shorter production runs. Good dimensional accuracy is difficult to
358
Chapter 16/Powder Metallurgy

achieve in isostatic pressing because of the flexible mold. Consequently, subsequent
finish shaping operations are often required to obtain the required dimensions, either
before or after sintering.
Hot isostatic pressing(HIP)iscarriedoutathightemperatures andpressures, usinga
gassuch asargonorhelium asthe compressionmedium.Themoldinwhichthepowdersare
contained is made of sheet metal to withstand the high temperatures. HIP accomplishes
pressing and sintering in one step. Despite this apparent advantage, it is a relatively
expensive process and its applications seem to be concentrated in the aerospace industry.
PM parts made by HIP are characterized by high density (porosity near zero), thorough
interparticle bonding, and good mechanical strength.
16.4.2 POWDER INJECTION MOLDING
Injection molding is closely associated with the plastics industry (Section 13.6). The same
basic processcan beapplied to form partsof metal or ceramic powders, thedifferencebeing
that the starting polymer contains a high content of particulate matter, typically from 50%
to 85% by volume. When used in powder metallurgy, the term metal injection molding
(MIM) is used. The more general process is powder injection molding (PIM), which
includes both metal and ceramic powders. The steps in MIM proceed as follows [7]: (1)
Metallic powders are mixed with an appropriate binder. (2) Granular pellets are formed
from the mixture. (3) The pellets are heated to molding temperature, injected into a mold
cavity, and the part is cooled and removed from the mold. (4) The part is processed to
remove the binder using any of several thermal or solvent techniques. (5) The part is
sintered. (6) Secondary operations are performed as appropriate.
The binder in powder injection molding acts as a carrier for the particles. Its
functions are to provide proper flow characteristics during molding and hold the powders
in the molded shape until sintering. The five basic types of binders in PIM are: (1)
thermosetting polymers, such as phenolics; (2) thermoplastic polymers, such as poly-
ethylene; (3) water; (4) gels; and (5) inorganic materials [7].
Polymers are the most
frequently used.
Powder injection molding is suited to part geometries similar to those in plastic
injection molding. It is not cost competitive for simple axisymmetric parts, because the
FIGURE 16.14
Cold isostatic pressing: (1) powders are placed in the ﬂexible mold; (2) hydrostatic pressure is
applied against the mold to compact the powders; and (3) pressure is reduced and the part is removed.
Section 16.4/Alternative Pressing and Sintering Techniques
359

conventional press-and-sinter process is quite adequate for these cases. PIM seems most
economical for small, complex parts of high value. Dimensional accuracy is limited by the
shrinkage that accompanies densification during sintering.
16.4.3 POWDER ROLLING, EXTRUSION, AND FORGING
Rolling, extrusion, and forging are familiar bulk metal forming processes (Chapter 19).
We describe them here in the context of powder metallurgy.
Powder Rolling
Powders can be compressed in a rolling mill operation to form metal
stripstock.Theprocessisusuallysetuptoruncontinuouslyorsemicontinuously,asshownin
Figure 16.15. The metallic powders are compacted between rolls into a green strip that is fed
directly into a sintering furnace. It is then cold rolled and resintered.
Powder Extrusion
Extrusion is one of the basic manufacturing processes (Section
1.3.1). In PM extrusion, the starting powders can be in different forms. In the most
popular method, powders are placed in a vacuum-tight sheet metal can, heated, and
extruded with the container. In another variation, billets are preformed by a conventional
press and sinter process, and then the billet is hot extruded. These methods achieve a high
degree of densification in the PM product.
Powder Forging
Forging is an important metal forming process (Section 1.3.1). In
powder forging, the starting workpart is a powder metallurgy part preformed to proper size
by pressing and sintering. Advantages of this approach are: (1) densification of the PM
part, (2) lower tooling costs and fewer forging ‘‘hits’’ (and therefore higher production
rate) because the starting workpart is preformed, and (3) reduced material waste.
16.4.4 COMBINED PRESSING AND SINTERING
Hot isostatic pressing (Section 16.4.1) accomplishes compaction and sintering in one step.
Other techniques that combine the two steps are hot pressing and spark sintering.
Hot Pressing
The setup in uniaxial hot pressing is very similar to conventional PM
pressing, except that heat is applied during compaction. The resulting product is generally
FIGURE 16.15
Powder
rolling: (1) powders are
fed through compaction
rolls to form a green
strip; (2) sintering;
(3) cold rolling; and
(4) resintering.
360
Chapter 16/Powder Metallurgy

dense, strong, hard, and dimensionally accurate. Despite these advantages, the process
presents certain technical problems that limit its adoption. Principal among these are (1)
selecting a suitable mold material that can withstand the high sintering temperatures; (2)
longer production cycle required to accomplish sintering; and (3) heating and maintain-
ing atmospheric control in the process [2]. Hot pressing has found some application in the
production of sintered carbide products using graphite molds.
Spark Sintering
An alternative approach that combines pressing and sintering but
overcomes some of the problems in hot pressing is spark sintering. The process consists of
two basic steps [2], [17]: (1) powder or a green compacted preform is placed in a die; and
(2) upper and lower punches, which also serve as electrodes, compress the part and
simultaneously apply a high-energy electrical current that burns off surface contaminants
and sinters the powders, forming a dense, solid part in about 15 seconds. The process has
been applied to a variety of metals.
16.4.5 LIQUID PHASE SINTERING
Conventional sintering (Section 16.3.3) is solid-state sintering; the metal is sintered at a
temperature below its melting point. In systems involving a mixture of two powder metals,
in which there is a difference in melting temperature between the metals, an alternative
type of sintering is used, called liquid phase sintering. In this process, the two powders are
initially mixed, and then heated to a temperature that is high enough to melt the lower-
melting-point metal but not theother. The melted metal thoroughlywets the solid particles,
creating a dense structure with strong bonding between the metals upon solidification.
Depending on the metals involved, prolonged heating may result in alloying of the metals
by gradually dissolving the solid particles into the liquid melt and/or diffusion of the liquid
metal into the solid. In either case, the resulting product is fully densified (no pores) and
strong. Examples of systems that involve liquid phase sintering include Fe–Cu, W–Cu, and
Cu–Co [6].
16.5
MATERIALS AND PRODUCTS FOR POWDER METALLURGY
The raw materials for PM processing are more expensive than for other metalworking
becauseoftheadditionalenergyrequiredtoreducethe metaltopowderform. Accordingly,
PM is competitive only in a certain range of applications. In this section we identify the
materials and products that seem most suited to powder metallurgy.
Powder Metallurgy Materials
From a chemistry standpoint, metal powders can be
classified as either elemental or pre-alloyed. Elemental powders consist of a pure metal
and are used in applications in which high purity is important. For example, pure iron
might be used where its magnetic properties are important. The most common elemental
powders are those of iron, aluminum, and copper.
Elemental powders are also mixed with other metal powders to produce special
alloys that are difficult to formulate using conventional processing methods. Tool steels
are an example; PM permits blending of ingredients that is difficult or impossible by
traditional alloying techniques. Using mixtures of elemental powders to form an alloy
provides a processing benefit, even where special alloys are not involved. Because the
powders are pure metals, they are not as strong as pre-alloyed metals. Therefore, they
deform more readily during pressing, so that density and green strength are higher than
with pre-alloyed compacts.
Section 16.5/Materials and Products for Powder Metallurgy
361

In pre-alloyed powders, each particle is an alloy composed of the desired chemical
composition. Pre-alloyed powders are used for alloys that cannot be formulated by mixing
elemental powders; stainless steel is an important example. The most common pre-alloyed
powders are certain copper alloys, stainless steel, and high-speed steel.
The commonly used elemental and pre-alloyed powdered metals, in approximate
order of tonnage usage, are: (1) iron, by far the most widely used PM metal, frequently
mixed with graphite to make steel parts, (2) aluminum, (3) copper and its alloys, (4)
nickel, (5) stainless steel, (6) high-speed steel, and (7) other PM materials such as
tungsten, molybdenum, titanium, tin, and precious metals.
Powder Metallurgy Products
A substantial advantageoffered by PMtechnologyisthat
parts can be made to near net shape or net shape; they require little or no additional shaping
after PM processing. Some of the components commonly manufactured by powder
metallurgy are gears, bearings, sprockets, fasteners, electrical contacts, cutting tools, and
various machinery parts. When produced in large quantities, metal gears and bearings are
particularlywellsuitedtoPMfortworeasons:(1) the geometry is defined principally in two
dimensions, so the part has a top surface of a certain shape, but there are no features along
the sides; and (2) there is a need for porosity in the material to serve as a reservoir for
lubricant. More complex parts with true three-dimensional geometries are also feasible in
powder metallurgy, by adding secondary operations such as machining to complete the
shape of the pressed and sintered part, and by observing certain design guidelines such as
those outlined in the following section.
16.6
DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS IN POWDER METALLURGY
Use of PM techniques is generally suited to a certain class of production situations and
part designs. In this section we attempt to define the characteristics of this class of
applications for which powder metallurgy is most appropriate. We first present a
classification system for PM parts, and then offer some guidelines on component design.
The Metal Powder Industries Federation (MPIF) defines four classes of powder
metallurgy part designs, by level of difficulty in conventional pressing. The system is useful
becauseitindicatessomeofthelimitations onshape thatcanbeachievedwithconventional
PM processing. The four part classes are illustrated in Figure 16.16.
FIGURE 16.16
Four classes of PM parts—side view shown; cross section is circular:
(a) Class I—simple thin shapes that can be pressed from one direction; (b) Class II—simple
but thicker shapes that require pressing from two directions; (c) Class III—two levels of
thickness, pressed from two directions; and (d) Class IV—multiple levels of thickness,
pressed from two directions, with separate controls for each level to achieve proper
densiﬁcation throughout the compact.
362
Chapter 16/Powder Metallurgy

The MPIF classification system provides some guidance concerning part geome-
tries that are suited to conventional PM pressing techniques. Additional advice is offered
in the following design guidelines, compiled from [3], [13], and [17].

Economics of PM processing usually require large part quantities to justify the cost of
equipment and special tooling required. Minimum quantities of 10,000 units are
suggested [17], although exceptions exist.

Powder metallurgy is unique in its capability to fabricate parts with a controlled level
of porosity. Porosities up to 50% are possible.

PM can be used to make parts out of unusual metals and alloys—materials that would
be difficult if not impossible to fabricate by other means.

The geometry of the part must permit ejection from the die after pressing; this
generally means that the part must have vertical or near-vertical sides, although steps
in the part are permissible as suggested by the MPIF classification system (Figure
16.16). Design features such as undercuts and holes on the part sides, as shown in
Figure 16.17, must be avoided. Vertical undercuts and holes, as in Figure 16.18, are
permissible because they do not interfere with ejection. Vertical holes can be of cross-
sectional shapes other than round (e.g., squares, keyways) without significant
increases in tooling or processing difficulty.

Screw threads cannot be fabricated by PM pressing; if required, they must be
machined into the PM component after sintering.

Chamfers and corner radii are possible by PM pressing, as shown in Figure 16.19.
Problems are encountered in punch rigidity when angles are too acute.
FIGURE 16.17
Part features
to be avoided in PM: (a) side
holes and (b) side undercuts.
Part ejection is impossible.
FIGURE 16.18
Permissible part features
in PM: (a) vertical hole,
blind and through,
(b) vertical stepped hole,
and (c) undercut in
vertical direction. These
features allow part
ejection.
Section 16.6/Design Considerations in Powder Metallurgy
363


Wall thickness should be a minimum of 1.5 mm (0.060 in) between holes or a hole and
the outside part wall, as indicated in Figure 16.20. Minimum recommended hole
diameter is 1.5 mm (0.060 in).
REFERENCES
[1] ASM Handbook, Vol. 7: Powder Metal Technologies
and Applications, ASM International, Materials
Park, Ohio, 1998.
[2] Amstead, B. H., Ostwald, P. F., and Begeman, M. L.
Manufacturing Processes. 8th ed. John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 1987.
[3] Bralla, J. G. (ed.). Design for Manufacturability
Handbook. 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1998.
[4] Bulger, M.‘‘Metal Injection Molding,’’ Advanced
Materials & Processes. March 2005, pp. 39–40.
[5] Dixon, R. H. T., and Clayton, A. Powder Metallurgy
for Engineers. The Machinery Publishing Co. Ltd.,
Brighton, U.K., 1971.
[6] German, R. M. Powder Metallurgy Science. 2nd ed.
Metal Powder Industries Federation, Princeton,
New Jersey, 1994.
FIGURE 16.19
Chamfers and corner radii are accomplished but certain rules should be observed:
(a) avoid acute chamfer angles; (b) larger angles are preferred for punch rigidity; (c) small inside radius is
desirable; (d) full outside corner radius is difﬁcult because punch is fragile at corner’s edge; (e) outside
corner problem can be solved by combining radius and chamfer.
FIGURE 16.20
Minimum
recommended wall thickness
(a) between holes or (b)
between a hole and an
outside wall should be 1.5 mm
(0.060 in).
364
Chapter 16/Powder Metallurgy

[7] German, R. M. Powder Injection Molding. Metal
Powder
Industries
Federation,
Princeton,
New
Jersey, 1990.
[8] German, R. M. A-Z of Powder Metallurgy, Elsevier
Science, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2006.
[9] Johnson, P. K.‘‘P/M Industry Trends in 2005,’’ Ad-
vanced Materials & Processes, March 2005, pp. 25–28.
[10] Metals Handbook. 9th ed. Vol. 7. Powder Metal-
lurgy. American Society for Metals, Metals Park,
Ohio, 1984.
[11] Pease, L. F. ‘‘A Quick Tour of Powder Metallurgy,’’
Advanced Materials & Processes, March 2005,
pp. 36–38.
[12] Pease, L. F., and West, W. G. Fundamentals of
Powder Metallurgy, Metal Powder Industries Fed-
eration, Princeton, New Jersey, 2002.
[13] Powder Metallurgy Design Handbook. Metal Pow-
der Industries Federation, Princeton, New Jersey,
1989.
[14] Schey, J. A. Introduction to Manufacturing Pro-
cesses. 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999.
[15] Smythe, J. ‘‘Superalloy Powders: An Amazing
History,’’ Advanced Materials & Processes, Novem-
ber 2008, pp. 52–55.
[16] Waldron, M. B., and Daniell, B. L. Sintering.
Heyden, London, 1978.
[17] Wick, C., Benedict, J. T., and Veilleux, R. F. (eds.).
Tool and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook. 4th
ed. Vol. II, Forming. Society of Manufacturing Engi-
neers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1984.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
16.1.
Name some of the reasons for the commercial
importance of powder metallurgy technology.
16.2.
What are some of the disadvantages of PM
methods?
16.3.
In the screening of powders for sizing, what is
meant by the term mesh count?
16.4.
What is the difference between open pores and
closed pores in metallic powders?
16.5.
What is meant by the term aspect ratio for a
metallic particle?
16.6.
How would one measure the angle of repose for a
given amount of metallic powder?
16.7.
Define bulk density and true density for metallic
powders.
16.8.
What are the principal methods used to produce
metallic powders?
16.9.
What are the three basic steps in the conventional
powder metallurgy shaping process?
16.10.
What is the technical difference between mixing
and blending in powder metallurgy?
16.11.
What are some of the ingredients usually added to
the metallic powders during blending and/or
mixing?
16.12.
What is meant by the term green compact?
16.13.
Describe what happens to the individual particles
during compaction.
16.14.
What are the three steps in the sintering cycle in
PM?
16.15.
What are some of the reasons why a controlled
atmosphere furnace is desirable in sintering?
16.16.
What are the advantages of infiltration in PM?
16.17.
What is the difference between powder injection
molding and metal injection molding?
16.18.
How is isostatic pressing distinguished from con-
ventional pressing and sintering in PM?
16.19.
Describe liquid phase sintering.
16.20.
What are the two basic classes of metal powders as
far as chemistry is concerned?
16.21.
Why is PM technology so well suited to the pro-
duction of gears and bearings?
16.22.
(Video) List the most common methods for form-
ing the pressed parts in powder metallurgy accord-
ing to the powder metallurgy video.
16.23.
(Video) List the types of environments that can be
present during the sintering process according to
the powder metallurgy video.
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 19 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point.
Each omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct
number of answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct
answers.
Multiple Choice Quiz
365

16.1.
The particle size that can pass through a screen is
obtained by taking the reciprocal of the mesh count
of the screen: (a) true or (b) false?
16.2.
For a given weight of metallic powders, the
total surface area of the powders is increased
by which of the following (two best answers):
(a) larger particle size, (b) smaller particle size,
(c) higher shape factor, and (d) smaller shape
factor?
16.3.
As particle size increases, interparticle friction (a)
decreases, (b) increases, or (c) remains the same?
16.4.
Which of the following powder shapes would
tend to have the lowest interparticle friction:
(a) acicular, (b) cubic, (c) flakey, (d) spherical,
and (e) rounded?
16.5.
Which of the following statements is correct in the
context of metallic powders (three correct answers):
(a) porosity þ packing factor ¼ 1.0, (b) packing
factor ¼ 1/porosity, (c) packing factor ¼ 1.0 – poros-
ity,(d)packingfactor¼–porosity,(e)packingfactor
¼ bulk density/true density?
16.6.
Which of the following most closely typifies the
sintering temperatures in PM? (a) 0.5 Tm, (b) 0.8
Tm, (c) Tm, where Tm ¼ melting temperature of the
metal?
16.7.
Repressing refers to a pressworking operation used
to compress a sintered part in a closed die to
achieve closer sizing and better surface finish:
(a) true or (b) false?
16.8.
Impregnation refers to which of the following (two
best answers): (a) filling the pores of the PM part
with a molten metal, (b) putting polymers into the
pores of a PM part, (c) soaking oil by capillary
action into the pores of a PM part, and (d) some-
thing that should not happen in a factory?
16.9.
In cold isostatic pressing, the mold is most typically
made of which one of the following: (a) rubber,
(b) sheetmetal, (c) textile, (d) thermosetting poly-
mer, or (e) tool steel?
16.10.
Which of the following processes combines press-
ing and sintering of the metal powders (three best
answers): (a) hot isostatic pressing, (b) hot press-
ing, (c) metal injection molding, (d) pressing and
sintering, and (e) spark sintering?
16.11.
Which of the following design features would be
difficult or impossible to achieve by conventional
pressing and sintering (three best answers): (a)
outside
rounded
corners,
(b)
side
holes,
(c)
threaded holes, (d) vertical stepped holes, and
(e) vertical wall thickness of 1/8 inch (3 mm)?
PROBLEMS
Characterization of Engineering Powders
16.1.
Ascreenwith325meshcounthaswireswithadiameter
of 0.001377 in. Determine (a) the maximum particle
size that will pass through the wire mesh and (b) the
proportion of open space in the screen.
16.2.
A screen with 10 mesh count has wires with a
diameter of 0.0213 in. Determine (a) the maximum
particle size that will pass through the wire mesh
and (b) the proportion of open space in the screen.
16.3.
What is the aspect ratio of a cubic particle
shape?
16.4.
Determine the shape factor for metallic particles of
the following ideal shapes: (a) sphere, (b) cubic, (c)
cylindrical with length-to-diameter ratio of 1:1, (d)
cylindrical with length-to-diameter ratio of 2:1, and
(e) a disk-shaped flake whose thickness-to-diame-
ter ratio is 1:10.
16.5.
A pile of iron powder weighs 2 lb. The particles are
spherical in shape and all have the same diameter of
0.002 in. (a) Determine the total surface area of all
the particles in the pile. (b) If the packing factor ¼
0.6, determine the volume taken by the pile. Note:
the density of iron ¼ 0.284 lb/in3.
16.6.
Solve Problem 16.5, except that the diameter of the
particles is 0.004 in. Assume the same packing
factor.
16.7.
Suppose in Problem 16.5 that the average particle
diameter ¼ 0.002 in; however, the sizes vary, form-
ing a statistical distribution as follows: 25% of the
particles by weight are 0.001 in, 50% are 0.002 in,
and 25% are 0.003 in. Given this distribution, what
is the total surface area of all the particles in the
pile?
16.8.
A solid cube of copper with each side ¼ 1.0 ft is
converted into metallic powders of spherical shape
by gas atomization. What is the percentage in-
crease in total surface area if the diameter of
each particle is 0.004 in (assume that all particles
are the same size)?
16.9.
A solid cube of aluminum with each side ¼ 1.0 m is
converted into metallic powders of spherical shape
by gas atomization. How much total surface area is
added by the process if the diameter of each
particle is 100 microns (assume that all particles
are the same size)?
366
Chapter 16/Powder Metallurgy

Problems
367
16.10.
Given a large volume of metallic powders, all of
which are perfectly spherical and having the same
exact diameter, what is the maximum possible
packing factor that the powders can take?
Compaction and Design Considerations
16.11.
In a certain pressing operation, the metallic pow-
der fed into the open die has a packing factor of 0.5.
The pressing operation reduces the powders to two
thirds of their starting volume. In the subsequent
sintering operation, shrinkage amounts to 10% on
a volume basis. Given that these are the only
factors that affect the structure of the finished
part, determine its final porosity.
16.12.
A bearing of simple geometry is to be pressed out
of bronze powders, using a compacting pressure of
207 MPa. The outside diameter ¼ 44 mm, the inside
diameter ¼ 22 mm, and the length of the bearing ¼
25 mm. What is the required press tonnage to
perform this operation?
16.13.
The part shown in Figure P16.13 is to be pressed of
iron powders using a compaction pressure of 75,000
lb/in2. Dimensions are inches. Determine (a) the
most appropriate pressing direction, (b) the re-
quired press tonnage to perform this operation,
and (c) the final weight of the part if the porosity is
10%. Assume shrinkage during sintering can be
neglected.
16.14.
For each of the four part drawings in Figure P16.14,
indicate which PM class the parts belong to, whether
the part must be pressed from one or two directions,
and how many levels of press control will be re-
quired? Dimensions are mm.
FIGURE P16.13
Part for Problem 16.13
(dimensions in inches).
+
(c)
(b)
(a)
(d)
12.5
45.0
62.5
12.5
38.0
38.0
56.0
40.5
47.5
0.875
12.5
12.5
12.5
12.5
40.5
100
+
11.0
56.0
22.0
+
+
FIGURE P16.14
Parts for Problem 16.14 (dimensions in mm).

17
PROCESSING OF
CERAMICS AND
CERMETS
Chapter Contents
17.1
Processing of Traditional Ceramics
17.1.1
Preparation of the Raw Material
17.1.2
Shaping Processes
17.1.3
Drying
17.1.4
Firing (Sintering)
17.2
Processing of New Ceramics
17.2.1
Preparation of Starting Materials
17.2.2
Shaping
17.2.3
Sintering
17.2.4
Finishing
17.3
Processing of Cermets
17.3.1
Cemented Carbides
17.3.2
Other Cermets and Ceramic Matrix
Composites
17.4
Product Design Considerations
Ceramic materials divide into three categories (Chapter 7):
(1) traditional ceramics, (2) new ceramics, and (3) glasses.
The processing of glass involves solidification primarily and
is covered in Chapter 12. In the present chapter we consider
the particulate processing methods used for traditional and
new ceramics. We also consider the processing of metal
matrix composites and ceramic matrix composites.
Traditionalceramicsare made fromminerals occurring
innature.Theyincludepottery,porcelain,bricks,andcement.
New ceramics are made from synthetically produced raw
materials and cover a wide spectrum of products such as
cutting tools, artificial bones, nuclear fuels, and substrates for
electronic circuits. The starting material for all of these items
ispowder. Inthe case of the traditionalceramics, the powders
areusuallymixedwithwatertotemporarilybindtheparticles
together and achieve the proper consistency for shaping. For
new ceramics, other substances are used as binders during
shaping. After shaping, the green parts are sintered. This is
often called firing in ceramics, but the function is the same as
in powder metallurgy: to effect a solid-state reaction that
bonds the material into a hard solid mass.
The processing methods discussed in this chapter are
commercially and technologically important because vir-
tually all ceramic products are formed by these methods
(except, of course, glass products). The manufacturing
sequence is similar for traditional and new ceramics be-
cause the form of the starting material is the same: powder.
However, the processing methods for the two categories
are sufficiently different that we discuss them separately.
17.1
PROCESSING OF
TRADITIONAL CERAMICS
In thissection wedescribetheproduction technologyusedto
make traditional ceramic products such as pottery, stone-
ware and other dinnerware, bricks, tile, and ceramic
368

refractories. Bonded grinding wheels are also produced by the same basic methods. What
these products have in common is that their raw materials consist primarily of silicate
ceramics—clays. The processing sequence for most of the traditional ceramics consists of
the steps depicted in Figure 17.1.
17.1.1 PREPARATION OF THE RAW MATERIAL
The shaping processes for traditional ceramics require that the starting material be in the
form of a plastic paste. This paste is made of fine ceramic powders mixed with water, and its
consistency determinestheease offormingthematerialandthe qualityof the finalproduct.
The raw ceramic material usually occurs in nature as rocky lumps, and reduction to powder
is the purpose of the preparation step in ceramics processing.
Techniques for reducing particle size in ceramics processing involve mechanical
energy in various forms, such as impact, compression, and attrition. The term comminution
is used for these techniques, which are most effective on brittle materials, including cement,
metallic ores, and brittle metals. Two general categories of comminution operations are
distinguished: crushing and grinding.
Crushing refers to the reduction of large lumps from the mine to smaller sizes for
subsequent further reduction. Several stages may be required (e.g., primary crushing,
secondary crushing), the reduction ratio in each stage being in the range 3 to 6. Crushing of
minerals is accomplished by compression against rigid surfaces or by impact against
surfaces in a rigid constrained motion [1]. Figure 17.2 shows several types of equipment
used to perform crushing: (a) jaw crushers, in which a large jaw toggles back and forth to
crush lumps against a hard, rigid surface; (b) gyratory crushers, which use a gyrating cone
to compress lumps against a rigid surface; (c) roll crushers, in which the ceramic lumps are
squeezed between rotating rolls; and (d) hammer mills, which use rotating hammers
impacting the material to break up the lumps.
Grinding, in the context here, refers to the operation of reducing the small pieces
produced by crushing into a fine powder. Grinding is accomplished by abrasion and impact
of the crushed mineral by thefree motion of unconnected hard media such as balls, pebbles,
FIGURE 17.1
Usual steps in traditional ceramics processing: (1) preparation of raw materials,
(2) shaping, (3) drying, and (4) ﬁring. Part (a) shows the workpart during the sequence, whereas
(b) shows the condition of the powders.
Section 17.1/Processing of Traditional Ceramics
369

or rods [1]. Examples of grinding include (a) ball mill, (b) roller mill, and (c) impact
grinding, illustrated in Figure 17.3.
In a ball mill, hard spheres mixed with the stock to be comminuted are tumbled
inside a rotating cylindrical container. The rotation causes the balls and stock to be carried
up thecontainer wall, and then pulled back down by gravity to accomplish a grinding action
by a combination of impact and attrition. These operations are often carried out with water
added to the mixture, so that the ceramic is in the form of a slurry. In a roller mill, stock is
compressed against a flat horizontal grinding table by rollers riding over the table surface.
Although not clearly shown in the sketch, the pressure of the grinding rollers against the
tableisregulatedbymechanicalspringsorhydraulic-pneumaticmeans.Inimpactgrinding,
which seems to be less frequently used, particles of stock are thrown against a hard flat
surface, either in a high velocity air stream or a high-speed slurry. The impact fractures the
pieces into smaller particles.
The plastic paste required for shaping consists of ceramic powders and water. Clay is
usuallythemainingredientinthepastebecauseithasidealformingcharacteristics.Themore
FIGURE 17.2
Crushing operations: (a) jaw crusher, (b) gyratory crusher, (c) roll crusher, and (d) hammer mill.
370
Chapter 17/Processing of Ceramics and Cermets

water there is in the mixture, the more plastic and easily formed is the clay paste. However,
whentheformedpartislaterdriedandfired,shrinkageoccursthatcanleadtocrackinginthe
product.Toaddressthisproblem,otherceramicrawmaterialsthatdonotshrinkondryingand
firingareusuallyaddedtothepaste,ofteninsignificantamounts.Also,othercomponentscan
be included to serve special functions. Thus, the ingredients of the ceramic paste can be
divided into the following three categories [3]: (1) clay, which provides the consistency and
plasticity required for shaping; (2) nonplastic raw materials, such as alumina and silica,
which do not shrink in drying and firing but unfortunately reduce plasticity in the mixture
duringforming;and(3)otheringredients,suchasfluxesthatmelt(vitrify)duringfiringand
promote sintering of the ceramic material, and wetting agents that improve mixing of
ingredients.
These ingredients must be thoroughly mixed, either wet or dry. The ball mill often
serves this purpose in addition to its grinding function. Also, the proper amounts of powder
and water in the paste must be attained, so water must be added or removed, depending on
the prior condition of the paste and its desired final consistency.
17.1.2 SHAPING PROCESSES
The optimum proportions of powder and water depend on the shaping process used.
Some shaping processes require high fluidity; others act on a composition that contains
very low water content. At about 50% water by volume, the mixture is a slurry that flows
like a liquid. As the water content is reduced, increased pressure is required on the paste
to produce a similar flow. Thus, the shaping processes can be divided according to the
consistency of the mixture: (1) slip casting, in which the mixture is a slurry with 25% to
40% water; (2) plastic-forming methods that shape the clay in a plastic condition at 15%
to 25% water; (3) semi-dry pressing, in which the clay is moist (10% to 15% water) but
has low plasticity; and (4) dry pressing, in which the clay is basically dry, containing less
than 5% water. Dry clay has no plasticity. The four categories are represented in the
chart of Figure 17.4, which compares the categories with the condition of the clay used as
starting material. Each category includes several different shaping processes.
Slip Casting
In slip casting, a suspension of ceramic powders in water, called a slip, is
poured into a porous plaster of paris (CaSO4–2H2O) mold so that water from the mix is
FIGURE 17.3
Mechanical methods of producing ceramic powders: (a) ball mill, (b) roller mill, and (c) impact
grinding.
Section 17.1/Processing of Traditional Ceramics
371

gradually absorbed into the plaster to form a firm layer of clay at the mold surface. The
composition of the slip is typically 25% to 40% water, the remainder being clay often
mixed with other ingredients. It must be sufficiently fluid to flow into the crevices of the
mold cavity, yet lower water content is desirable for faster production rates. Slip casting
has two principal variations: drain casting and solid casting. In drain casting, which is the
traditional process, the mold is inverted to drain excess slip after the semi-solid layer has
been formed, thus leaving a hollow part in the mold; the mold is then opened and the part
removed. The sequence, which is very similar to slush casting of metals, is illustrated in
Figure 17.5. It is used to make tea pots, vases, art objects, and other hollow-ware products.
In solid casting, used to produce solid products, adequate time is allowed for the entire
body to become firm. The mold must be periodically resupplied with additional slip to
account for shrinkage because of absorbed water.
Plastic Forming
Thiscategoryincludesavarietyofmethods,bothmanualandmechanized.
They all require the starting mixture to have a plastic consistency, which is generally achieved
with 15% to 25% water. Manual methods generally make use of clay at the upper end of the
range because it provides a material that is more easily formed; however, this is accompanied
by greater shrinkage in drying. Mechanized methods generally employ a mixture with lower
water content so that the starting clay is stiffer.
Although manual forming methods date back thousands of years, they are still
used today by skilled artisans, either in production or for artworks. Hand modeling
involves the creation of the ceramic product by manipulating the mass of plastic clay
FIGURE 17.5
Sequence
of steps in drain casting,
a form of slip casting:
(1) slip is poured into
mold cavity; (2) water is
absorbed into plaster
mold to form a ﬁrm layer;
(3) excess slip is poured
out; and (4) part is
removed from mold and
trimmed.
FIGURE 17.4
Four categories of
shaping processes used for traditional
ceramics, compared with water
content and pressure required to form
the clay.
372
Chapter 17/Processing of Ceramics and Cermets

into the desired geometry. In addition to art pieces, patterns for plaster molds in slip
casting are often made this way. Hand molding is a similar method, only a mold or form
is used to define portions of the geometry. Hand throwing on a potter’s wheel is another
refinement of the handicraft methods. The potter’s wheel is a round table that rotates on
a vertical spindle, powered either by motor or foot-operated treadle. Ceramic products
of circular cross section can be formed on the rotating table by throwing and shaping the
clay, sometimes using a mold to provide the internal shape.
Strictly speaking, use of a motor-driven potter’s wheel is a mechanized method.
However, most mechanized clay-forming methods are characterized by much less
manual participation than the hand-throwing method described above. These more
mechanized methods include jiggering, plastic pressing, and extrusion. Jiggering is an
extension of the potter’s wheel methods, in which hand throwing is replaced by mecha-
nized techniques. It is used to produce large numbers of identical items such as houseware
plates and bowls. Although there are variations in the tools and methods used, reflecting
different levels of automation and refinements to the basic process, a typical sequence is
as follows, depicted in Figure 17.6: (1) a wet clay slug is placed on a convex mold; (2) a
forming tool is pressed into the slug to provide the initial rough shape—the operation is
called batting and the workpiece thus created is called a bat; and (3) a heated jigger tool
is used to impart the final contoured shape to the product by pressing the profile into the
surface during rotation of the workpart. The reason for heating the tool is to produce
steam from the wet clay that prevents sticking. Closely related to jiggering is jolleying, in
which the basic mold shape is concave rather than convex [8]. In both of these processes, a
rolling tool is sometimes used in place of the nonrotating jigger (or jolley) tool; this rolls
the clay into shape, avoiding the need to first bat the slug.
Plastic pressing is a forming process in which a plastic clay slug is pressed between
upper and lower molds, contained in metal rings. The molds are made of a porous material
such as gypsum, so that when a vacuum is drawn on the backs of the mold halves, moisture is
removed from the clay. The mold sections are then opened, using positive air pressure to
prevent sticking of the part in the mold. Plastic pressing achieves a higher production rate
than jiggering and is not limited to radially symmetric parts.
Extrusion is used in ceramics processing to produce long sections of uniform cross
section, which are then cut to required piece length. The extrusion equipment utilizes a
screw-type action to assist in mixing the clay and pushing the plastic material through the
die opening. This production sequence is widely used to make hollow bricks, shaped tiles,
drain pipes, tubes, and insulators. It is also used to make the starting clay slugs for other
ceramics processing methods such as jiggering and plastic pressing.
Semi-dry Pressing
In semi-dry pressing, the proportion of water in the starting clay is
typically 10% to 15%. This results in low plasticity, precluding the use of plastic forming
methods that require very plastic clay. Semi-dry pressing uses high pressure to overcome
FIGURE 17.6
Sequence
in jiggering: (1) wet clay
slug is placed on a
convex mold; (2) batting;
and (3) a jigger tool
imparts the ﬁnal product
shape. Symbols v and F
indicate motion (v ¼
velocity) and applied
force, respectively.
Section 17.1/Processing of Traditional Ceramics
373

the material’s low plasticity and force it to flow into a die cavity, as depicted in Figure 17.7.
Flash is often formed from excess clay being squeezed between the die sections.
Dry Pressing
The main distinction between semi-dry and dry pressing is the moisture
content of the starting mix. The moisture content of the starting clay in dry pressing is
typically below 5%. Binders are usually added to the dry powder mix to provide sufficient
strength in the pressed part for subsequent handling. Lubricants are also added to prevent
die sticking during pressing and ejection. Because dry clay has no plasticity and is very
abrasive, there are differences indie design and operatingprocedures, compared with semi-
dry pressing. The dies must be made of hardened tool steel or cemented tungsten carbide to
reduce wear. Because dry clay will not flow during pressing, the geometry of the part must
be relatively simple, and the amount and distribution of starting powder in the die cavity
must be right. No flash is formed in dry pressing, and no drying shrinkage occurs, so drying
timeiseliminatedandgoodaccuracycanbeachievedinthedimensionsofthefinalproduct.
The process sequence in dry pressing is similar to semi-dry pressing. Typical products
include bathroom tile, electrical insulators, and refractory brick.
17.1.3 DRYING
Water plays an important role in most of the traditional ceramics shaping processes.
Thereafter, it serves no purpose and must be removed from the body of the clay piece
before firing. Shrinkage is a problem during this step in the processing sequence because
water contributes volume to the piece, and when it is removed, the volume is reduced. The
effect can be seen in Figure 17.8.As water is initially addedto dry clay, it simply replaces the
air in the pores between ceramic grains, and there is no volumetric change. Increasing the
water content above a certain point causes the grains to become separated and the volume
to grow, resulting in wet clay that has plasticity and formability. As more water is added, the
mixture eventually becomes a liquid suspension of clay particles in water.
The reverse of this process occurs in drying. As water is removed from the wet clay,
the volume of the piece shrinks. The drying process occurs in two stages, as depicted in
Figure 17.9. In the first stage, the rate of drying is rapid and constant, as water is evaporated
FIGURE 17.7
Semi-dry
pressing: (1) depositing
moist powder into die
cavity, (2) pressing, and
(3) opening the die
sections and ejection.
Symbols v and F indicate
motion (v ¼ velocity) and
applied force,
respectively.
374
Chapter 17/Processing of Ceramics and Cermets

from thesurface of theclay into the surrounding air and water from the interior migrates by
capillary action toward the surface to replace it. It is during this stage that shrinkage occurs,
with the associated risk of warping and cracking owing to variations in drying in different
sections of the piece. In the second stage of drying, the moisture content has been reduced
to where the ceramic grains are in contact, and little or no further shrinkage occurs. The
drying process slows, and this is seen in the decreasing rate in the plot.
In production, drying is usually accomplished in drying chambers in which tempera-
ture and humidity are controlled to achieve the proper drying schedule. Care must be taken
so that water is not removed too rapidly, lest large moisture gradients be set up in the piece,
making it more prone to crack. Heating is usually by a combination of convection and
radiation, using infrared sources. Typical drying times range between a quarter of an hour
for thin sections to several days for very thick sections.
17.1.4 FIRING (SINTERING)
After shaping but before firing, the ceramic piece is said to be green (the same term as in
powder metallurgy), meaning not fully processed or treated. The green piece lacks
hardness and strength; it must be fired to fix the part shape and achieve hardness and
strength in the finished ware. Firing is the heat treatment process that sinters the ceramic
material; it is performed in a furnace called a kiln. In sintering, bonds are developed
between the ceramic grains, and this is accompanied by densification and reduction of
porosity. Therefore, shrinkage occurs in the polycrystalline material in addition to the
shrinkage that has already occurred in drying. Sintering in ceramics is basically the same
FIGURE 17.8
Volume of clay as a function of water
content. Relationship shown here is typical; it varies for
different clay compositions.
FIGURE 17.9
Typical drying rate
curve and associated volume reduction
(drying shrinkage) for a ceramic body
in drying. Drying rate in the second
stage of drying is depicted here as a
straight line (constant rate decrease as
a function of water content); the
function is variously shown as concave
or convex in the literature [3], [8].
Section 17.1/Processing of Traditional Ceramics
375

mechanism as in powder metallurgy. In the firing of traditional ceramics, certain chemical
reactions between the components in the mixture may also take place, and a glassy phase
also forms among the crystals that acts as a binder. Both of these phenomena depend on
the chemical composition of the ceramic material and the firing temperatures used.
Unglazed ceramic ware is fired only once; glazed products are fired twice. Glazing
refers to the application of a ceramic surface coating to make the piece more impervious to
water and to enhance its appearance (Section 7.2.2). The usual processing sequence with
glazed ware is (1) fire the ware once before glazing to harden the body of the piece, (2) apply
the glaze, and (3) fire the piece a second time to harden the glaze.
17.2
PROCESSING OF NEW CERAMICS
Most of the traditional ceramics are based on clay, which possesses a unique capacity to be
plastic when mixed with water but hard when dried and fired. Clay consists of various
formulations of hydrous aluminum silicate, usually mixed with other ceramic materials, to
form a rather complex chemistry. New ceramics (Section 7.3) are based on simpler chemical
compounds,suchasoxides,carbides,andnitrides.Thesematerialsdonotpossesstheplasticity
andformabilityoftraditionalclaywhenmixedwithwater.Accordingly,otheringredientsmust
be combined with the ceramic powders to achieve plasticity and other desirable properties
during forming, so that conventional shaping methods can be used. The new ceramics are
generallydesignedforapplicationsthatrequirehigherstrength,hardness,andotherproperties
not found in the traditional ceramic materials. These requirements have motivated the
introductionofseveralnewprocessingtechniquesnotpreviouslyusedfortraditionalceramics.
The manufacturing sequence for the new ceramics can be summarized in the
following steps: (1) preparation of starting materials, (2) shaping, (3) sintering, and
(4) finishing. Although the sequence is nearly the same as for the traditional ceramics,
the details are often quite different, as we shall see in the following.
17.2.1 PREPARATION OF STARTING MATERIALS
Because the strength specified for these materials is usually much greater than for traditional
ceramics, the starting powders must be more homogeneous in size and composition, and
particle size must be smaller (strength of the resulting ceramic product is inversely related to
grain size). All of this means that greater control of the starting powders is required. Powder
preparation includes mechanical and chemical methods. The mechanical methods consist of
the same ball mill grinding operations used for traditional ceramics. The trouble with these
methods is that the ceramic particles become contaminated from the materials used in the
balls and walls of the mill. This compromises the purity of the ceramic powders and results in
microscopic flaws that reduce the strength of the final product.
Two chemical methods are used to achieve greater homogeneity inthe powders of new
ceramics: freeze drying and precipitation from solution. In freeze drying, salts of the
appropriate starting chemistry are dissolved in water and the solution is sprayed to form
small droplets, which are rapidly frozen. The water is then removed from the droplets in a
vacuum chamber, and the resulting freeze-dried salt is decomposed by heating to form the
ceramic powders. Freeze drying is not applicable to all ceramics, because in some cases a
suitable water-soluble salt cannot be identified as the starting material.
Precipitation from solution is another preparation method used for new ceramics.
In the typical process, the desired ceramic compound is dissolved from the starting
mineral, thus permitting impurities to be filtered out. An intermediate compound is then
precipitated from solution, which is converted into the desired compound by heating. An
376
Chapter 17/Processing of Ceramics and Cermets

example of the precipitation method is the Bayer process for producing high purity
alumina (also used in the production of aluminum). In this process, aluminum oxide is
dissolved from the mineral bauxite so that iron compounds and other impurities can be
removed. Then, aluminum hydroxide (Al(OH)3) is precipitated from solution and
reduced to Al2O3 by heating.
Further preparation of the powders includes classification by size and mixing before
shaping. Veryfine powdersarerequiredfor newceramicsapplications,andsothegrains must
be separated and classified according to size. Thorough mixing of the particles, especially
when different ceramic powders are combined, is required to avoid segregation.
Various additives are often combined with the starting powders, usually in small
amounts. The additives include (1) plasticizers to improve plasticity and workability;
(2) binders to bond the ceramic particles into a solid mass in the final product, (3) wetting
agents for better mixing; (4) deflocculants, which help to prevent clumping and premature
bonding of the powders; and (5) lubricants, to reduce friction between ceramic grains
during forming and to reduce sticking during mold release.
17.2.2 SHAPING
Many of the shaping processes for new ceramics are borrowed from powder metallurgy
(PM) and traditional ceramics. The press and sinter methods discussed in Section 16.3 have
been adapted to the new ceramic materials. And some of the traditional ceramics-forming
techniques (Section 17.1.2) are used to shape the new ceramics, including slip casting,
extrusion, and dry pressing. The following processes are not normally associated with the
forming of traditional ceramics, although several are associated with PM.
Hot Pressing
Hot pressing is similar to dry pressing (Section 17.1.2), except that the
process is carried out at elevated temperatures, so that sintering of the product is
accomplished simultaneously with pressing. This eliminates the need for a separate firing
step in the sequence. Higher densities and finer grain size are obtained, but die life is
reduced by the hot abrasive particles against the die surfaces.
Isostatic Pressing
Isostatic pressing of ceramics is the same process used in powder
metallurgy (Section 16.4.1). It uses hydrostatic pressure to compact the ceramic powders
from all directions, thus avoiding the problem of nonuniform density in the final product
that is often observed in the traditional uniaxial pressing method.
Doctor-Blade Process
This process is used for making thin sheets of ceramic. One
common application of the sheets is in the electronics industry as a substrate material for
integrated circuits. The process is diagrammed in Figure 17.10. A ceramic slurry is introduced
onto a moving carrier film such as cellophane. Thickness of the ceramic on the carrier is
determined by a wiper, called a doctor-blade. As the slurry moves down the line, it is dried
FIGURE 17.10
The
doctor-blade process,
used to fabricate thin
ceramic sheets. Symbol v
indicates motion (v ¼
velocity).
Section 17.2/Processing of New Ceramics
377

into a flexible green ceramic tape. At the end of the line, a take-up spool reels in the tape for
later processing. In its green condition, the tape can be cut or otherwise shaped before firing.
Powder Injection Molding
Powder injection molding (PIM) is the same as the PM
process (Section 16.4.2), except that the powders are ceramic rather than metallic. Ceramic
particles are mixed with a thermoplastic polymer that acts as a carrier and provides the
properflowcharacteristicsatmoldingtemperatures.Themixisthenheatedandinjectedinto
a mold cavity. Upon cooling, which hardens the polymer, the mold is opened and the part is
removed. Because the temperatures needed to plasticize the carrier are much lower than
those required for sintering the ceramic, the piece is green after molding. Before sintering,
the plastic binder must be removed. This is called debinding, which is usually accomplished
by a combination of thermal and solvent treatments.
Applications of ceramic PIM are currently inhibited by difficulties in debinding and
sintering. Burning off the polymer is relatively slow, and its removal significantly weakens
the green strength of the molded part. Warping and cracking often occur during sintering.
Further, ceramic products made by powder injection molding are especially vulnerable to
microstructural flaws that limit their strength.
17.2.3 SINTERING
Because the plasticity needed to shape the new ceramics is not normally based on a water
mixture, the drying step so commonly required to remove water from the traditional
green ceramics can be omitted in the processing of most new ceramic products. The
sintering step, however, is still very much required to obtain maximum possible strength
and hardness. The functions of sintering are the same as before, to: (1) bond individual
grains into a solid mass, (2) increase density, and (3) reduce or eliminate porosity.
Temperatures around 80% to 90% of the melting temperature of the material are
commonly used in sintering ceramics. Sintering mechanisms differ somewhat between the
new ceramics, which are based predominantly on a single chemical compound (e.g., Al2O3),
and the clay-based ceramics, which usually consist of several compounds having different
melting points. In the case of the new ceramics, the sintering mechanism is mass diffusion
across the contacting particle surfaces, probably accompanied by some plastic flow. This
mechanism causes the centers of the particles to move closer together, resulting in
densification of the final material. In the sintering of traditional ceramics, this mechanism
is complicated by the melting of some constituents and the formation of a glassy phase that
acts as a binder between the grains.
17.2.4 FINISHING
Parts made of new ceramics sometimes require finishing. In general, these operations have
one or more of the following purposes, to: (1) increase dimensional accuracy, (2) improve
surface finish, and (3) make minor changes in part geometry. Finishing operations usually
involve grinding and other abrasive processes (Chapter 25). Diamond abrasives must be
used to cut the hardened ceramic materials.
17.3
PROCESSING OF CERMETS
Many metal matrix composites (MMCs) and ceramic matrix composites (CMCs) are
processed by particulate processing methods. The most prominent examples are
cemented carbides and other cermets.
378
Chapter 17/Processing of Ceramics and Cermets

17.3.1 CEMENTED CARBIDES
The cemented carbides are a family of composite materials consisting of carbide ceramic
particles embedded in a metallic binder. They are classified as metal matrix composites
becausethemetallic binderisthematrixthat holds the bulkmaterialtogether;however, the
carbide particles constitute the largest proportion of the composite material, normally
ranging between 80% and 96% by volume. Cemented carbides are technically classified as
cermets, although they are often distinguished from the other materials in this class.
The most important cemented carbide is tungsten carbide in a cobalt binder (WC–
Co). Generally included within this category are certain mixtures of WC, TiC, and TaC in a
Co matrix, in which tungsten carbide is the major component. Other cemented carbides
include titanium carbide in nickel (TiC–Ni) and chromium carbide in nickel (Cr3C2–Ni).
These composites are discussed in Section 9.2.1, and the carbide ingredients are described
in Section 7.3.2. In our present discussion we are concerned with the particulate processing
of cemented carbide.
To provide a strong and pore-free part, the carbide powders must be sintered with a
metal binder. Cobalt works best with WC, whereas nickel is better with TiC and Cr3C2. The
usual proportion of binder metal is from around 4% up to 20%. Powders of carbide and
binder metal are thoroughly mixed wet in a ball mill (or other suitable mixing machine) to
formahomogeneoussludge.Millingalsoservestorefineparticlesize.Thesludgeisthendried
in a vacuum or controlled atmosphere to prevent oxidation in preparation for compaction.
Compaction
Various methods are used to shape the powder mix into a green compact of
thedesiredgeometry.Themostcommonprocessiscoldpressing,describedearlierandused
for high production of cemented carbide parts such as cutting tool inserts. The dies used in
cold pressing must be made oversized to account for shrinkage during sintering. Linear
shrinkage can be 20% or more. For high production, the dies themselves are made with
WC–Co liners to reduce wear, because of the abrasive nature of carbide particles. For
smallerquantities, largeflat sectionsare sometimespressedandthencutintosmaller pieces
of the specified size.
Other compaction methods used for cemented carbide products include isostatic
pressing and hot pressing for large pieces, such as draw dies and ball mill balls; and
extrusion, for long sections of circular, rectangular, or other cross section. Each of these
processes has been described previously, either in this or the preceding chapter.
Sintering
Although it is possible to sinter WC and TiC without a binder metal, the
resulting material is somewhat less than 100% of true density. Use of a binder yields a
structure that is virtually free of porosity.
Sintering of WC–Co involves liquid phase sintering (Section 16.4.5). The process can
be explained with reference to the binary phase diagram for these constituents in
Figure 17.11. The typical composition range for commercial cemented carbide products
is identified in the diagram. The usual sintering temperatures for WC–Co are in the range
1370C to 1425C (2500C to 2600F), which is below cobalt’s melting point of 1495C
(2716F). Thus, the pure binder metal does not melt at the sintering temperature. However,
as the phase diagram shows, WC dissolves in Co in the solid state. During the heat
treatment,WCisgraduallydissolvedintothe gammaphase,anditsmeltingpointisreduced
so that melting finally occurs. As the liquid phase forms, it flows and wets the WC particles,
further dissolving the solid. The presence of the molten metal also serves to remove gases
from the internal regions of the compact. These mechanisms combine to effect a
rearrangement of the remaining WC particles into a closer packing, which results in
significant densification and shrinkage of the WC–Co mass. Later, during cooling in the
sintering cycle, the dissolved carbide is precipitated and deposited onto the existing crystals
to form a coherent WC skeleton, throughout which the Co binder is embedded.
Section 17.3/Processing of Cermets
379

Secondary Operations
Subsequent processing is usually required after sintering to
achieve adequate dimensional control of cemented carbide parts. Grinding with a
diamond abrasive wheel is the most common secondary operation performed for this
purpose. Other processes used to shape the hard cemented carbides include electric
discharge machining and ultrasonic machining, two nontraditional material removal
processes discussed in Chapter 26.
17.3.2 OTHER CERMETS AND CERAMIC MATRIX COMPOSITES
In addition to cemented carbides, other cermets are based on oxide ceramics such as
Al2O3 and MgO. Chromium is a common metal binder used in these composite materials.
The ceramic-to-metal proportions cover a wider range than those of the cemented
carbides; in some cases, the metal is the major ingredient. These cermets are formed into
useful products by the same basic shaping methods used for cemented carbides.
The current technology of ceramic matrix composites (Section 9.3) includes ceramic
materials (e.g., Al2O3, BN, Si3N4, and glass) reinforced by fibers of carbon, SiC, or Al2O3. If
thefibers arewhiskers (fibersconsistingofsinglecrystals),theseCMCscanbeprocessedby
particulate methods used for new ceramics (Section 17.2).
17.4
PRODUCT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
Ceramic materials have special properties that make them attractive to designers if the
application is right. The following design recommendations, compiled from Bralla [2] and
other sources, apply to both new and traditional ceramic materials, although designers
are more likely to find opportunities for new ceramics in engineered products. In general,
the same guidelines apply to cemented carbides.

Ceramic materials are several times stronger in compression than in tension;
accordingly, ceramic components should be designed to be subjected to compressive
stresses, not tensile stresses.

Ceramics are brittle and possess almost no ductility. Ceramic parts should not be used
in applications that involve impact loading or high stresses that might cause fracture.
FIGURE 17.11
WC–Co
phase diagram.
(Source: [7]).
1800
3200
2800
2400
2000
1600
1600
1400
1200
1000
0
WC
25
50
Weight percent cobalt
75
100
Co
Temperature, ∞C
Temperature, ∞F
WC + liquid
WC + 
Liquid
 + liquid
Typical composition range
of cemented carbide products
1320∞C (2408∞F)
380
Chapter 17/Processing of Ceramics and Cermets


Although many of the ceramic shaping processes allow complex geometries to be
formed, it is desirable to keep shapes simple for both economic and technical reasons.
Deep holes, channels, and undercuts should be avoided, as should large cantilevered
projections.

Outside edges and corners should have radii or chamfers; likewise, inside corners
should have radii. This guideline is, of course, violated in cutting tool applications, in
which the cutting edge must be sharp to function. The cutting edge is often fabricated
with a very small radius or chamfer to protect it from microscopic chipping, which
could lead to failure.

Part shrinkage in drying and firing (for traditional ceramics) and sintering (for new
ceramics) may be significant and must be taken into account by the designer in
dimensioning and tolerancing. This is mostly a problem for manufacturing engineers,
who must determine appropriate size allowances so that the final dimensions will be
within the tolerances specified.

Screw threads in ceramic parts should be avoided. They are difficult to fabricate and
do not have adequate strength in service after fabrication.
REFERENCES
[1] Bhowmick, A. K. Bradley Pulverizer Company,
Allentown, Pennsylvania, personal communication,
February 1992.
[2] Bralla, J. G. (editor-in-chief). Design for Manufac-
turability Handbook. 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1999.
[3] Hlavac, J. The Technology of Glass and Ceramics.
Elsevier Scientific Publishing, New York, 1983.
[4] Kingery, W. D., Bowen, H. K., and Uhlmann, D. R.
Introduction to Ceramics. 2nd ed. John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 1995.
[5] Rahaman, M. N. Ceramic Processing. CRC Taylor &
Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2007.
[6] Richerson, D. W. Modern Ceramic Engineering:
Properties, Processing, and Use in Design, 3rd ed.
CRC Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Flotida, 2006.
[7] Schwarzkopf, P., and Kieffer, R. Cemented Carbides.
Macmillan, New York, 1960.
[8] Singer, F., and Singer, S. S. Industrial Ceramics.
Chemical Publishing Company, New York, 1963.
[9] Somiya, S. (ed.). Advanced Technical Ceramics.
Academic Press, San Diego, California, 1989.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
17.1.
What is the difference between the traditional
ceramics and the new ceramics, as far as raw
materials are concerned?
17.2.
List the basic steps in the traditional ceramics
processing sequence.
17.3.
What is the technical difference between crushing
and grinding in the preparation of traditional ce-
ramic raw materials?
17.4.
Describe the slip casting process in traditional
ceramics processing.
17.5.
List and briefly describe some of the plastic forming
methods used to shape traditional ceramic products.
17.6.
What is the process of jiggering?
17.7.
What is the difference between dry pressing and
semi-dry pressing of traditional ceramic parts?
17.8.
What happens to a ceramic material when it is
sintered?
17.9.
What is the name given to the furnace used to fire
ceramic ware?
17.10.
What is glazing in traditional ceramics processing?
17.11.
Why is the drying step, so important in the proc-
essing of traditional ceramics, usually not required
in processing of new ceramics?
17.12.
Why is raw material preparation more important in
the processing of new ceramics than for traditional
ceramics?
17.13.
What is the freeze drying process used to make
certain new ceramic powders?
17.14.
Describe the doctor-blade process.
17.15.
Liquid phase sintering is used for WC–Co compacts,
even though the sintering temperatures are below the
meltingpointsofeitherWCorCo.Howisthispossible?
17.16.
What are some design recommendations for ce-
ramic parts?
Review Questions
381

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 16 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
17.1.
The following equipment is used for crushing and
grinding of minerals in the preparation of tradi-
tional ceramics raw materials. Which of the pieces
listed is used for grinding (two correct answers):
(a) ball mill, (b) hammer mill, (c) jaw crusher,
(d) roll crusher, and (e) roller mill?
17.2.
Which one of the following compounds becomes a
plastic and formable material when mixed with
suitable proportions of water: (a) aluminum oxide,
(b) hydrogen oxide, (c) hydrous aluminum silicate,
or (d) silicon dioxide?
17.3.
At which one of the following water contents does
clay become a suitably plastic material for the
traditional ceramics plastic forming processes:
(a) 5%, (b) 10%, (c) 20%, or (d) 40%?
17.4.
Which
of
the
following
processes
are
not
plastic forming methods used in the shaping of
traditional ceramics (three correct answers):
(a)
dry pressing, (b) extrusion, (c) jangling,
(d) jiggering, (e) jolleying, (f) slip casting, and
(g) spinning?
17.5.
The term green piece in ceramics refers to a part
that has been shaped but not yet fired: (a) true or
(b) false?
17.6.
In the final product made of a polycrystalline new
ceramic material, strength increases with grain size:
(a) true or (b) false?
17.7.
Which one of the following processes for the new
ceramic materials accomplishes shaping and sinter-
ing
simultaneously:
(a)
doctor-blade
process,
(b) freeze drying, (c) hot pressing, (d) injection
molding, or (e) isostatic pressing?
17.8.
Which of the following are the purposes of finish-
ing operations used for parts made of the new
ceramics (two best answers): (a) apply a surface
coating, (b) electroplate the surface, (c) improve
surface finish, (d) increase dimensional accuracy,
and (e) work harden the surface?
17.9.
Which of the following terms describes what a
cemented carbide is (one best answer): (a) ceramic,
(b) cermet, (c) composite, (d) metal, (e) new ce-
ramic, or (f) traditional ceramic?
17.10.
Which of the following geometric features should
be avoided if possible in the design of structural
components made of new ceramics (three best
answers): (a) deep holes, (b) rounded inside cor-
ners, (c) rounded outside corners, (d) sharp edges,
(e) thick sections, and (f) threads?
382
Chapter 17/Processing of Ceramics and Cermets

Part V
Metal Forming and
Sheet Metalworking
18
FUNDAMENTALS
OF METAL FORMING
Chapter Contents
18.1
Overview of Metal Forming
18.2
Material Behavior in Metal Forming
18.3
Temperature in Metal Forming
18.4
Strain Rate Sensitivity
18.5
Friction and Lubrication in Metal Forming
Metal forming includes a large group of manufacturing pro-
cesses in which plastic deformation is used to change the shape
ofmetalworkpieces.Deformationresultsfromtheuseofatool,
usuallycalledadieinmetalforming,whichappliesstressesthat
exceed the yield strength of the metal. The metal therefore
deformstotakeashapedeterminedbythegeometryofthedie.
Metal forming dominates the class of shaping operations iden-
tified in Chapter 1 as the deformation processes (Figure 1.4).
Stresses applied to plastically deform the metal are
usually compressive. However, some forming processes
stretch the metal, while others bend the metal, and still others
apply shear stresses to the metal. To be successfully formed, a
metal must possess certain properties. Desirable properties
include low yield strength and high ductility. These properties
are affected by temperature. Ductility is increased and yield
strength is reduced when work temperature is raised. The
effect of temperature gives rise to distinctions between cold
working, warm working, and hot working. Strain rate and
frictionareadditional factorsthataffect performance inmetal
forming.Weexaminealloftheseissuesinthischapter,butfirst
let us provide an overview of the metal forming processes.
18.1
OVERVIEW OF METAL
FORMING
Metal forming processes can be classified into two basic cate-
gories: bulk deformation processes and sheet metalworking
383

processes. These two categories are covered in detail in Chapters 19 and 20, respectively. Each
category includes several major classes of shaping operations, as indicated in Figure 18.1.
Bulk Deformation Processes
Bulk deformation processes are generally characterized
by significant deformations and massive shape changes, and the surface area-to-volume of
the work is relatively small. The term bulk describes the workparts that have this low area-
to-volume ratio. Starting work shapes for these processes include cylindrical billets and
rectangular bars. Figure 18.2 illustrates the following basic operations in bulk deformation:
FIGURE 18.1
Classiﬁcation
of metal forming operations.
Miscellaneous
processes
Shearing
processes
Deep or cup
drawing
Sheet
metalworking
Bending
operations
Wire and bar
drawing
Extrusion
processes
Forging
processes
Bulk
deformation
Rolling
processes
Metal forming
FIGURE 18.2
Basic bulk
deformation processes:
(a) rolling, (b) forging,
(c) extrusion, and
(d) drawing. Relative
motion in the operations
is indicated by v; forces
are indicated by F.
384
Chapter 18/Fundamentals of Metal Forming


Rolling. This is a compressive deformation process in which the thickness of a slab
or plate is reduced by two opposing cylindrical tools called rolls. The rolls rotate so
as to draw the work into the gap between them and squeeze it.

Forging. In forging, a workpiece is compressed between two opposing dies, so that the
die shapes are imparted to the work. Forging is traditionally a hot working process, but
many types of forging are performed cold.

Extrusion. This is a compression process in which the work metal is forced to flow
through a die opening, thereby taking the shape of the opening as its own cross section.

Drawing. In this forming process, the diameter of a round wire or bar is reduced by
pulling it through a die opening.
Sheet Metalworking
Sheet metalworking processes are forming and cutting operations
performed onmetal sheets, strips, andcoils. The surfacearea-to-volume ratioof the starting
metal is high; thus, this ratio is a useful means to distinguish bulk deformation from sheet
metal processes. Pressworking is the term often applied to sheet metal operations because
themachinesused to perform these operations are presses (presses of various types arealso
used inother manufacturing processes).A part produced ina sheetmetal operation is often
called a stamping.
Sheet metal operations are always performed as cold working processes and are
usually accomplished using a set of tools called a punch and die. The punch is the positive
portion and the die is the negative portion of the tool set. The basic sheet metal operations
are sketched in Figure 18.3 and are defined as follows:

Bending. Bending involves straining of a metal sheet or plate to take an angle along a
(usually) straight axis.
FIGURE 18.3
Basic
sheet metalworking
operations: (a) bending,
(b) drawing, and
(c) shearing: (1) as punch
ﬁrst contacts sheet, and
(2) after cutting. Force
and relative motion in
these operations are
indicated by F and v.
Section 18.1/Overview of Metal Forming
385


Drawing. In sheet metalworking, drawing refers to the forming of a flat metal sheet
into a hollow or concave shape, such as a cup, by stretching the metal. A blankholder
is used to hold down the blank while the punch pushes into the sheet metal, as shown
in Figure 18.3(b). To distinguish this operation from bar and wire drawing, the terms
cup drawing or deep drawing are often used.

Shearing. This process seems somewhat out-of-place in a list of deformation processes,
because it involves cutting rather than forming. A shearing operation cuts the work using
a punch and die, as in Figure 18.3(c). Although it is not a forming process, it is included
here because it is a necessary and very common operation in sheet metalworking.
ThemiscellaneousprocesseswithinthesheetmetalworkingclassificationinFigure18.1
includeavarietyofrelatedshapingprocessesthatdonotusepunchanddietooling.Examples
of these processes are stretch forming, roll bending, spinning, and bending of tube stock.
18.2
MATERIAL BEHAVIOR IN METAL FORMING
Considerable insight aboutthe behavior of metals during forming can be obtained from the
stress–strain curve. The typical stress–strain curve for most metals is divided into an elastic
region and a plastic region (Section 3.1.1). In metal forming, the plastic region is of primary
interest because the material is plastically and permanently deformed in these processes.
The typical stress–strain relationship for a metal exhibits elasticity below the yield
point and strain hardening above it. Figures 3.4 and 3.5 indicate this behavior in linear and
logarithmic axes. In the plastic region, the metal’s behavior is expressed by the flow curve:
s ¼ Ken
where K ¼ the strength coefficient, MPa (lb/in2); and n is the strain-hardening exponent.
The stress s and strain e in the flow curve are true stress and true strain. The flow curve is
generally valid as a relationship that defines a metal’s plastic behavior in cold working.
Typical values of K and n for different metals at room temperature are listed in Table 3.4.
Flow Stress
Theflow curvedescribesthestress–strainrelationship intheregion inwhich
metal forming takes place. It indicates the flow stress of the metal—the strength property
that determines forces and power required to accomplish a particular forming operation.
For most metals at room temperature, the stress–strain plot of Figure 3.5 indicates that as
the metal is deformed, its strength increases due to strain hardening. The stress required to
continue deformation must be increased to match this increase in strength. Flow stress is
defined as the instantaneous value of stress required to continue deforming the material—
to keep the metal ‘‘flowing.’’ It is the yield strength of the metal as a function of strain, which can
be expressed:
Yf ¼ Ken
ð18:1Þ
where Yf ¼ flow stress, MPa (lb/in2).
In the individual forming operations discussed in the following two chapters, the
instantaneous flow stress can be used to analyze the process as it is occurring. For example,
in certain forging operations, the instantaneous force during compression can be deter-
mined from theflow stress value. Maximum force can be calculated basedon the flow stress
that results from the final strain at the end of the forging stroke.
In other cases, the analysis is based on the average stresses and strains that occur
during deformation rather than instantaneous values. Extrusion represents this case,
Figure 18.2(c). As the billet is reduced in cross section to pass through the extrusion
386
Chapter 18/Fundamentals of Metal Forming

die opening, the metal gradually strain hardens to reach a maximum value. Rather than
determine a sequence of instantaneous stress–strain values during the reduction, which
would be not only difficult but also of limited interest, it is more useful to analyze the
process based on the average flow stress during deformation.
Average Flow Stress
The average flow stress (also called the mean flow stress) is the
average value of stress over the stress–strain curve from the beginning of strain to the final
(maximum) value that occurs during deformation. The value is illustrated in the stress–
strain plot of Figure 18.4. The average flow stress is determined by integrating the flow
curve equation, Eq. (18.1), between zero and the final strain value defining the range of
interest. This yields the equation:
Yf ¼ Ken
1 þ n
ð18:2Þ
where Yf ¼ average flow stress, MPa (lb/in2); and e ¼ maximum strain value during the
deformation process.
We makeextensiveuseof the average flowstress inourstudyofthebulk deformation
processes in the following chapter. Given values of K and n for the work material, a method
of computing final strain will be developed for each process. Based on this strain, Eq. (18.2)
can be used to determine the average flow stress to which the metal is subjected during the
operation.
18.3
TEMPERATURE IN METAL FORMING
The flow curve is a valid representation of stress–strain behavior of a metal during plastic
deformation, particularly for cold working operations. For any metal, the values of K and n
depend on temperature. Strength and strain hardening are both reduced at higher tempera-
tures. These property changes are important because they result in lower forces and power
during forming. In addition, ductility is increased at higher temperatures, which allows
greater plastic deformation of the work metal. We can distinguish three temperature ranges
that are used in metal forming: cold, warm, and hot working.
Cold Working
Cold working (also known as cold forming) is metal forming performed
at room temperature or slightly above. Significant advantages of cold forming compared
FIGURE 18.4
Stress–strain curve indicating
location of average ﬂow stress Yf in relation
to yield strength Y and ﬁnal ﬂow stress Yf.
Section 18.3/Temperature in Metal Forming
387

to hot working are (1) greater accuracy, meaning closer tolerances can be achieved; (2)
better surface finish; (3) higher strength and hardness of the part due to strain hardening;
(4) grain flow during deformation provides the opportunity for desirable directional
properties to be obtained in the resulting product; and (5) no heating of the work is
required, which saves on furnace and fuel costs and permits higher production rates.
Owing to this combination of advantages, many cold forming processes have become
important mass-production operations. They provide close tolerances and good surfaces,
minimizing the amount of machining required so that these operations can be classified
as net shape or near net shape processes (Section 1.3.1).
There are certain disadvantages or limitations associated with cold forming
operations: (1) higher forces and power are required to perform the operation;
(2) care must be taken to ensure that the surfaces of the starting workpiece are free
of scale and dirt; and (3) ductility and strain hardening of the work metal limit the amount
of forming that can be done to the part. In some operations, the metal must be annealed
(Section 27.1) in order to allow further deformation to be accomplished. In other cases,
the metal is simply not ductile enough to be cold worked.
To overcome the strain-hardening problem and reduce force and power requirements,
many forming operations are performed at elevated temperatures. There are two elevated
temperature ranges involved, giving rise to the terms warm working and hot working.
Warm Working
Because plastic deformation properties are normally enhanced by
increasing workpiece temperature, forming operations are sometimes performed at
temperatures somewhat above room temperature but below the recrystallization temper-
ature. The term warm working is applied to this second temperature range. The dividing
line between cold working and warm working is often expressed in terms of the melting
point for the metal. The dividing line is usually taken to be 0.3 Tm, where Tm is the melting
point (absolute temperature) for the particular metal.
The lower strength and strain hardening at the intermediate temperatures, as well
as higher ductility, provide warm working with the following advantages over cold
working: (1) lower forces and power, (2) more intricate work geometries possible,
and (3) need for annealing may be reduced or eliminated.
Hot Working
Hot working (also called hot forming) involves deformation at tempera-
tures above the recrystallization temperature (Section 3.3). The recrystallization tempera-
ture for a given metal is about one-half of its melting point on the absolute scale. In practice,
hot working is usually carried out at temperatures somewhat above 0.5Tm. The work metal
continues to soften as temperature is increased beyond 0.5Tm, thus enhancing the advantage
of hot working above this level. However, the deformation process itself generates heat,
which increases work temperatures in localized regions of the part. This can cause melting in
these regions, which is highly undesirable. Also, scale on the work surface is accelerated at
higher temperatures. Accordingly, hot working temperatures are usually maintained within
the range 0.5Tm to 0.75Tm.
The most significant advantageof hot working isthecapabilityto producesubstantial
plastic deformation of the metal—far more than is possible with cold working or warm
working. The principal reason for this is that the flow curve of the hot-worked metal has a
strength coefficient that issubstantiallylessthan atroomtemperature, thestrain-hardening
exponent is zero (at least theoretically), and the ductility of the metal is significantly
increased. All of this results in the following advantages relative to cold working: (1) the
shape of the workpart can be significantly altered, (2) lower forces and power are required
to deform the metal, (3) metals that usually fracture in cold working can be hot formed, (4)
strength properties are generally isotropic because of the absence of the oriented grain
structure typically created in cold working, and (5) no strengthening of the part occurs
from work hardening. This last advantage may seem inconsistent, since strengthening of
388
Chapter 18/Fundamentals of Metal Forming

the metal is often considered an advantage for cold working. However, there are
applications in which it is undesirable for the metal to be work hardened because it
reduces ductility, for example, if the part is to be subsequently processed by cold forming.
Disadvantages of hot working include (1) lower dimensional accuracy, (2) higher total
energy required (due to the thermal energy to heat the workpiece), (3) work surface
oxidation (scale), (4) poorer surface finish, and (5) shorter tool life.
Recrystallization of the metal in hot working involves atomic diffusion, which is a
time-dependent process. Metal forming operations are often performed at high speeds that
do not allow sufficient time for complete recrystallization of the grain structure during the
deformation cycle itself. However, because of the high temperatures, recrystallization
eventually does occur. It may occur immediately following the forming process or later, as
the workpiece cools. Even though recrystallization may occur after the actual deformation,
its eventual occurrence, and the substantial softening of the metal at high temperatures, are
the features that distinguish hot working from warm working or cold working.
Isothermal Forming
Certain metals, such as highly alloyed steels, many titanium alloys,
and high-temperature nickel alloys, possess good hot hardness, a property that makes them
useful for high-temperature service. However, this very property that makes them attract-
ive in these applications also makes them difficult to form with conventional methods. The
problem is that when these metals are heated to their hot working temperatures and then
come incontact with the relatively cold forming tools, heat is quickly transferred awayfrom
the part surfaces, thus raising the strength in these regions. The variations in temperature
and strength in different regions of the workpiece cause irregular flow patterns in the metal
during deformation, leading to high residual stresses and possible surface cracking.
Isothermal forming refers to forming operations that are carried out in such a way
as to eliminate surface cooling and the resulting thermal gradients in the workpart. It is
accomplished by preheating the tools that come in contact with the part to the same
temperature as the work metal. This weakens the tools and reduces tool life, but it avoids
the problems described above when these difficult metals are formed by conventional
methods. In some cases, isothermal forming represents the only way in which these work
materials can be formed. The procedure is most closely associated with forging, and we
discuss isothermal forging in the following chapter.
18.4
STRAIN RATE SENSITIVITY
Theoretically, a metal in hot working behaves like a perfectly plastic material, with strain-
hardening exponent n ¼ 0. This means that the metal should continue to flow under the
same level of flow stress, once that stress level is reached. However, there is an additional
phenomenon that characterizes the behavior of metals during deformation, especially at
the elevated temperatures of hot working. That phenomenon is strain rate sensitivity. Let
us begin our discussion of this topic by defining strain rate.
The rate at which the metal is strained in a forming process is directly related to the
speed of deformation, v. In many forming operations, deformation speed is equal to the
velocity of the ram or other moving element of the equipment. It is most easily visualized
in a tensile test as the velocity of the testing machine head relative to its fixed base. Given
the deformation speed, strain rate is defined:
_e ¼ v
h
ð18:3Þ
where _e ¼ true strain rate, m/s/m (in/sec/in), or simply s–1; and h ¼ instantaneous height of
the workpiece being deformed, m (in). If deformation speed v is constant during the
operation, strain rate will change as h changes. In most practical forming operations,
Section 18.4/Strain Rate Sensitivity
389

valuation of strain rate is complicated by the geometry of the workpart and variations in
strain rate in different regions of the part. Strain rate can reach 1000 s–1 or more for some
metal forming processes such as high-speed rolling and forging.
We have already observed that the flow stress of a metal is a function of
temperature. At the temperatures of hot working, flow stress depends on strain rate.
The effect of strain rate on strength properties is known as strain rate sensitivity. The
effect can be seen in Figure 18.5. As strain rate is increased, resistance to deformation
increases. This usually plots approximately as a straight line on a log–log graph, thus
leading to the relationship:
Yf ¼ C_em
ð18:4Þ
where C is the strength constant (similar but not equal to the strength coefficient in the
flow curve equation), and m is the strain rate sensitivity exponent. The value of C is
determined at a strain rate of 1.0, and m is the slope of the curve in Figure 18.5(b).
FIGURE 18.5
(a) Effect
of strain rate on ﬂow
stress at an elevated
work temperature.
(b) Same relationship
plotted on log–log
coordinates.
FIGURE 18.6
Effect of temperature on ﬂow
stress for a typical metal. The constant C in
Eq. (18.4), indicated by the intersection of
each plot with the vertical dashed line at
strain rate ¼ 1.0, decreases, and m (slope of
each plot) increases with increasing
temperature.
390
Chapter 18/Fundamentals of Metal Forming

The effect of temperature on the parameters of Eq. (18.4) is pronounced. Increas-
ing temperature decreases the value of C (consistent with its effect on K in the flow curve
equation) and increases the value of m. The general result can be seen in Figure 18.6. At
room temperature, the effect of strain rate is almost negligible, indicating that the flow
curve is a good representation of the material behavior. As temperature is increased,
strain rate plays a more important role in determining flow stress, as indicated by the
steeper slopes of the strain rate relationships. This is important in hot working because
deformation resistance of the material increases so dramatically as strain rate is
increased. To give a sense of the effect, typical values of m for the three temperature
ranges of metal working are given in Table 18.1.
Thus we see that even in cold working, strain rate can have an effect, if small, on flow
stress. In hot working, the effect can be significant. A more complete expression for flow
stress as a function of both strain and strain rate would be the following:
Yf ¼ Aen_em
ð18:5Þ
where A ¼ a strength coefficient, combining the effects of the previous K and C values. Of
course, A, n, and m would all be functions of temperature, and the enormous task of testing
and compiling the values of these parameters for different metals and various tempera-
tures would be forbidding.
In our coverage of the various bulk deformation processes in Chapter 19, many of
which are performed hot, we neglect the effect of strain rate in analyzing forces and
power. For cold working and warm working, and for hot working operations at relatively
low deformation speeds, this neglect represents a reasonable assumption.
18.5
FRICTION AND LUBRICATION IN METAL FORMING
Friction in metal forming arises because of the close contact between the tool and work
surfaces and the high pressures that drive the surfaces together in these operations. In
most metal forming processes, friction is undesirable for the following reasons: (1) metal
flow in the work is retarded, causing residual stresses and sometimes defects in the
product; (2) forces and power to perform the operation are increased, and (3) tool wear
can lead to loss of dimensional accuracy, resulting in defective parts and requiring
replacement of the tooling. Since tools in metal forming are generally expensive, tool
wear is a major concern. Friction and tool wear are more severe in hot working because of
the much harsher environment.
Friction in metal forming is different from that encountered in most mechanical
systems, such as gear trains, shafts and bearings, and other components involving relative
motion between surfaces. These other cases are generally characterized by low contact
pressures, low to moderate temperatures, and ample lubrication to minimize metal-to-
metal contact.Bycontrast,the metalformingenvironmentfeatureshighpressuresbetween
a hardened tool and a soft workpart, plastic deformation of the softer material, and high
TABLE 18.1
Typical values of temperature, strain-rate sensitivity, and coefﬁcient of
friction in cold, warm, and hot working.
Category
Temperature
Range
Strain-Rate
Sensitivity Exponent
Coefficient
of Friction
Cold working
0.3Tm
0.000  m  0.05
0.1
Warm working
0.3Tm–0.5Tm
0.05  m  0.1
0.2
Hot working
0.5Tm–0.75Tm
0.05  m  0.4
0.4–0.5
Section 18.5/Friction and Lubrication in Metal Forming
391

temperatures (at least in hot working). These conditions can result in relatively high
coefficientsoffrictioninmetalworking, even inthepresenceoflubricants. Typicalvalues of
coefficient of friction for the three categories of metal forming are listed in Table 18.1.
If the coefficient of friction becomes large enough, a condition known as sticking
occurs. Sticking in metalworking (also called sticking friction) is the tendency for the two
surfaces in relative motion to adhere to each other rather than slide. It means that the
friction stress between the surfaces exceeds the shear flow stress of the work metal, thus
causing the metal to deform by a shear process beneath the surface rather than slip at the
surface. Sticking occurs in metal forming operations and is a prominent problem in rolling;
we discuss it in that context in the following chapter.
Metalworking lubricants are applied to the tool–work interface in many forming
operations to reduce the harmful effects of friction. Benefits include reduced sticking,
forces, power, and tool wear; and better surface finish on the product. Lubricants also serve
other functions, such as removing heat from the tooling. Considerations in choosing an
appropriate metalworking lubricant include (1) type of forming process (rolling, forging,
sheet metal drawing, and so on), (2) whether used in hot working or cold working, (3) work
material, (4) chemical reactivity with the tool and work metals (it is generally desirable for
the lubricant to adhere to the surfaces to be most effective in reducing friction), (5) ease of
application, (6) toxicity, (7) flammability, and (8) cost.
Lubricants used for cold working operations include [4], [7] mineral oils, fats and
fatty oils, water-based emulsions, soaps, and other coatings. Hot working is sometimes
performed dry for certain operations and materials (e.g., hot rolling of steel and extrusion
of aluminum). When lubricants are used in hot working, they include mineral oils,
graphite, and glass. Molten glass becomes an effective lubricant for hot extrusion of steel
alloys. Graphite contained in water or mineral oil is a common lubricant for hot forging of
various work materials. More detailed treatments of lubricants in metalworking are
found in references [7] and [9].
REFERENCES
[1] Altan, T., Oh, S.-I., and Gegel, H. L. Metal Forming:
Fundamentals and Applications. ASM Interna-
tional, Materials Park, Ohio, 1983.
[2] Cook, N. H. Manufacturing Analysis. Addison-
Wesley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, Massa-
chusetts, 1966.
[3] Hosford, W. F., and Caddell, R. M. Metal Forming:
Mechanics and Metallurgy, 3rd ed. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, UK, 2007.
[4] Lange, K. Handbook of Metal Forming. Society of
Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 2006.
[5] Lenard, J. G. Metal Forming Science and Practice,
Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2002.
[6] Mielnik, E. M. Metalworking Science and Engineer-
ing. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, 1991.
[7] Nachtman, E. S., and Kalpakjian, S. Lubricants and
Lubrication in Metalworking Operations. Marcel
Dekker, Inc., New York, 1985.
[8] Wagoner, R. H., and Chenot, J.-L. Fundamentals of
Metal Forming. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,
1997.
[9] Wick, C., et al. (eds.). Tool and Manufacturing
Engineers Handbook, 4th ed. Vol. II, Forming.
Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn,
Michigan, 1984.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
18.1.
What are the differences between bulk deforma-
tion processes and sheet metal processes?
18.2.
Extrusion is a fundamental shaping process. De-
scribe it.
18.3.
Why is the term pressworking often used for sheet
metal processes?
18.4.
What is the difference between deep drawing and
bar drawing?
392
Chapter 18/Fundamentals of Metal Forming

Problems
393
18.5.
Indicate the mathematical equation for the flow
curve.
18.6.
How does increasing temperature affect the pa-
rameters in the flow curve equation?
18.7.
Indicate some of the advantages of cold working
relative to warm and hot working.
18.8.
What is isothermal forming?
18.9.
Describe the effect of strain rate in metal forming.
18.10.
Why is friction generally undesirable in metal
forming operations?
18.11.
What is sticking friction in metalworking?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 13 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
18.1.
Which of the following are bulk deformation pro-
cesses (three correct answers): (a) bending, (b) deep
drawing, (c) extrusion, (d) forging, (e) rolling, and
(f) shearing?
18.2.
Which of the following is typical of the starting
work geometry in sheet metal processes: (a) high
volume-to-area ratio or (b) low volume-to-area
ratio?
18.3.
The flow curve expresses the behavior of a metal
in which of the following regions of the stress–
strain curve: (a) elastic region or (b) plastic
region?
18.4.
The average flow stress is the flow stress multiplied
by which of the following factors: (a) n, (b) (1 þ n),
(c) 1/n, or (d) 1/(1 þ n), where n is the strain-
hardening exponent?
18.5.
Hot working of metals refers to which one of the
following temperature regions relative to the melt-
ing point of the given metal on an absolute
temperature scale: (a) room temperature, (b)
0.2Tm, (c) 0.4Tm, or (d) 0.6Tm?
18.6.
Which of the following are advantages and character-
istics of hot working relative to cold working (four
correct answers): (a) fracture of workpart is less
likely, (b) friction is reduced, (c) increased strength
properties, (d) isotropic mechanical properties,
(e) less overall energy is required, (f) lower defor-
mation forces isrequired, (g) more significant shape
changes are possible, and (h) strain-rate sensitivity
is reduced?
18.7.
Increasing strain rate tends to have which one of
the following effects on flow stress during hot
forming
of
metal:
(a)
decreases
flow
stress,
(b) has no effect, or (c) increases flow stress?
18.8.
The coefficient of friction between the part and the
tool in cold working tends to be (a) higher,
(b) lower, or (c) no different relative to its value
in hot working?
PROBLEMS
Flow Curve in Forming
18.1.
The strength coefficient ¼ 550 MPa and strain-
hardening exponent ¼ 0.22 for a certain metal.
During a forming operation, the final true strain
that the metal experiences ¼ 0.85. Determine the
flow stress at this strain and the average flow stress
that the metal experienced during the operation.
18.2.
A metal has a flow curve with parameters: strength
coefficient ¼ 850 MPa and strain-hardening expo-
nent ¼ 0.30. A tensile specimen of the metal with
gage length ¼ 100 mm is stretched to a length ¼ 157
mm. Determine the flow stress at the new length and
the average flow stress that the metal has been
subjected to during the deformation.
18.3.
A particular metal has a flow curve with parameters:
strength coefficient ¼ 35,000 lb/in2 and strain-hard-
ening exponent ¼ 0.26. A tensile specimen of the
metal with gage length ¼ 2.0 in is stretched to a
length ¼ 3.3 in. Determine the flow stress at this new
length and the average flow stress that the metal has
been subjected to during deformation.
18.4.
The
strength
coefficient
and
strain-hardening
exponent of a certain test metal are 40,000 lb/in2
and 0.19, respectively. A cylindrical specimen of
the metal with starting diameter ¼ 2.5 in and length
¼ 3.0 in is compressed to a length of 1.5 in. Deter-
mine the flow stress at this compressed length and

the average flow stress that the metal has experi-
enced during deformation.
18.5.
Derive the equation for average flow stress, Eq.
(18.2) in the text.
18.6.
For a certain metal, the strength coefficient ¼
700 MPa and strain-hardening exponent ¼ 0.27.
Determine the average flow stress that the metal
experiences if it is subjected to a stress that is equal
to its strength coefficient K.
18.7.
Determine the value of the strain-hardening expo-
nent for a metal that will cause the average flow
stress to be 3/4 of the final flow stress after
deformation.
18.8.
The strength coefficient ¼ 35,000 lb/in2 and strain-
hardening exponent ¼ 0.40 for a metal used in a
forming operation in which the workpart is re-
duced in cross-sectional area by stretching. If the
average flow stress on the part is 20,000 lb/in2,
determine the amount of reduction in cross-sec-
tional area experienced by the part.
18.9.
In a tensile test, two pairs of values of stress and
strain were measured for the specimen metal after
it had yielded: (1) true stress ¼ 217 MPa and true
strain ¼ 0.35, and (2) true stress ¼ 259 MPa and
true strain ¼ 0.68.
Based on these data points,
determine the strength coefficient and strain-hard-
ening exponent.
18.10.
The following stress and strain values were meas-
ured in the plastic region during a tensile test carried
out on a new experimental metal: (1) true stress ¼
43,608 lb/in2 and true strain ¼ 0.27 in/in, and (2) true
stress ¼ 52,048 lb/in2 and true strain ¼ 0.85 in/in.
Based on these data points, determine the strength
coefficient and strain-hardening exponent.
Strain Rate
18.11.
The gage length of a tensile test specimen ¼ 150 mm.
It is subjected to a tensile test in which the grips
holding the end of the test specimen are moved with
a relative velocity ¼ 0.1 m/s. Construct a plot of the
strain rate as a function of length as the specimen is
pulled to a length ¼ 200 mm.
18.12.
A specimen with 6.0 in starting gage length is
subjected to a tensile test in which the grips holding
the end of the test specimen are moved with a
relative velocity ¼ 1.0 in/sec. Construct a plot of the
strain rate as a function of length as the specimen is
pulled to a length ¼ 8.0 in.
18.13.
A workpart with starting height h ¼ 100 mm is
compressed to a final height of 50 mm. During the
deformation, the relative speed of the platens com-
pressing the part ¼ 200 mm/s. Determine the strain
rate at (a) h ¼ 100 mm, (b) h ¼ 75 mm, and (c) h ¼
51 mm.
18.14.
A hot working operation is carried out at various
speeds. The strength constant ¼ 30,000 lb/in2 and
the strain-rate sensitivity exponent ¼ 0.15. Deter-
mine the flow stress if the strain rate is (a) 0.01/sec
(b) 1.0/sec, (c) 100/sec.
18.15.
A tensile test is performed to determine the pa-
rameters strength constant C and strain-rate sensi-
tivity exponent m in Eq. (18.4) for a certain metal.
The temperature at which the test is performed ¼
500C. At a strain rate ¼ 12/s, the stress is measured
at 160 MPa; and at a strain rate ¼ 250/s, the stress ¼
300 MPa. (a) Determine C and m. (b) If the
temperature were 600C, what changes would
you expect in the values of C and m?
18.16.
A tensile test is carried out to determine the
strength constant C and strain-rate sensitivity
exponent m for a certain metal at 1000F. At a
strain rate ¼ 10/sec, the stress is measured at 23,000
lb/in2; and at a strain rate ¼ 300/sec, the stress ¼
45,000 lb/in2. (a) Determine C and m. (b) If the
temperature were 900F, what changes would you
expect in the values of C and m?
394
Chapter 18/Fundamentals of Metal Forming

19
BULK DEFORMATION
PROCESSES IN
METAL WORKING
Chapter Contents
19.1
Rolling
19.1.1
Flat Rolling and Its Analysis
19.1.2
Shape Rolling
19.1.3
Rolling Mills
19.2
Other Deformation Processes Related to
Rolling
19.3
Forging
19.3.1
Open-Die Forging
19.3.2
Impression-Die Forging
19.3.3
Flashless Forging
19.3.4
Forging Hammers, Presses, and Dies
19.4
Other Deformation Processes Related to
Forging
19.5
Extrusion
19.5.1
Types of Extrusion
19.5.2
Analysis of Extrusion
19.5.3
Extrusion Dies and Presses
19.5.4
Other Extrusion Processes
19.5.5
Defects in Extruded Products
19.6
Wire and Bar Drawing
19.6.1
Analysis of Drawing
19.6.2
Drawing Practice
19.6.3
Tube Drawing
The deformation processes described in this chapter ac-
complish significant shape change in metal parts whose
initial form is bulk rather than sheet. The starting forms
include cylindrical bars and billets, rectangular billets and
slabs, and similar elementary geometries. The bulk defor-
mation processes refine the starting shapes, sometimes
improving mechanical properties, and always adding com-
mercial value. Deformation processes work by stressing the
metal sufficiently to cause it to plastically flow into the
desired shape.
Bulk deformation processes are performed as cold,
warm, and hot working operations. Cold and warm working
isappropriatewhentheshapechangeislesssevere,andthere
isa need to improvemechanical properties and achievegood
finish on the part. Hot working is generally required when
massive deformation of large workparts is involved.
The commercial and technological importance of
bulk deformation processes derives from the following:

When performed as hot working operations, they can
achieve significant change in the shape of the workpart.

When performed as cold working operations, they can
be used not only to shape the product, but also to
increase its strength through strain hardening.

These processes produce little or no waste as a by-
product of the operation. Some bulk deformation op-
erations are near net shape or net shape processes; they
achieve final product geometry with little or no subse-
quent machining.
The bulk deformation processes covered in this chap-
ter are (1) rolling, (2) forging, (3) extrusion, and (4) wire
and bar drawing. The chapter also documents the variations
and related operations of the four basic processes that have
been developed over the years.
395

19.1
ROLLING
Rollingisadeformationprocessinwhichthethicknessoftheworkisreducedbycompressive
forces exerted by two opposing rolls. The rolls rotate as illustrated in Figure 19.1 to pull and
simultaneously squeeze the work between them. The basic process shown in our figure is flat
rolling, used to reduce the thickness of a rectangular cross section. A closely related process is
shape rolling, in which a square cross section is formed into a shape such as an I-beam.
Most rolling processes are very capital intensive, requiring massive pieces of equip-
ment, called rolling mills, to perform them. The high investment cost requires the mills to be
used for production in large quantities of standard items such as sheets and plates. Most
rolling is carried out by hot working, called hot rolling, owing to the large amount of
deformation required. Hot-rolled metal is generally free of residual stresses, and its
properties are isotropic. Disadvantages of hot rolling are that the product cannot be
held to close tolerances, and the surface has a characteristic oxide scale.
Steelmaking provides the most common application of rolling mill operations (His-
torical Note 19.1). Let us follow the sequence of steps in a steel rolling mill to illustrate the
variety of products made. Similar steps occur in other basic metal industries. The work starts
out as a cast steel ingot that has just solidified. While it is still hot, the ingot is placed in a
furnace where it remains for many hours until it has reached a uniform temperature
throughout, so that the metal will flow consistently during rolling. For steel, the desired
temperature for rolling is around 1200C (2200F). The heating operation is called soaking,
and the furnaces in which it is carried out are called soaking pits.
Fromsoaking, the ingotismovedtotherolling mill,where itisrolled into one of three
intermediate shapes called blooms, billets, or slabs. A bloom has a square cross section 150
mm  150 mm (6 in  6 in) or larger. A slab is rolled from an ingot or a bloom and has a
rectangular cross section of width 250 mm (10 in) or more and thickness 40 mm (1.5 in) or
more. A billet is rolled from a bloom and is square with dimensions 40 mm (1.5 in) on a side
or larger. These intermediate shapes are subsequently rolled into final product shapes.
Blooms arerolled into structural shapesand railsforrailroad tracks. Billets are rolled
into bars and rods. These shapes are the raw materials for machining, wire drawing, forging,
and othermetalworkingprocesses. Slabs are rolled into plates, sheets, andstrips. Hot-rolled
plates are used in shipbuilding, bridges, boilers, welded structures for various heavy
machines, tubes and pipes, and many other products. Figure 19.2 shows some of these
rolled steel products. Further flattening of hot-rolled plates and sheets is often accom-
plished by cold rolling, in order to prepare them for subsequent sheet metal operations
(Chapter 20). Cold rolling strengthens the metal and permits a tighter tolerance on
thickness. In addition, the surface of the cold-rolled sheet is absent of scale and generally
superior to the corresponding hot-rolled product. These characteristics make cold-rolled
sheets, strips, and coils ideal for stampings, exterior panels, and other parts of products
ranging from automobiles to appliances and office furniture.
FIGURE 19.1
The
rolling process
(speciﬁcally, ﬂat rolling).
396
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

19.1.1 FLAT ROLLING AND ITS ANALYSIS
Flat rolling is illustrated in Figures 19.1 and 19.3. It involves the rolling of slabs, strips,
sheets, and plates—workparts of rectangular cross section in which the width is greater
than the thickness. In flat rolling, the work is squeezed between two rolls so that its
thickness is reduced by an amount called the draft:
d ¼ to  tf
ð19:1Þ
where d ¼ draft, mm (in); to ¼ starting thickness, mm (in); and tf ¼ final thickness, mm
(in). Draft is sometimes expressed as a fraction of the starting stock thickness, called the
Historical Note 19.1
Rolling
Rolling of gold and silver by manual methods dates
from the fourteenth century. Leonardo da Vinci designed
one of the ﬁrst rolling mills in 1480, but it is doubtful that
his design was ever built. By around 1600, cold rolling of
lead and tin was accomplished on manually operated
rolling mills. By around 1700, hot rolling of iron was
being done in Belgium, England, France, Germany, and
Sweden. These mills were used to roll iron bars into
sheets. Prior to this time, the only rolls in steelmaking
were slitting mills—pairs of opposing rolls with collars
(cutting disks) used to slit iron and steel into narrow strips
for making nails and similar products. Slitting mills were
not intended to reduce thickness.
Modern rolling practice dates from 1783 when a patent
was issued in England for using grooved rolls to produce
iron bars. The Industrial Revolution created a tremendous
demand for iron and steel, stimulating developments in
rolling. The ﬁrst mill for rolling railway rails was started in
1820 in England. The ﬁrst I-beams were rolled in France in
1849. In addition, the size and capacity of ﬂat rolling mills
increased dramatically during this period.
Rolling is a process that requires a very large power
source. Water wheels were used to power rolling mills
until the eighteenth century. Steam engines increased the
capacity of these rolling mills until soon after 1900 when
electric motors replaced steam.
FIGURE 19.2
Some of
the steel products made in
a rolling mill.
Section 19.1/Rolling
397

reduction:
r ¼ d
to
ð19:2Þ
where r ¼ reduction. When a series of rolling operations are used, reduction is taken as
the sum of the drafts divided by the original thickness.
In addition to thickness reduction, rolling usually increases work width. This is
called spreading, and it tends to be most pronounced with low width-to-thickness ratios
and low coefficients of friction. Conservation of matter is preserved, so the volume of
metal exiting the rolls equals the volume entering
towoLo ¼ tfwf Lf
ð19:3Þ
wherewo andwf are the before and after workwidths, mm (in); and Lo and Lf arethebefore
and after work lengths, mm (in). Similarly, before and after volume rates of material flow
must be the same, so the before and after velocities can be related:
towovo ¼ tfwf vf
ð19:4Þ
where vo and vf are the entering and exiting velocities of the work.
The rolls contact the work along an arc defined by the angle u. Each roll has radius
R, and its rotational speed gives it a surface velocity vr. This velocity is greater than the
entering speed of the work vo and less than its exiting speed vf. Since the metal flow is
continuous, there is a gradual change in velocity of the work between the rolls. However,
there is one point along the arc where work velocity equals roll velocity. This is called the
no-slip point, also known as the neutral point. On either side of this point, slipping and
friction occur between roll and work. The amount of slip between the rolls and the work
can be measured by means of the forward slip, a term used in rolling that is defined:
s ¼ vf  vr
vr
ð19:5Þ
where s ¼ forward slip; vf ¼ final (exiting) work velocity, m/s (ft/sec); and vr ¼ roll speed,
m/s (ft/sec).
The true strain experienced by the work in rolling is based on before and after stock
thicknesses. In equation form,
e ¼ ln to
tf
ð19:6Þ
The true strain can be used to determine the average flow stress Yf applied to the work
material in flat rolling. Recall from the previous chapter, Eq. (18.2), that
Yf ¼ Ken
1 þ n
ð19:7Þ
The average flow stress is used to compute estimates of force and power in rolling.
Frictioninrollingoccurswithacertaincoefficientoffriction,andthecompressionforce
oftherolls, multipliedbythiscoefficientof friction,resultsinafrictionforcebetweentherolls
andthework.Ontheentrancesideoftheno-slippoint,frictionforceisinonedirection,andon
theothersideitisintheoppositedirection.However,thetwoforcesarenotequal.Thefriction
forceontheentrancesideisgreater,sothatthenetforcepullstheworkthroughtherolls.Ifthis
were not the case, rolling would not be possible. There is a limit to the maximum possible
draft that can be accomplished in flat rolling with a given coefficient of friction, defined by:
dmax ¼ m2R
ð19:8Þ
398
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

where dmax ¼ maximum draft, mm (in); m ¼ coefficient of friction; and R ¼ roll radius mm
(in). The equation indicates that if friction were zero, draft would be zero, and it would be
impossible to accomplish the rolling operation.
Coefficient of friction in rolling depends on lubrication, work material, and
working temperature. In cold rolling, the value is around 0.1; in warm working, a typical
value is around 0.2; and in hot rolling, m is around 0.4 [16]. Hot rolling is often
characterized by a condition called sticking, in which the hot work surface adheres
to the rolls over the contact arc. This condition often occurs in the rolling of steels and
high-temperature alloys. When sticking occurs, the coefficient of friction can be as high
as 0.7. The consequence of sticking is that the surface layers of the work are restricted to
move at the same speed as the roll speed vr; and below the surface, deformation is more
severe in order to allow passage of the piece through the roll gap.
Given a coefficient of friction sufficient to perform rolling, roll force F required to
maintain separation between the two rolls can be computed by integrating the unit roll
pressure (shown as p in Figure 19.3) over the roll-work contact area. This can be expressed:
F ¼ w
ZL
0
pd L
ð19:9Þ
where F ¼ rolling force, N (lb); w ¼ the width of the work being rolled, mm (in); p ¼
roll pressure, MPa (lb/in2); and L ¼ length of contact between rolls and work, mm (in).
The integration requires two separate terms, one for either side of the neutral point.
Variation in roll pressure along the contact length is significant. A sense of this
variation can be obtained from the plot in Figure 19.4. Pressure reaches a maximum
at the neutral point, and trails off on either side to the entrance and exit points. As
friction increases, maximum pressure increases relative to entrance and exit values. As
friction decreases, the neutral point shifts away from the entrance and toward the exit
in order to maintain a net pull force in the direction of rolling. Otherwise, with low
friction, the work would slip rather than pass between the rolls.
An approximation of the results obtained by Eq. (19.9) can be calculated based
on the average flow stress experienced by the work material in the roll gap. That is,
F ¼ Yf wL
ð19:10Þ
FIGURE 19.3
Side view of ﬂat
rolling, indicating before and after
thicknesses, work velocities, angle
of contact with rolls, and other
features.
Section 19.1/Rolling
399

where Yf ¼ average flow stress from Eq. (19.7), MPa (lb/in2); and the product wL is the
roll-work contact area, mm2 (in2). Contact length can be approximated by
L ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
R(to  tf)
q
ð19:11Þ
The torque in rolling can be estimated by assuming that the roll force is centered on
the work as it passes between the rolls, and that it acts with a moment arm of one-half the
contact length L. Thus, torque for each roll is
T ¼ 0:5 FL
ð19:12Þ
The power required to drive each roll is the product of torque and angular velocity.
Angular velocity is 2pN, where N ¼ rotational speed of the roll. Thus, the power for each
roll is 2pNT. Substituting Eq. (19.12) for torque in this expression for power, and
doubling the value to account for the fact that a rolling mill consists of two powered
rolls, we get the following expression:
P ¼ 2pNFL
ð19:13Þ
where P ¼ power, J/s or W (in-lb/min); N ¼ rotational speed, 1/s (rev/min); F ¼ rolling
force, N (lb); and L ¼ contact length, m (in).
Example 19.1 Flat
Rolling
A 300-mm-wide strip 25-mm thick is fed through a rolling mill with two powered rolls
each of radius ¼ 250 mm. The work thickness is to be reduced to 22 mm in one pass at a
roll speed of 50 rev/min. The work material has a flow curve defined by K ¼ 275 MPa and
n ¼ 0.15, and the coefficient of friction between the rolls and the work is assumed to be
0.12. Determine if the friction is sufficient to permit the rolling operation to be
accomplished. If so, calculate the roll force, torque, and horsepower.
Solution:
The draft attempted in this rolling operation is
d ¼ 25  22 ¼ 3 mm
FIGURE 19.4
Typical variation in pressure
along the contact length in ﬂat rolling. The
peak pressure is located at the neutral point.
The area beneath the curve, representing the
integration in Eq. (19.9), is the roll force F.
400
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

From Eq. (19.8), the maximum possible draft for the given coefficient of friction is
dmax ¼ (0:12)2(250) ¼ 3:6 mm
Since the maximum allowable draft exceeds the attempted reduction, the rolling
operation is feasible. To compute rolling force, we need the contact length L and the
average flow stress Yf. The contact length is given by Eq. (19.11):
L ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
250(25  22)
p
¼ 27:4 mm
Yf is determined from the true strain:
e ¼ ln 25
22 ¼ 0:128
Yf ¼ 275(0:128)0:15
1:15
¼ 175:7 MPa
Rolling force is determined from Eq. (19.10):
F ¼ 175:7(300)(27:4) ¼ 1; 444; 786 N
Torque required to drive each roll is given by Eq. (19.12):
T ¼ 0:5(1; 444; 786)(27; 4)(103) ¼ 19; 786 N-m
and the power is obtained from Eq. (19.13):
P ¼ 2p(50)(1; 444; 786)(27:4)(103) ¼ 12; 432; 086 N-m/min ¼ 207; 201 N-m/s(W)
For comparison, let us convert this to horsepower (we note that one horsepower ¼
745.7 W):
HP ¼ 207; 201
745:7
¼ 278 hp
n
It can be seen from this example that large forces and power are required in rolling.
Inspection of Eqs. (19.10) and (19.13) indicates that force and/or power to roll a strip of a
given width and work material can be reduced by any of the following: (1) using hot rolling
rather than cold rolling to reduce strength and strain hardening (K and n) of the work
material;(2)reducing thedraftineach pass;(3) usinga smaller roll radius Rto reduce force;
and (4) using a lower rolling speed N to reduce power.
19.1.2 SHAPE ROLLING
In shape rolling, the work is deformed into a contoured cross section. Products made by
shape rolling include construction shapes such as I-beams, L-beams, and U-channels; rails
for railroad tracks; and round and square bars and rods (see Figure 19.2). The process is
accomplished by passing the work through rolls that have the reverse of the desired shape.
Most of the principles that apply in flat rolling are also applicable to shape rolling.
Shaping rolls are more complicated; and the work, usually starting as a square shape,
requires a gradual transformation through several rolls in order to achieve the final cross
section. Designing the sequence of intermediate shapes and corresponding rolls is called
roll-pass design. Its goal is to achieve uniform deformation throughout the cross section in
each reduction. Otherwise, certain portions of the work are reduced more than others,
causing greater elongation in these sections. The consequence of nonuniform reduction can
Section 19.1/Rolling
401

be warping and cracking of the rolled product. Both horizontal and vertical rolls are utilized
to achieve consistent reduction of the work material.
19.1.3 ROLLING MILLS
Various rolling mill configurations are available to deal with the variety of applications and
technical problems inthe rolling process. The basic rolling mill consistsof two opposing rolls
and is referred to as a two-high rolling mill, shown in Figure 19.5(a). The rolls in these mills
have diameters in the range of 0.6 to 1.4 m (2.0–4.5 ft). The two-high configuration can be
eitherreversingornonreversing.Inthenonreversingmill,therollsalwaysrotateinthesame
direction, and the work always passes through from the same side. The reversing mill allows
the direction of roll rotation to be reversed, so that the work can be passed through in either
direction. Thispermits a series of reductions to be made through the same set of rolls, simply
by passing through the work from opposite directions multiple times. The disadvantage of
the reversing configuration is the significant angular momentum possessed by large rotating
rolls and the associated technical problems involved in reversing the direction.
Several alternative arrangements are illustrated in Figure 19.5. In the three-high
configuration, Figure 19.5(b), there are three rolls in a vertical column, and the direction of
rotation of each roll remains unchanged. To achieve a series of reductions, the work can be
passed through from either side by raising or lowering the strip after each pass. The
equipment in a three-high rolling mill becomes more complicated, because an elevator
mechanism is needed to raise and lower the work.
As several of the previous equations indicate, advantages are gained in reducing roll
diameter. Roll-work contact length is reduced with a lower roll radius, and this leads to
lower forces, torque, and power. The four-high rolling mill uses two smaller-diameter rolls
to contact the work and two backing rolls behind them, as in Figure 19.5(c). Owing to the
high roll forces, these smaller rolls would deflect elastically between their end bearings as
thework passes through unless the largerbacking rollswere used to supportthem. Another
FIGURE 19.5
Various conﬁgurations of rolling mills: (a) 2-high, (b) 3-high, (c) 4-high, (d) cluster mill, and
(e) tandem rolling mill.
402
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

roll configuration that allows smaller working rolls against the work is the cluster rolling
mill (Figure 19.5(d)).
To achieve higher throughput rates in standard products, a tandem rolling mill is often
used. This configuration consists of a series of rolling stands, as represented in Figure 19.5(e).
Although only three stands are shown in our sketch, a typical tandem rolling mill may have
eight or ten stands, each making a reduction in thickness or a refinement in shape of the work
passing through. With each rolling step, work velocity increases, and the problem of
synchronizing the roll speeds at each stand is a significant one.
Modern tandem rolling mills are often supplied directly by continuous casting
operations (Section 7.2.2). These setups achieve a high degree of integration among the
processes required to transform starting raw materials into finished products. Advantages
includeeliminationofsoakingpits,reductioninfloorspace,andshortermanufacturinglead
times. These technical advantages translate into economic benefits for a mill that can
accomplish continuous casting and rolling.
19.2
OTHER DEFORMATION PROCESSES RELATED TO ROLLING
Several other bulk deformation processes use rolls to form the workpart. The operations
include thread rolling, ring rolling, gear rolling, and roll piercing.
Thread Rolling
Threadrolling isused to form threads oncylindrical partsbyrolling them
between two dies. It is the most important commercial process for mass producing external
threaded components (e.g., bolts and screws). The competing process is thread cutting
(Section 22.7.1). Most thread rolling operations are performed by cold working in thread
rollingmachines.Thesemachinesareequippedwithspecialdiesthatdeterminethesizeand
form of the thread. The dies are of two types: (1) flat dies, which reciprocate relative to each
other, as illustrated in Figure 19.6; and (2) round dies, which rotate relative to each other to
accomplish the rolling action.
Production rates in thread rolling can be high, ranging up to eight parts per second for
small bolts and screws. Not only are these rates significantly higher than thread cutting, but
there are other advantages over machining as well: (1) better material utilization,
(2) stronger threads due to work hardening, (3) smoother surface, and (4) better fatigue
resistance due to compressive stresses introduced by rolling.
Ring Rolling
Ring rolling is a deformation process in which a thick-walled ring of smaller
diameter is rolled into a thin-walled ring of larger diameter. The before and after views of the
FIGURE 19.6
Thread rolling with ﬂat dies: (1) start of cycle and (2) end of cycle.
Section 19.2/Other Deformation Processes Related to Rolling
403

process are illustrated in Figure 19.7. As the thick-walled ring is compressed, the deformed
material elongates, causing the diameter of the ring to be enlarged. Ring rolling is usually
performed as a hot-working process for large rings and as a cold-working process for smaller
rings.
Applications of ring rolling include ball and roller bearing races, steel tires for railroad
wheels, and rings for pipes, pressure vessels, and rotating machinery. The ring walls are not
limited to rectangular cross sections; the process permits rolling of more complex shapes.
Thereareseveraladvantagesofringrollingoveralternativemethodsofmakingthesameparts:
raw material savings, ideal grain orientation for the application, and strengthening through
cold working.
Gear Rolling
Gear rolling is a cold working process to produce certain gears. The
automotive industry is an important user of these products. The setup in gear rolling is
similar to thread rolling, except that the deformed features of the cylindrical blank or
disk are oriented parallel to its axis (or at an angle in the case of helical gears) rather
than spiraled as in thread rolling. Alternative production methods for gears include
several machining operations, discussed in Section 22.7.2. Advantages of gear rolling
compared to machining are similar to those of thread rolling: higher production rates,
better strength and fatigue resistance, and less material waste.
Roll Piercing
Ring rolling is a specialized hot working process for making seamless
thick-walled tubes. It utilizes two opposing rolls, and hence it is grouped with the
rolling processes. The process is based on the principle that when a solid cylindrical
part is compressed on its circumference, as in Figure 19.8(a), high tensile stresses are
FIGURE 19.7
Ring rolling used to reduce the wall thickness and increase the diameter of a ring:
(1) start and (2) completion of process.
FIGURE 19.8
Roll piercing: (a) formation of internal stresses and cavity by compression of cylindrical part; and
(b) setup of Mannesmann roll mill for producing seamless tubing.
404
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

developed at its center. If compression is high enough, an internal crack is formed. In
roll piercing, this principle is exploited by the setup shown in Figure 19.8(b). Com-
pressive stresses on a solid cylindrical billet are applied by two rolls, whose axes are
oriented at slight angles (6) from the axis of the billet, so that their rotation tends to
pull the billet through the rolls. A mandrel is used to control the size and finish of the
hole created by the action. The terms rotary tube piercing and Mannesmann process
are also used for this tube-making operation.
19.3
FORGING
Forging is a deformation process in which the work is compressed between two dies, using
either impact or gradual pressure to form the part. It is the oldest of the metal forming
operations, dating back to perhaps 5000 BCE (Historical Note 19.2). Today, forging is an
important industrial process used to make a variety of high-strength components for
automotive,aerospace,andotherapplications.Thesecomponentsincludeenginecrankshafts
and connecting rods, gears, aircraft structural components, and jet engine turbine parts. In
addition,steelandotherbasicmetalsindustriesuseforgingtoestablishthebasicformoflarge
components that are subsequently machined to final shape and dimensions.
Forging is carried out in many different ways. One way to classify the operations is by
working temperature. Most forging operations are performed hot or warm, owing to the
significant deformation demanded by the process and the need to reduce strength and
increase ductility of the work metal. However, cold forging is also very common for certain
products. The advantage of cold forging is the increased strength that results from strain
hardening of the component.
Either impact or gradual pressure is used in forging. The distinction derives more
from thetype of equipmentused than differences in process technology. A forging machine
that applies an impact load is called a forging hammer, while one that applies gradual
pressure is called a forging press.
Another difference among forging operations is the degree to which the flow of the
work metal is constrained by the dies. By this classification, there are three types of forging
operations, shown in Figure 19.9: (a) open-die forging, (b) impression-die forging, and (c)
flashless forging. In open-die forging, the work is compressed between two flat (or almost
flat) dies, thusallowing themetal to flowwithout constraintin alateraldirection relativeto
the die surfaces. In impression-die forging, the die surfaces contain a shape or impression
that is imparted to the work during compression, thus constraining metal flow to a
significant degree. In this type of operation, a portion of the work metal flows beyond the
Historical Note 19.2
Forging
The forging process dates from the earliest written
records of man, around 7000 years ago. There is
evidence that forging was used in ancient Egypt, Greece,
Persia, India, China, and Japan to make weapons,
jewelry, and a variety of implements. Craftsmen in the art
of forging during these times were held in high regard.
Engraved stone platens were used as impression dies
in the hammering of gold and silver in ancient Crete
around 1600 BCE. This evolved into the fabrication of
coins by a similar process around 800 BCE. More
complicated impression dies were used in Rome around
200 CE. The blacksmith’s trade remained relatively
unchanged for many centuries until the drop hammer
with guided ram was introduced near the end of the
eighteenth century. This development brought forging
practice into the Industrial Age.
Section 19.3/Forging
405

die impression to form flash, as shown in the figure. Flash is excess metal that must be
trimmed off later. In flashless forging, the work is completely constrained within the die
and no excess flash is produced. The volume of the starting workpiece must be controlled
very closely so that it matches the volume of the die cavity. The reader can obtain a good
sense of these operations in our video clip on forging.
VIDEO CLIP
Forging. The three segments on this clip are (1) the forging process, (2) open-die forging,
and (3) impression-die forging.
19.3.1 OPEN-DIE FORGING
The simplest case of open-die forging involves compression of a workpart of cylindrical
cross section between two flat dies, much in the manner of a compression test (Section
3.1.2). This forging operation, known as upsetting or upset forging, reduces the height of
the work and increases its diameter.
Analysis of Open-Die Forging
If open-die forging is carried out under ideal conditions of
no friction between work and die surfaces, then homogeneous deformation occurs, and the
radial flow of the material is uniform throughout its height, as pictured in Figure 19.10. Under
these ideal conditions, the true strain experienced by the work during the process can be
determined by
e ¼ ln ho
h
ð19:14Þ
FIGURE 19.9
Three types of forging operation illustrated by cross-sectional sketches: (a) open-die forging,
(b) impression-die forging, and (c) ﬂashless forging.
406
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

where ho ¼ starting height of the work, mm (in); and h ¼ the height at some intermediate
point in the process, mm (in). At the end of the compression stroke, h ¼ its final value hf,
and the true strain reaches its maximum value.
Estimates of force to perform upsetting can be calculated. The force required to
continue the compression at any given height h during the process can be obtained by
multiplying the corresponding cross-sectional area by the flow stress:
F ¼ YfA
ð19:15Þ
where F ¼ force, lb (N); A ¼ cross-sectional area of the part, mm2 (in2); and Yf ¼ flow stress
corresponding to the strain given by Eq. (19.14), MPa (lb/in2). Area A continuously
increases during the operation as height is reduced. Flow stress Yf also increases as a result
of work hardening, except when the metal is perfectly plastic (e.g., in hot working). In this
case, the strain-hardening exponent n ¼ 0, and flow stress Yf equals the metal’s yield
strength Y. Force reaches a maximum value at the end of the forging stroke, when both area
and flow stress are at their highest values.
An actual upsetting operation does not occur quite as shown in Figure 19.10 because
friction opposes the flow of work metal at the die surfaces. This creates the barreling effect
shown in Figure 19.11. When performed on a hot workpart with cold dies, the barreling
effect is even more pronounced. This results from a higher coefficient of friction typical in
hot working and heat transfer at and near the die surfaces, which cools the metal and
increasesits resistancetodeformation.Thehottermetalinthemiddle of the part flows more
readily than the cooler metal at the ends. These effects are more significant as the diameter-
FIGURE 19.10
Homogeneous
deformation of a
cylindrical workpart
under ideal conditions in
an open-die forging
operation: (1) start of
process with workpiece
at its original length and
diameter, (2) partial
compression, and (3) ﬁnal
size.
FIGURE 19.11
Actual
deformation of a
cylindrical workpart in
open-die forging,
showing pronounced
barreling: (1) start of
process, (2) partial
deformation, and (3) ﬁnal
shape.
Section 19.3/Forging
407

to-height ratio of the workpart increases, due to the greater contact area at the work–die
interface.
All of these factors cause the actual upsetting force to be greater than what is
predicted by Eq. (19.15). As an approximation, we can apply a shape factor to Eq. (19.15)
to account for effects of the D/h ratio and friction:
F ¼ Kf Yf A
ð19:16Þ
where F, Yf, and A have the same definitions as in the previous equation; and Kf is the
forging shape factor, defined as
Kf ¼ 1 þ 0:4 mD
h
ð19:17Þ
where m ¼ coefficient of friction; D ¼ workpart diameter or other dimension representing
contact length with die surface, mm (in); and h ¼ workpart height, mm (in).
Example 19.2
Open-Die Forging
Acylindricalworkpieceissubjectedtoacoldupsetforgingoperation.Thestartingpieceis75
mm inheight and 50mm indiameter. It is reduced inthe operation to a height of 36mm. The
workmaterialhasaflowcurvedefinedbyK¼ 350MPaandn¼ 0.17.Assumeacoefficientof
friction of 0.1. Determine the force as the process begins, at intermediate heights of 62 mm,
49 mm, and at the final height of 36 mm.
Solution:
Workpiece volume V ¼ 75p(502=4) ¼ 147,262 mm3. At the moment contact is
madebytheupperdie,h¼75mmandtheforceF¼0.Atthestartofyielding,hisslightlyless
than 75 mm, and we assume that strain ¼ 0.002, at which the flow stress is
Yf ¼ Ken ¼ 350(0:002)0:17 ¼ 121:7 MPa
The diameter is still approximately D ¼ 50 mm and area A ¼ p(502=4) ¼ 1963.5 mm2. For
these conditions, the adjustment factor Kf is computed as
Kf ¼ 1 þ 0:4(0:1)(50)
75
¼ 1:027
The forging force is
F ¼ 1:027(121:7)(1963:5) ¼ 245; 410 MPa
At h ¼ 62 mm,
e ¼ ln 75
62 ¼ ln(1:21) ¼ 0:1904
Yf ¼ 350(0:1904)17 ¼ 264:0 MPa
Assuming constant volume, and neglecting barreling,
A ¼ 147; 262=62 ¼ 2375:2 mm2 and D ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
4 2375:2
ð
Þ
p
r
¼ 55:0 mm
Kf ¼ 1 þ 0:4 0:1
ð
Þ 55
ð
Þ
62
¼ 1:035
F ¼ 1:035(264)(2375:2) ¼ 649; 303 N
Similarly, at h ¼ 49 mm, F ¼ 955,642 N; and at h ¼ 36 mm, F ¼ 1,467,422 N. The load-
stroke curve in Figure 19.12 was developed from the values in this example.
n
Open-Die Forging Practice
Open-die hot forging is an important industrial process.
Shapes generated by open-die operations are simple; examples include shafts, disks, and
408
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

rings. In some applications, the dies have slightly contoured surfaces that help to shape the
work. In addition, the work must often be manipulated (e.g., rotating in steps) to effect the
desired shape change. Skill of the human operator is a factor in the success of these
operations. An example of open-die forging in the steel industry is the shaping of a large
square cast ingot into a round cross section. Open-die forging operations produce rough
forms, and subsequent operations are required to refine the parts to final geometry and
dimensions. An important contribution of open-die hot-forging is that it creates a favorable
grain flow and metallurgical structure in the metal.
Operations classified as open-die forging or related operations include fullering,
edging, and cogging, illustrated in Figure 19.13. Fullering is a forging operation per-
formed to reduce the cross section and redistribute the metal in a workpart in preparation
for subsequent shape forging. It is accomplished by dies with convex surfaces. Fullering
die cavities are often designed into multi-cavity impression dies, so that the starting bar
can be rough formed before final shaping. Edging is similar to fullering, except that the
dies have concave surfaces.
A cogging operation consists of a sequence of forging compressions along the
length of a workpiece to reduce cross section and increase length. It is used in the steel
industry to produce blooms and slabs from cast ingots. It is accomplished using open dies
with flat or slightly contoured surfaces. The term incremental forging is sometimes used
for this process.
19.3.2 IMPRESSION-DIE FORGING
Impression-die forging, sometimes called closed-die forging, is performed with dies that
contain the inverse of the desired shape of the part. The process is illustrated in a three-step
sequence inFigure 19.14. The raw workpiece is shownas a cylindrical part similar to that used
in the previous open-die operation. As the die closes to its final position, flash is formed by
metalthatflowsbeyondthediecavityandintothesmallgapbetweenthedieplates.Although
this flash must be cut away from the part in a subsequent trimming operation, it actually
serves an important function during impression-dieforging. As the flash begins to form in the
FIGURE 19.12
Upsetting force as a
function of height h and height reduction
(ho  h). This plot is sometimes called
the load stroke curve.
1500
1000
500
0
75
62
49
36
h (mm)
(ho – h)
0
13
26
39
Forging force (1000 N)
Section 19.3/Forging
409

die gap, friction resists continued flow of metal into the gap, thus constraining the bulk of the
work material to remain in the die cavity. In hot forging, metal flow is further restricted
because the thin flash cools quickly against the die plates, thereby increasing its resistance to
deformation. Restricting metal flow in the gap causes the compression pressures on the part
to increase significantly, thus forcing the material to fill the sometimes intricate details of the
die cavity to ensure a high-quality product.
FIGURE 19.13
Several open-die forging operations: (a) fullering, (b) edging, and (c) cogging.
FIGURE 19.14
Sequence in impression-die forging: (1) just prior to initial contact with raw workpiece,
(2) partial compression, and (3) ﬁnal die closure, causing ﬂash to form in gap between die plates.
410
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

Several forming steps are often required in impression-die forging to transform the
starting blank into the desired final geometry. Separate cavities in the die are needed for
each step. The beginning steps are designed to redistribute the metal in the workpart to
achieve a uniform deformation and desired metallurgical structure in the subsequent steps.
The final steps bring the part to its final geometry. In addition, when drop forging is used,
several blows of the hammer may be required for each step. When impression-die drop
forging is done manually, as it often is, considerable operator skill is required under adverse
conditions to achieve consistent results.
Becauseofflashformationinimpression-dieforgingandthemorecomplexpartshapes
made with these dies, forces in this process are significantly greater and more difficult to
analyzethaninopen-dieforging.Relativelysimpleformulasanddesignfactorsareoftenused
to estimate forces in impression-die forging. The force formula is the same as previous Eq.
(19.16) for open-die forging, but its interpretation is slightly different:
F ¼ Kf Yf A
ð19:18Þ
where F ¼ maximum force in theoperation, N (lb); A ¼ projected area of the part including
flash, mm2 (in2); Yf ¼ flow stress of the material, MPa (lb/in2); and Kf ¼ forging shape
factor. In hot forging, the appropriate value of Yf is the yield strength of the metal at the
elevated temperature. In other cases, selecting the proper value of flow stress is difficult
becausethestrainvariesthroughouttheworkpieceforcomplexshapes.KfinEq.(19.18)isa
factor intended to account for increases in force required to forge part shapes of various
complexities. Table 19.1 indicates the range of values of Kf for different part geometries.
Obviously, the problem of specifying the proper Kf value for a given workpart limits the
accuracy of the force estimate.
Eq.(19.18)appliestothemaximumforceduringtheoperation,sincethisistheloadthat
will determine the required capacity of the press or hammer used in the operation. The
maximum force is reached at the end of the forging stroke, when the projected area is greatest
and friction is maximum.
Impression-die forging is not capable of close tolerance work, and machining is
often required to achieve the accuracies needed. The basic geometry of the part is
obtained from the forging process, with machining performed on those portions of the
part that require precision finishing (e.g., holes, threads, and surfaces that mate with other
components). The advantages of forging, compared to machining the part completely, are
higher production rates, conservation of metal, greater strength, and favorable grain
orientation of the metal that results from forging. A comparison of the grain flow in
forging and machining is illustrated in Figure 19.15.
Improvements in the technology of impression-die forging have resulted in the
capability to produce forgings with thinner sections, more complex geometries, drastic
reductions in draft requirements on the dies, closer tolerances, and the virtual elimination
of machining allowances. Forging processes with these features are known as precision
forging. Common work metals used for precision forging include aluminum and titanium. A
comparisonofprecisionandconventionalimpression-dieforgingispresentedinFigure19.16.
Note that precision forging in this example does not eliminate flash, although it reduces it.
TABLE 19.1
Typical Kf values for various part shapes in impression-die and
ﬂashless forging.
Part Shape
Kf
Part Shape
Kf
Impression-die forging:
Flashless forging:
Simple shapes with flash
6.0
Coining (top and bottom surfaces)
6.0
Complex shapes with flash
8.0
Complex shapes
8.0
Very complex shapes with flash
10.0
Section 19.3/Forging
411

Some precision forging operations are accomplished without producing flash. Depending on
whether machining is required to finish the part geometry, precision forgings are properly
classified as near net shape or net shape processes.
19.3.3 FLASHLESS FORGING
As mentioned above, impression-die forging is sometimes called closed-die forging in
industry terminology. However, there is a technical distinction between impression-die
forging and true closed-die forging. The distinction is that in closed-die forging, the raw
workpiece is completely contained within the die cavity during compression, and no flash is
formed. The process sequence is illustrated in Figure 19.17. The term flashless forging is
appropriate to identify this process.
Flashless forging imposes requirements on process control that are more demand-
ing than impression-die forging. Most important is that the work volume must equal the
space in the die cavity within a very close tolerance. If the starting blank is too large,
excessive pressures may cause damage to the die or press. If the blank is too small, the
cavity will not be filled. Because of the special demands made by flashless forging, the
process lends itself best to part geometries that are usuallysimpleandsymmetrical,andto
work materialssuch as aluminum and magnesium and their alloys. Flashless forging is often
classified as a precision forging process [5].
Forces in flashless forging reach values comparable to those in impression-die
forging. Estimates of these forces can be computed using the same methods as for
impression-die forging: Eq. (19.18) and Table 19.1.
Coining is a special application of closed-die forging in which fine details in the die
are impressed into the top and bottom surfaces of the workpart. There is little flow of
metal in coining, yet the pressures required to reproduce the surface details in the die
cavity are high, as indicated by the value of Kf in Table 19.1. A common application of
FIGURE 19.15
Comparison of metal
grain ﬂow in a part that
is: (a) hot forged with
ﬁnish machining, and
(b) machined complete.
FIGURE 19.16
Cross sections of
(a) conventional- and
(b) precision forgings.
Dashed lines in
(a) indicate subsequent
machining required to
make the conventional
forging equivalent in
geometry to the
precision forging. In both
cases, ﬂash extensions
must be trimmed.
412
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

coining is, of course, in the minting of coins, shown in Figure 19.18. The process is also
used to provide good surface finish and dimensional accuracy on workparts made by
other operations.
19.3.4 FORGING HAMMERS, PRESSES, AND DIES
Equipment used in forging consists of forging machines, classified as hammers or presses,
and forging dies, which are the special tooling used in these machines. In addition, auxiliary
equipment is needed, such as furnaces to heat the work, mechanical devices to load and
unload the work, and trimming stations to cut away the flash in impression-die forging.
Forging Hammers
Forging hammers operate by applying an impact loading against the
work. The term drop hammer is often used for these machines, owing to the means of
delivering impact energy (see Figures 19.19 and 19.20). Drop hammers are most frequently
FIGURE 19.17
Flashless forging: (1) just
before initial contact with
workpiece, (2) partial
compression, and (3) ﬁnal
punch and die closure.
Symbols v and F indicate
motion (v ¼ velocity) and
applied force,
respectively.
FIGURE 19.18
Coining operation: (1) start of cycle, (2) compression stroke, and (3) ejection of ﬁnished part.
Section 19.3/Forging
413

used for impression-die forging. The upper portion of the forging die is attached to the ram,
andthelowerportionisattachedtotheanvil.Intheoperation,theworkisplacedonthelower
die, and the ram is lifted and then dropped. When the upper die strikes the work, the impact
energy causes the part to assume the form of the die cavity. Several blows of the hammer are
often required to achieve the desired change in shape. Drop hammers can be classified as
gravitydrophammersandpowerdrophammers.Gravitydrophammersachievetheirenergy
by the falling weight of a heavy ram. The force of the blow is determined by the height of the
dropandthe weight of theram.Power drophammersacceleratetheramby pressurizedair or
steam. One of the disadvantages of drop hammers is that a large amount of the impact energy
is transmitted through the anvil and into the floor of the building.
FIGURE 19.19
Drop
forging hammer, fed by
conveyor and heating
units at the right of the
scene. (Photo courtesy of
Chambersburg
Engineering Company,
Chambersburg,
Pennsylvania)
FIGURE 19.20
Diagram showing details
of a drop hammer for impression-die
forging.
Head (containing
cylinder)
Piston rod
Frame
Ram
Anvil
414
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

Forging Presses
Pressesapplygradualpressure,ratherthansuddenimpact,toaccomplish
the forging operation. Forging presses include mechanical presses, hydraulic presses, and
screw presses. Mechanical presses operate by means of eccentrics, cranks, or knuckle joints,
which convert the rotating motion of a drive motor into the translation motion of the ram.
These mechanisms are very similar to those used in stamping presses (Section 20.5.2).
Mechanical presses typically achieve very high forces at the bottom of the forging stroke.
Hydraulic presses use a hydraulically driven piston to actuate the ram. Screw presses apply
force by a screw mechanismthat drives the vertical ram. Bothscrew drive andhydraulic drive
operate at relatively low ram speeds and can provide a constant force throughout the stroke.
Thesemachinesarethereforesuitableforforging(andotherforming)operationsthatrequire
a long stroke.
Forging Dies
Proper die design is important in the success of a forging operation. Parts to
be forged must be designed based on knowledge of the principles and limitations of this
process. Our purpose here is to describe some of the terminology and guidelines used in the
design of forgings and forging dies. Design of open dies is generally straightforward because
the dies are relatively simple in shape. Our comments apply to impression dies and closed
dies. Figure 19.21 defines some of the terminology in an impression die.
We indicate some of the principles and limitations that must be considered in the
part design or in the selection of forging as the manufacturing process to make the part in
the following discussion of forging die terminology [5]:

Parting line. The parting line is the plane that divides the upper die from the lower die.
Called the flash line in impression-die forging, it is the plane where the two die halves
meet. Its selection by the designer affects grain flow in the part, required load, and flash
formation.

Draft. Draft is the amount of taper on the sides of the part required to remove it from
the die. The term also applies to the taper on the sides of the die cavity. Typical draft
angles are 3 onaluminumand magnesiumpartsand 5 to 7 onsteelparts. Draftangles
on precision forgings are near zero.

Webs and ribs. Aweb is a thin portion of the forging that is parallel to the parting line,
while a rib is a thin portion that is perpendicular to the parting line. These part features
cause difficulty in metal flow as they become thinner.

Fillet and corner radii. Fillet and corner radii are illustrated in Figure 19.21. Small
radii tend to limit metal flow and increase stresses on die surfaces during forging.

Flash. Flash formation plays a critical role in impression-die forging by causing
pressure buildup inside the die to promote filling of the cavity. This pressure buildup
FIGURE 19.21
Terminology for a
conventional impression-
die in forging.
Section 19.3/Forging
415

iscontrolledbydesigninga flashlandandgutter intothedie, aspictured inFigure19.21.
The land determines the surface area along which lateral flow of metal occurs, thereby
controlling the pressure increase inside the die. The gutter permits excess metal to
escape without causing the forging load to reach extreme values.
19.4
OTHER DEFORMATION PROCESSES RELATED TO FORGING
In addition to the conventional forging operations discussed in the preceding sections,
other metal forming operations are closely associated with forging.
Upsetting and Heading
Upsetting (also called upset forging) is a deformation operation
in which a cylindrical workpart is increased in diameter and reduced in length. This operation
was analyzed in our discussion of open-die forging (Section 19.3.1). However, as an industrial
operation, it can also be performed as closed-die forging, as seen in Figure 19.22.
Upsetting is widely used in the fastener industry to form heads on nails, bolts, and
similar hardware products. In these applications, the term heading is often used to denote the
operation. Figure 19.23 illustrates a variety of heading applications, indicating various
possible die configurations. Owing to these types of applications, more parts are produced
FIGURE 19.23
Examples of heading
(upset forging)
operations: (a) heading
a nail using open dies,
(b) round head formed by
punch, (c) and (d) heads
formed by die, and
(e) carriage bolt head
formed by punch and die.
FIGURE 19.22
An upset forging operation to form a head on a bolt or similar hardware item. The cycle is as
follows: (1) wire stock is fed to the stop; (2) gripping dies close on the stock and the stop is retracted; (3) punch
moves forward; and (4) bottoms to form the head.
416
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

by upsetting than by any other forging operation. It is performed as a mass-production
operation—cold,warm,orhot—onspecialupsetforgingmachines,calledheadersorformers.
These machines are usually equipped with horizontal slides, rather than vertical slides as in
conventional forging hammers and presses. Long wire or bar stock is fed into the machines,
the end of the stock is upset forged, and then the piece is cut to length to make the desired
hardware item. For bolts and screws, thread rolling (Section 19.2) is used to form the threads.
There are limits on the amount of deformation that can be achieved in upsetting,
usually defined as the maximum length of stock to be forged. The maximum length that can
be upset in one blow is three times the diameter of the starting stock. Otherwise, the metal
bends or buckles instead of compressing properly to fill the cavity.
Swaging and Radial Forging
Swaging and radial forging are forging processes used to
reduce the diameter of a tube or solid rod. Swaging is often performed on the end of a
workpiece to create a tapered section. The swaging process, shown in Figure 19.24, is
accomplished by means of rotating dies that hammer a workpiece radially inward to taper it
as the piece is fed into the dies. Figure 19.25 illustrates some of the shapes and products that
are made by swaging. A mandrel is sometimes required to control the shape and size of the
internal diameter of tubular parts that are swaged. Radial forging is similar to swaging in its
actionagainsttheworkandisusedtocreatesimilarpartshapes.Thedifferenceisthatinradial
forging the dies do not rotate around the workpiece; instead, the work is rotated as it feeds
into the hammering dies.
Roll Forging
Roll forging is a deformation process used to reduce the cross section of a
cylindrical (or rectangular) workpiece by passing it through a set of opposing rolls that have
grooves matching the desired shape of the final part. The typical operation is illustrated in
Figure 19.26. Roll forging is generally classified as a forging process even though it utilizes
rolls. The rolls do not turn continuously in roll forging, but rotate through only a portion of
one revolution corresponding to the desired deformation to be accomplished on the part.
FIGURE 19.24
Swaging
process to reduce solid
rod stock; the dies rotate
as they hammer the
work. In radial forging,
the workpiece rotates
while the dies remain in a
ﬁxed orientation as they
hammer the work.
FIGURE 19.25
Examples of parts made
by swaging: (a) reduction
of solid stock,
(b) tapering a tube,
(c) swaging to form a
groove on a tube,
(d) pointing of a tube,
and (e) swaging of neck
on a gas cylinder.
Section 19.4/Other Deformation Processes Related to Forging
417

Roll-forged parts are generally stronger and possess favorable grain structure compared to
competing processes such as machining that might be used to produce the same part
geometry.
Orbital Forging
Inthisprocess, deformation occursbymeansofacone-shaped upper die
that is simultaneously rolled and pressed into the workpart. As illustrated in Figure 19.27,
the work is supported on a lower die, which has a cavity into which the work is compressed.
Because the axis of the cone is inclined, only a small area of the work surface is compressed
at any moment. As the upper die revolves, the area under compression also revolves. These
operating characteristics of orbital forging result in a substantial reduction in press load
required to accomplish deformation of the work.
FIGURE 19.26
Roll forging.
FIGURE 19.27
Orbital forging. At end of deformation cycle, lower die lifts to eject part.
418
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

Hubbing
Hubbing is a deformation process in which a hardened steel form is pressed
into a soft steel (or other soft metal) block. The process is often used to make mold cavities
for plastic molding and die casting, as sketched in Figure 19.28. The hardened steel form,
called the hub, is machined to the geometry of the part to be molded. Substantial pressures
are required to force the hub into the soft block, and this is usually accomplished by a
hydraulic press. Complete formation of the die cavity in the block often requires several
steps—hubbing followed by annealing to recover the work metal from strain hardening.
When significant amounts of material are deformed in the block, as shown in our
figure, the excess must be machined away. The advantage of hubbing in this application is
that it is generally easier to machine the positive form than the mating negative cavity.
This advantage is multiplied in cases where more than one cavity are made in the die
block.
Isothermal Forging
Isothermal forging is a term applied to a hot-forging operation in
which the workpart is maintained at or near its starting elevated temperature during
deformation, usually by heating the forging dies to the same elevated temperature. By
avoiding chill of the workpiece on contact with the cold die surfaces as in conventional
forging, the metal flows more readily and the force required to perform the process is
reduced. Isothermal forging is more expensive than conventional forging and is usually
reserved for difficult-to-forge metals, such as titanium and superalloys, and for complex
part shapes. The process is sometimes carried out in a vacuum to avoid rapid oxidation of
the die material. Similar to isothermal forging is hot-die forging, in which the dies are
heated to a temperature that is somewhat below that of the work metal.
Trimming
Trimming is an operation used to remove flash on the workpart in impres-
sion-die forging. In most cases, trimming is accomplished by shearing, as in Figure 19.29,
in which a punch forces the work through a cutting die, the blades for which have the
profile of the desired part. Trimming is usually done while the work is still hot, which
means that a separate trimming press is included at each forging hammer or press. In
cases where the work might be damaged by the cutting process, trimming may be done by
alternative methods, such as grinding or sawing.
FIGURE 19.28
Hubbing: (1) before
deformation, and (2) as
the process is completed.
Note that the excess
material formed by the
penetration of the hub
must be machined away.
Section 19.4/Other Deformation Processes Related to Forging
419

19.5
EXTRUSION
Extrusion is a compression process in which the work metal is forced to flow through a die
openingtoproduceadesiredcross-sectionalshape.Theprocesscanbelikenedtosqueezing
toothpaste out of a toothpaste tube. Extrusion dates from around 1800 (Historical Note
19.3). There are several advantages of the modern process: (1) a variety of shapes are
possible, especially with hot extrusion; (2) grain structure and strength properties are
enhanced in cold and warm extrusion; (3) fairly close tolerances are possible, especially in
cold extrusion; and (4) in some extrusion operations, little or no wasted material is created.
However, a limitation is that the cross section of the extruded part must be uniform
throughout its length.
19.5.1 TYPES OF EXTRUSION
Extrusioniscarriedoutinvariousways.Oneimportantdistinctionisbetweendirectextrusion
and indirect extrusion. Another classification is by working temperature: cold, warm, or hot
extrusion. Finally, extrusion is performed as either a continuous process or a discrete process.
Direct versus Indirect Extrusion
Direct extrusion (also called forward extrusion) is
illustrated in Figure 19.30. A metal billet is loaded into a container, and a ram
compresses the material, forcing it to flow through one or more openings in a die at
the opposite end of the container. As the ram approaches the die, a small portion of the
billet remains that cannot be forced through the die opening. This extra portion, called
the butt, is separated from the product by cutting it just beyond the exit of the die.
FIGURE 19.29
Trimming operation
(shearing process) to remove the ﬂash
after impression-die forging.
Historical Note 19.3
Extrusion
Extrusion as an industrial process was invented around
1800 in England, during the Industrial Revolution when
that country was leading the world in technological
innovations. The invention consisted of the ﬁrst hydraulic
press for extruding lead pipes. An important step forward
was made in Germany around 1890, when the ﬁrst
horizontal extrusion press was built for extruding metals
with higher melting points than lead. The feature that
made this possible was the use of a dummy block that
separated the ram from the work billet.
420
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

Oneoftheproblemsindirectextrusionisthesignificantfrictionthatexistsbetweenthe
work surface and the walls of the container as the billet is forced to slide toward the die
opening. This friction causes a substantial increase in the ram force required in direct
extrusion. In hot extrusion, the friction problem is aggravated by the presence of an oxide
layeronthesurfaceofthebillet.Thisoxidelayercancausedefectsintheextrudedproduct.To
address these problems, a dummy block is often used between the ram and the work billet.
The diameter of the dummy block isslightly smaller than the billet diameter, so that a narrow
ring of work metal (mostly the oxide layer) is left in the container, leaving the final product
free of oxides.
Hollow sections (e.g., tubes) are possible in direct extrusion by the process setup in
Figure19.31.Thestartingbilletispreparedwithaholeparalleltoitsaxis.Thisallowspassageofa
mandrelthatisattachedtothedummyblock.Asthebilletiscompressed,thematerialisforced
to flow through the clearance between the mandrel and the die opening. The resulting cross
section is tubular. Semi-hollow cross-sectional shapes are usually extruded in the same way.
The starting billet in direct extrusion is usually round in cross section, but the final
shape is determined by the shape of the die opening. Obviously, the largest dimension of
the die opening must be smaller than the diameter of the billet.
In indirect extrusion, also called backward extrusion and reverse extrusion, Fig-
ure 19.32(a), the die is mounted to the ram rather than at the opposite end of the container.
As the ram penetrates into the work, the metal is forced to flow through the clearance in a
FIGURE 19.30
Direct
extrusion.
FIGURE 19.31
(a) Direct extrusion to
produce a hollow or
semi-hollow cross
section; (b) hollow and
(c) semi-hollow cross
sections.
Section 19.5/Extrusion
421

direction opposite to the motion of the ram. Since the billet is not forced to move relative
tothecontainer,thereisnofrictionatthecontainerwalls,andtheramforceisthereforelower
than in direct extrusion. Limitations of indirect extrusion are imposed by the lower rigidity of
the hollow ram and the difficulty in supporting the extruded product as it exits the die.
Indirect extrusion can produce hollow (tubular) cross sections, as in Figure 19.32(b). In
this method, theram ispressed into thebillet, forcing the materialtoflow aroundthe ramand
take a cup shape. There are practical limitations on the length of the extrudedpart that can be
made by this method. Support of the ram becomes a problem as work length increases.
Hot versus Cold Extrusion
Extrusion can be performedeitherhot or cold, depending on
workmetaland amount of straintowhich itissubjectedduring deformation.Metalsthatare
typically extruded hot include aluminum, copper, magnesium, zinc, tin, and their alloys.
These same metals are sometimes extruded cold. Steel alloys are usually extruded hot,
althoughthesofter, more ductilegradesare sometimescoldextruded(e.g.,lowcarbonsteels
and stainlesssteel). Aluminum isprobablythe mostideal metal for extrusion (hot and cold),
and many commercial aluminum products are made by this process (structural shapes, door
and window frames, etc.).
Hot extrusion involves prior heating of the billet to a temperature above its
recrystallization temperature. This reduces strength and increases ductility of the
metal, permitting more extreme size reductions and more complex shapes to be
achieved in the process. Additional advantages include reduction of ram force,
increased ram speed, and reduction of grain flow characteristics in the final product.
Cooling of the billet as it contacts the container walls is a problem, and isothermal
extrusion is sometimes used to overcome this problem. Lubrication is critical in hot
extrusion for certain metals (e.g., steels), and special lubricants have been developed
that are effective under the harsh conditions in hot extrusion. Glass is sometimes used
as a lubricant in hot extrusion; in addition to reducing friction, it also provides effective
thermal insulation between the billet and the extrusion container.
Cold extrusion andwarmextrusionare generally used toproducediscrete parts, often
in finished (or near finished) form. The term impact extrusion is used to indicate high-speed
coldextrusion,andthismethodisdescribedinmoredetailinSection19.5.4.Someimportant
advantages of cold extrusion include increased strength due to strain hardening, close
tolerances, improved surface finish, absence of oxide layers, and high production rates. Cold
extrusion at room temperature also eliminates the need for heating the starting billet.
Continuous versus Discrete Processing
A true continuous process operates in steady
state mode for an indefinite period of time. Some extrusion operations approach this ideal
Container
Container
Work billet
Die
Work billet
Die
Hollow ram
Ram
Final work
shape
Final work
shape
F, v
v, F
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 19.32
Indirect extrusion to produce (a) a solid cross section and (b) a hollow cross section.
422
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

by producing very long sections in one cycle, but these operations are ultimately limited by
thesizeofthestartingbillet thatcanbeloadedintotheextrusioncontainer. Theseprocesses
are more accurately described as semi-continuous operations. In nearly all cases, the long
section is cut into smaller lengths in a subsequent sawing or shearing operation.
In a discrete extrusion operation, a single part is produced in each extrusion cycle.
Impact extrusion is an example of the discrete processing case.
19.5.2 ANALYSIS OF EXTRUSION
Let us use Figure 19.33 as a reference indiscussing some of theparametersin extrusion.The
diagram assumes that both billet and extrudate are round in cross section. One important
parameter is the extrusion ratio, also called the reduction ratio. The ratio is defined:
rx ¼ Ao
Af
ð19:19Þ
where rx¼ extrusionratio;Ao¼ cross-sectionalareaof thestartingbillet,mm2(in2); andAf ¼
final cross-sectional area of the extruded section, mm2 (in2). The ratio applies for both direct
and indirect extrusion. The value of rx can be used to determine true strain in extrusion, given
that ideal deformation occurs with no friction and no redundant work:
e ¼ lnrx ¼ ln Ao
Af
ð19:20Þ
Under the assumption of ideal deformation (no friction and no redundant work), the
pressure applied by the ram to compress the billet through the die opening depicted in our
figure can be computed as follows:
p ¼ Yf ln rx
ð19:21Þ
where Yf ¼ average flow stress during deformation, MPa (lb/in2). For convenience, we
restate Eq. (18.2) from the previous chapter:
Yf ¼ Ken
1 þ n
In fact, extrusion is not a frictionless process, and the previous equations grossly
underestimate the strain and pressure in an extrusion operation. Friction exists between
the die and the work as the billet squeezes down and passes through the die opening. In
direct extrusion, friction also exists between the container wall and the billet surface. The
effect of friction is to increase the strain experienced by the metal. Thus, the actual
pressure is greater than that given by Eq. (19.21), which assumes no friction.
FIGURE 19.33
Pressure
and other variables in
direct extrusion.
Section 19.5/Extrusion
423

Various methods have been suggested to calculate the actual true strain and
associated ram pressure in extrusion [1], [3], [6], [11], [12], and [19]. The following
empirical equation proposed by Johnson [11] for estimating extrusion strain has gained
considerable recognition:
ex ¼ a þ b ln rx
ð19:22Þ
where ex ¼ extrusion strain; and a and b are empirical constants for a given die angle.
Typical values of these constants are: a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.2 to 1.5. Values of a and b tend to
increase with increasing die angle.
The ram pressure to perform indirect extrusion can be estimated based on
Johnson’s extrusion strain formula as follows:
p ¼ Yfex
ð19:23aÞ
where Yf is calculated based on ideal strain from Eq. (19.20), rather than extrusion strain
in Eq. (19.22).
In direct extrusion, the effect of friction between the container walls and the billet
causes the ram pressure to be greater than for indirect extrusion. We can write the following
expression which isolates the friction force in the direct extrusion container:
pfpD2
o
4
¼ mpcpDoL
where pf ¼ additional pressure required to overcome friction, MPa (lb/in2); pDo
2=4 ¼
billet cross-sectional area, mm2 (in2); m ¼ coefficient of friction at the container wall; pc ¼
pressure of the billet against the container wall, MPa (lb/in2); and pDoL ¼ area of the
interface between billetand container wall,mm2 (in2). The right-handside of thisequation
indicates the billet-container friction force, and the left-hand side gives the additional ram
force to overcome that friction. In the worst case, sticking occurs at the container wall so
that friction stress equals shear yield strength of the work metal:
mpspDoL ¼ YspDoL
where Ys ¼ shear yield strength, MPa (lb/in2). If we assume that Ys ¼ Yf=2, then pf
reduces to the following:
pf ¼ Yf
2L
Do
Based on this reasoning, the following formula can be used to compute ram pressure in
direct extrusion:
p ¼ Yf
ex þ 2L
Do


ð19:23bÞ
where the term 2L/Do accounts for the additional pressure due to friction at the container–
billet interface. L is the portion of the billet length remaining to be extruded, and Do is the
original diameter of the billet. Note that p is reduced as the remaining billet length decreases
during the process. Typical plots of ram pressure as a function of ram stroke for direct and
indirect extrusion are presented in Figure 19.34. Eq. (19.23b) probably overestimates ram
pressure. With good lubrication, ram pressures would be lower than values calculated by this
equation.
Ram force in indirect or direct extrusion is simply pressure p from Eqs. (19.23a) or
(19.23b), respectively, multiplied by billet area Ao:
F ¼ pAo
ð19:24Þ
424
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

where F ¼ ram force in extrusion, N (lb). Power required to carry out the extrusion
operation is simply
P ¼ Fv
ð19:25Þ
where P ¼ power, J/s (in-lb/min); F ¼ ram force, N (lb); and v ¼ ram velocity, m/s (in/min).
Example 19.3
Extrusion
Pressures
A billet 75 mm long and 25 mm in diameter is to be extruded in a direct extrusion operation
with extrusion ratio rx ¼ 4.0. The extrudate has a round cross section. The die angle (half-
angle) ¼ 90. The work metal has a strength coefficient ¼ 415 MPa, and strain-hardening
exponent ¼ 0.18. Use the Johnson formula with a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.5 to estimate extrusion
strain. Determine the pressure applied to the end of the billet as the ram moves forward.
Solution:
LetusexaminetherampressureatbilletlengthsofL¼75mm(startingvalue),
L ¼ 50 mm, L ¼ 25 mm, and L ¼ 0. We compute the ideal true strain, extrusion strain using
Johnson’s formula, and average flow stress:
e ¼ ln rx ¼ ln 4:0 ¼ 1:3863
ex ¼ 0:8 þ 1:5(1:3863) ¼ 2:8795
Yf ¼ 415(1:3863)0:18
1:18
¼ 373 MPa
L ¼ 75 mm: With a die angle of 90, the billet metal is assumed to be forced through the die
opening almost immediately; thus, our calculation assumes that maximum pressure is
reached at the billet length of 75 mm. For die angles less than 90, the pressure would build
to a maximum as in Figure 19.34 as the starting billet is squeezed into the cone-shaped
portion of the extrusion die. Using Eq. (19.23b),
p ¼ 373 2:8795 þ 2 75
25


¼ 3312 MPa
L ¼ 50 mm: p ¼ 373 2:8795 þ 2 50
25


¼ 2566 MPa
L ¼ 25 mm: p ¼ 373 2:8795 þ 2 25
25


¼ 1820 MPa
FIGURE 19.34
Typical plots of
ram pressure versus ram stroke
(and remaining billet length) for
direct and indirect extrusion. The
higher values in direct extrusion
result from friction at the
container wall. The shape of the
initial pressure buildup at the
beginning of the plot depends on
die angle (higher die angles
cause steeper pressure
buildups). The pressure increase
at the end of the stroke is related
to formation of the butt.
Section 19.5/Extrusion
425

L ¼ 0: Zero length is a hypothetical value in direct extrusion. In reality, it is impossible to
squeeze all of the metal through the die opening. Instead, a portion of the billet (the
‘‘butt’’) remains unextruded and the pressure begins to increase rapidly as L approaches
zero. This increase in pressure at the end of the stroke is seen in the plot of ram pressure
versus ram stroke in Figure 19.34. Calculated below is the hypothetical minimum value of
ram pressure that would result at L ¼ 0.
p ¼ 373 2:8795 þ 2 0
25


¼ 1074 MPa
This is also the value of ram pressure that would be associated with indirect extrusion
throughout the length of the billet.
n
19.5.3 EXTRUSION DIES AND PRESSES
Important factors in an extrusion die are die angle and orifice shape. Die angle, more
precisely die half-angle, is shown as a in Figure 19.35(a). For low angles, surface area of the
die is large, leading to increased friction at the die–billet interface. Higher friction results in
larger ram force. On the other hand, a large die angle causes more turbulence in the metal
flow during reduction, increasing the ram force required. Thus, the effect of die angle on
ram force is a U-shaped function, as in Figure 19.35(b). An optimum die angle exists, as
suggested by our hypothetical plot. The optimum angle depends on various factors (e.g.,
work material, billet temperature, and lubrication) and is therefore difficult to determine
for a given extrusion job. Die designers rely on rules of thumb and judgment to decide the
appropriate angle.
Our previous equations for ram pressure, Eqs. (19.23a), apply to a circular die
orifice. The shape of the die orifice affects the ram pressure required to perform an
extrusion operation. A complex cross section, such as the one shown in Figure 19.36,
requires a higher pressure and greater force than a circular shape. The effect of the die
orifice shape can be assessed by the die shape factor, defined as the ratio of the pressure
required to extrude a cross section of a given shape relative to the extrusion pressure for a
round cross section of the same area. We can express the shape factor as follows:
Kx ¼ 0:98 þ 0:02 Cx
Cc

2:25
ð19:26Þ
where Kx ¼ die shape factor in extrusion; Cx ¼ perimeter of the extruded cross section, mm
(in); and Cc ¼ perimeter of a circle of the same area as the extruded shape, mm (in). Eq.
FIGURE 19.35
(a) Deﬁnition of die angle
in direct extrusion;
(b) effect of die angle on
ram force.
426
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

(19.26) is based on empirical data in Altan et al. [1] over a range of Cx/Cc values from 1.0 to
about 6.0. The equation may be invalid much beyond the upper limit of this range.
As indicated by Eq. (19.26), the shape factor is a function of the perimeter of the
extruded cross section divided by the perimeter of a circular cross section of equal area. A
circular shape is the simplest shape, with a value of Kx ¼ 1.0. Hollow, thin-walled sections
have higher shape factors and are more difficult to extrude. The increase in pressure is not
included in our previous pressure equations, Eqs. (19.23a and 19.23b), which apply only
to round cross sections. For shapes other than round, the corresponding expression for
indirect extrusion is
p ¼ KxYf ex
ð19:27aÞ
and for direct extrusion,
p ¼ KxYf
ex þ 2L
Do


ð19:27bÞ
where p ¼ extrusion pressure, MPa (lb/in2); Kx ¼ shape factor; and the other terms have
the same interpretation as before. Values of pressure given by these equations can be
used in Eq. (19.24) to determine ram force.
Die materials used for hot extrusion include tool and alloy steels. Important
properties of these die materials include high wear resistance, high hot hardness, and
high thermal conductivity to remove heat from the process. Die materials for cold
extrusion include tool steels and cemented carbides. Wear resistance and ability to retain
shape under high stress are desirable properties. Carbides are used when high production
rates, long die life, and good dimensional control are required.
FIGURE 19.36
A complex extruded cross section for a heat sink. (Photo courtesy of Aluminum
Company of America, Pittsburg, Pennsylvania.)
Section 19.5/Extrusion
427

Extrusion presses are either horizontal or vertical, depending on orientation of the
work axis. Horizontal types are more common. Extrusion presses are usually hydraulically
driven. This drive is especially suited to semi-continuous production of long sections, as in
direct extrusion. Mechanical drives are often used for cold extrusion of individual parts,
such as in impact extrusion.
19.5.4 OTHER EXTRUSION PROCESSES
Direct and indirect extrusion are the principal methods of extrusion. Various names are
given to operations that are special cases of the direct and indirect methods described here.
Other extrusion operations are unique. In this section we examine some of these special
forms of extrusion and related processes.
Impact Extrusion
Impact extrusion is performed at higher speeds and shorter strokes
than conventional extrusion. It is used to make individual components. As the name
suggests, the punch impacts the workpart rather than simply applying pressure to it.
Impacting can be carried out as forward extrusion, backward extrusion, or combina-
tions of these. Some representative examples are shown in Figure 19.37.
FIGURE 19.37
Several examples of impact extrusion: (a) forward, (b) backward, and (c) combination of forward
and backward.
428
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

Impact extrusion is usually done cold on a variety of metals. Backward impact
extrusion is most common. Products made by this process include toothpaste tubes and
battery cases. As indicated by these examples, very thin walls are possible on impact
extruded parts. The high-speed characteristics of impacting permit large reductions and
high production rates, making this an important commercial process.
Hydrostatic Extrusion
One of the problems in direct extrusion isfriction along the billet–
container interface. This problem can be addressed by surrounding the billet with fluid inside
the container and pressurizing the fluid by the forward motion of the ram, as in Figure 19.38.
This way, there is no friction inside the container, and friction at the die opening is reduced.
Consequently, ram force is significantly lower than in direct extrusion. The fluid pressure
acting on all surfaces of the billet gives the process its name. It can be carried out at room
temperature or at elevated temperatures. Special fluids and procedures must be used at
elevated temperatures. Hydrostatic extrusion is an adaptation of direct extrusion.
Hydrostatic pressure on the work increases the material’s ductility. Accordingly, this
processcanbeusedonmetalsthatwouldbetoobrittleforconventional extrusionoperations.
Ductile metals can also be hydrostatically extruded, and high reduction ratios are possible on
these materials. One of the disadvantages of the process is the required preparation of the
starting work billet. The billet must be formed with a taper at one end to fit snugly into the die
entry angle. This establishes a seal to prevent fluid from squirting out the die hole when the
container is initially pressurized.
19.5.5 DEFECTS IN EXTRUDED PRODUCTS
Owing to the considerable deformation associated with extrusion operations, a number
of defects can occur in extruded products. The defects can be classified into the following
categories, illustrated in Figure 19.39:
FIGURE 19.38
Hydrostatic extrusion.
FIGURE 19.39
Some common
defects in extrusion: (a) centerburst,
(b) piping, and (c) surface cracking.
Section 19.5/Extrusion
429

(a) Centerburst. This defect is an internal crack that develops as a result of tensile stresses
along the centerline of the workpart during extrusion. Although tensile stresses may
seem unlikely in a compression process such as extrusion, they tend to occur under
conditions that cause large deformation in the regions of the work away from the central
axis. The significant material movement in these outer regions stretches the material
along the center of the work. If stresses are great enough, bursting occurs. Conditions
that promote centerburst are high die angles, low extrusion ratios, and impurities in the
work metal that serve as starting points for crack defects. The difficult aspect of
centerburst is its detection. It is an internal defect that is usually not noticeable by
visual observation. Other names sometimes used for this defect include arrowhead
fracture, center cracking, and chevron cracking.
(b) Piping. Piping is a defect associated with direct extrusion. As in Figure 19.39(b), it is
the formation of a sink hole in the end of the billet. The use of a dummy block whose
diameter is slightly less than that of the billet helps to avoid piping. Other names given
to this defect include tailpipe and fishtailing.
(c) Surface cracking. This defect results from high workpart temperatures that cause cracks
to develop at the surface. They often occur when extrusion speed is too high, leading to
high strain rates and associated heat generation. Other factors contributing to surface
cracking are high friction and surface chilling of high temperature billets in hot extrusion.
19.6
WIRE AND BAR DRAWING
In the context of bulk deformation, drawing is an operation in which the cross section of a
bar, rod, or wire is reduced by pulling it through a die opening, as in Figure 19.40. The
general features of the process are similar to those of extrusion. The difference is that the
work is pulled through the die in drawing, whereas it is pushed through the die in
extrusion. Although the presence of tensile stresses is obvious in drawing, compression
also plays a significant role because the metal is squeezed down as it passes through the
die opening. For this reason, the deformation that occurs in drawing is sometimes
referred to as indirect compression. Drawing is a term also used in sheet metalworking
(Section 20.3). The term wire and bar drawing is used to distinguish the drawing process
discussed here from the sheet metal process of the same name.
The basic difference between bar drawing and wire drawing is the stock size that is
processed. Bar drawing is the term used for large diameter bar and rod stock, while wire
drawing applies to small diameter stock. Wire sizes down to 0.03 mm (0.001 in) are
possible in wire drawing. Although the mechanics of the process are the same for the two
cases, the methods, equipment, and even the terminology are somewhat different.
Bar drawing is generally accomplished as a single-draft operation—the stock is
pulled through one die opening. Because the beginning stock has a large diameter, it is in
FIGURE 19.40
Drawing
of bar, rod, or wire.
430
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

the form of a straight cylindrical piece rather than coiled. This limits the length of the
work that can be drawn, necessitating a batch type operation. By contrast, wire is drawn
from coils consisting of several hundred (or even several thousand) feet of wire and is
passed through a series of draw dies. The number of dies varies typically between 4 and
12. The term continuous drawing is used to describe this type of operation because of the
long production runs that are achieved with the wire coils, which can be butt-welded each
to the next to make the operation truly continuous.
In a drawing operation, the change in size of the work is usually given by the area
reduction, defined as follows:
r ¼ Ao  Af
Ao
ð19:28Þ
where r ¼ area reduction in drawing; Ao ¼ original area of work, mm2 (in2); and Af ¼ final
area, mm2 (in2). Area reduction is often expressed as a percentage.
In bar drawing, rod drawing, and in drawing of large diameter wire for upsetting
and heading operations, the term draft is used to denote the before and after difference in
size of the processed work. The draft is simply the difference between original and final
stock diameters:
d ¼ Do  Df
ð19:29Þ
where d ¼ draft, mm (in); Do ¼ original diameter of work, mm (in); and Df ¼ final work
diameter, mm (in).
19.6.1 ANALYSIS OF DRAWING
In this section, we consider the mechanics of wire and bar drawing. How are stresses and
forces computed in the process? We also consider how large a reduction is possible in a
drawing operation.
Mechanics of Drawing
If no friction or redundant work occurred in drawing, true
strain could be determined as follows:
e ¼ ln Ao
Af
¼ ln
1
1  r
ð19:30Þ
where Ao and Af are the original and final cross-sectional areas of the work, as previously
defined; and r ¼ drawing reduction as given by Eq. (19.28). The stress that results from
this ideal deformation is given by
s ¼ Yfe ¼ Yf ln Ao
Af
ð19:31Þ
where Yf ¼ Ken
1þn ¼ average flow stress based on the value of strain given by Eq. (19.30).
Because friction is present in drawing and the work metal experiences in-
homogeneous deformation, the actual stress is larger than provided by Eq. (19.31). In
addition to the ratio Ao/Af, other variables that influence draw stress are die angle and
coefficient of friction at the work–die interface. A number of methods have been proposed
for predicting draw stress based on values of these parameters [1], [3], and [19]. We present
the equation suggested by Schey [19]:
sd ¼ Yf 1 þ
m
tan a


f ln Ao
Af
ð19:32Þ
where sd ¼ draw stress, MPa (lb/in2); m ¼ die-work coefficient of friction; a ¼ die angle
(half-angle) as defined in Figure 19.40; and f is a factor that accounts for inhomogeneous
Section 19.6/Wire and Bar Drawing
431

deformation which is determined as follows for a round cross section:
f ¼ 0:88  0:12 D
Lc
ð19:33Þ
where D ¼ average diameter of work during drawing, mm (in); and Lc ¼ contact length of
the work with the draw die in Figure 19.40, mm (in). Values of D and Lc can be determined
from the following:
D ¼ Do þ Df
2
ð19:34aÞ
Lc ¼ Do  Df
2 sin a
ð19:34bÞ
The corresponding draw force is then the area of the drawn cross section multiplied by the
draw stress:
F ¼ Afsd ¼ AfYf 1 þ
m
tan a


f ln Ao
Af
ð19:35Þ
where F ¼ draw force, N (lb); and the other terms are defined above. The power required
in a drawing operation is the draw force multiplied by exit velocity of the work.
Example 19.4
Stress and Force
in Wire Drawing
Wire is drawn through a draw die with entrance angle ¼ 15. Starting diameter is 2.5 mm and
final diameter ¼ 2.0 mm. The coefficient of friction at the work–die interface ¼ 0.07. The
metal has a strength coefficient K ¼ 205 MPa and a strain-hardening exponent n ¼ 0.20.
Determine the draw stress and draw force in this operation.
Solution:
ThevaluesofDandLcforEq.(19.33)canbedeterminedusingEqs.(19.34).D¼
2.25 mm and Lc ¼ 0.966 mm. Thus,
f ¼ 0:88 þ 0:12 2:25
0:966 ¼ 1:16
The areasbefore and after drawing arecomputed as Ao ¼ 4.91mm2 andAf ¼ 3.14mm2. The
resulting true strain e ¼ ln(4.91/3.14) ¼ 0.446, and the average flow stress in the operation is
computed:
Yf ¼ 205(0:446)0:20
1:20
¼ 145:4 MPa
Draw stress is given by Eq. (19.32):
sd ¼ (145:4) 1 þ 0:07
tan 15


(1:16)(0:446) ¼ 94:1 MPa
Finally, the draw force is this stress multiplied by the cross-sectional area of the exiting
wire:
F ¼ 94:1(3:14) ¼ 295:5 N
n
Maximum Reduction per Pass
A question that may occur to the reader is: Why is more
than one step required to achieve the desired reduction in wire drawing? Why not take the
entire reduction in a single pass through one die, as in extrusion? The answer can be
explainedasfollows. From the preceding equations, itisclearthatas the reduction increases,
draw stress increases. If the reduction is large enough, draw stress will exceed the yield
432
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

strength of the exiting metal. When that happens, the drawn wire will simply elongate
instead of new material being squeezed through the die opening. For wire drawing to be
successful, maximum draw stress must be less than the yield strength of the exiting metal.
It is a straightforward matter to determine this maximum draw stress and the resulting
maximum possible reduction that can be made in one pass, under certain assumptions. Let us
assume aperfectly plastic metal (n¼ 0), nofriction, andnoredundant work. Inthis idealcase,
the maximum possible draw stress is equal to the yield strength of the work material.
Expressing this using the equation for draw stress under conditions of ideal deformation, Eq.
(19.31), and setting Yf ¼ Y (because n ¼ 0),
sd ¼ Yf ln Ao
Af
¼ Y ln Ao
Af
¼ Y ln
1
1  r ¼ Y
This means that ln(Ao=Af) ¼ ln (1=(1  r)) ¼ 1. That is, emax ¼ 1.0. In order for emax to be
zero, then Ao=Af ¼ 1=(1  r) must equal the natural logarithm base e. Accordingly, the
maximum possible area ratio is
Ao
Af
¼ e ¼ 2:7183
ð19:36Þ
and the maximum possible reduction is
rmax ¼ e  1
e
¼ 0:632
ð19:37Þ
The value given by Eq. (19.37) is often used as the theoretical maximum reduction possible in
a single draw, even though it ignores (1) the effects of friction and redundant work, which
would reduce the maximum possible value, and (2) strain hardening, which would increase
the maximum possible reduction because the exiting wire would be stronger than the starting
metal. In practice, draw reductions per pass are quite below the theoretical limit. Reductions
of 0.50 for single-draft bar drawing and 0.30 for multiple-draft wire drawing seem to be the
upper limits in industrial operations.
19.6.2 DRAWING PRACTICE
Drawing is usually performed as a cold working operation. It is most frequently used to
produce round cross sections, but squares and other shapes are also drawn. Wire drawing
is an important industrial process, providing commercial products such as electrical wire
and cable; wire stock for fences, coat hangers, and shopping carts; and rod stock to
produce nails, screws, rivets, springs, and other hardware items. Bar drawing is used to
produce metal bars for machining, forging, and other processes.
Advantages of drawing in these applications include (1) close dimensional control,
(2) good surface finish, (3) improved mechanical properties such as strength and hardness,
and (4) adaptability to economical batch or mass production. Drawing speeds are as high as
50 m/s (10,000 ft/min) for very fine wire. In the case of bar drawing to provide stock for
machining, the operation improves the machinability of the bar (Section 24.1).
Drawing Equipment
Bar drawing is accomplished on a machine called a draw bench,
consisting of an entry table, die stand (which contains the draw die), carriage, and exit rack.
The arrangement is shown in Figure 19.41. The carriage is used to pull the stock through the
draw die. It is powered by hydraulic cylinders or motor-driven chains. The die stand is often
designed to hold more than one die, so that several bars can be pulled simultaneously
through their respective dies.
Section 19.6/Wire and Bar Drawing
433

Wire drawing is done on continuous drawing machines that consist of multiple draw
dies, separated by accumulating drums between the dies, as in Figure 19.42. Each drum,
called a capstan, is motor driven to provide the proper pull force to draw the wire stock
through the upstream die. It also maintains a modest tension on the wire as it proceeds to
the next draw die in the series. Each die provides a certain amount of reduction in the wire,
so that the desired total reduction is achieved by the series. Depending on the metal to be
processed and the total reduction, annealing of the wire is sometimes required between
groups of dies in the series.
Draw Dies
Figure 19.43 identifies the features of a typical draw die. Four regions of the die
can be distinguished: (1) entry, (2) approach angle, (3) bearing surface (land), and (4) back
relief. The entry region is usually a bell-shaped mouth that does not contact the work. Its
purpose is to funnel the lubricant into the die and prevent scoring of work and die surfaces.
The approach is where the drawing process occurs. It is
cone-shaped with an angle (half-
angle) normally ranging from about 6 to 20. The proper angle varies according to work
FIGURE 19.41
Hydraulically operated
draw bench for drawing
metal bars.
FIGURE 19.42
Continuous drawing of wire.
434
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

material. The bearing surface, or land, determines the size of the final drawn stock. Finally,
the back relief is the exit zone. It is provided with a back relief angle (half-angle) of about
30. Draw dies are made of tool steels or cemented carbides. Dies for high-speed wire
drawing operations frequently use inserts made of diamond (both synthetic and natural) for
the wear surfaces.
Preparation of the Work
Prior to drawing, the beginning stock must be properly
prepared. This involves three steps: (1) annealing, (2) cleaning, and (3) pointing. The
purpose of annealing is to increase the ductility of the stock to accept deformation during
drawing. As previously mentioned, annealing is sometimes needed between steps in
continuous drawing. Cleaning of the stock is required to prevent damage of the work
surface and draw die. It involves removal of surface contaminants (e.g., scale and rust) by
means of chemical pickling or shot blasting. In some cases, prelubrication of the work
surface is accomplished subsequent to cleaning.
Pointing involves the reduction in diameter of the starting end of the stock so that it
can be inserted through the draw die to start the process. This is usually accomplished by
swaging, rolling, or turning. The pointed end of the stock is then gripped by the carriage
jaws or other device to initiate the drawing process.
19.6.3 TUBE DRAWING
Drawing can be used to reduce the diameter or wall thickness of seamless tubes and pipes,
after the initial tubing has been produced by some other process such as extrusion. Tube
drawing can be carried out either with or without a mandrel. The simplest method uses no
mandrel and is used for diameter reduction, as in Figure 19.44. The term tube sinking is
sometimes applied to this operation.
FIGURE 19.44
Tube drawing
with no mandrel (tube sinking).
FIGURE 19.43
Draw
die for drawing of round
rod or wire.
Section 19.6/Wire and Bar Drawing
435

The problem with tube drawing in which no mandrel is used, as in Figure 19.44, is that
it lacks control over the inside diameter and wall thicknessof thetube. This is why mandrels
of various types are used, two of which are illustrated in Figure 19.45. The first, Figure 19.45
(a), usesa fixedmandrel attachedtoa longsupportbar toestablish insidediameterandwall
thickness during the operation. Practical limitations on the length of the support bar in this
method restrictthelength ofthetube that can bedrawn. The second type, shown in(b), uses
a floating plug whose shape is designed so that it finds a ‘‘natural’’ position in the reduction
zone of the die. This method removes the limitations on work length present with the fixed
mandrel.
REFERENCES
[1] Altan, T., Oh, S-I., and Gegel, H. L. Metal Forming:
Fundamentals and Applications. ASM Interna-
tional, Materials Park, Ohio, 1983.
[2] ASM Handbook, Vol. 14A, Metalworking: Bulk
Forming.
ASM
International,
Materials
Park,
Ohio, 2005.
[3] Avitzur, B. Metal Forming: Processes and Analysis.
Robert E. Krieger Publishing Company, Hunting-
ton, New York, 1979.
[4] Black, J. T., and Kohser, R. A., DeGarmo’s Materi-
als and Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed. John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
[5] Byrer, T. G.,et al. (eds.). Forging Handbook. Forging
Industry Association, Cleveland, Ohio; and Ameri-
can Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio, 1985.
[6] Cook, N. H. Manufacturing Analysis. Addison-
Wesley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, Massa-
chusetts, 1966.
[7] Groover, M. P.‘‘An Experimental Study of the Work
Components and Extrusion Strain in the Cold For-
ward Extrusion of Steel,’’ research report. Bethle-
hem Steel Corporation, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania,
1966.
[8] Harris, J. N. Mechanical Working of Metals. Perga-
mon Press, Oxford, UK, 1983.
[9] Hosford, W. F., and Caddell, R. M. Metal Forming:
Mechanics and Metallurgy, 3rd ed. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, UK, 2007.
[10] Jensen, J. E. (ed.). Forging Industry Handbook. Forg-
ing Industry Association, Cleveland, Ohio, 1970.
[11] Johnson, W.‘‘The Pressure for the Cold Extrusion of
Lubricated Rod Through Square Dies of Moderate
Reduction at Slow Speeds,’’ Journal of the Institute
of Metals, Vol. 85, 1956.
[12] Kalpakjian, S. Mechanical Processing of Materials.
D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., Princeton, New
Jersey, 1967, Chapter 5.
[13] Kalpakjian, S., and SchmidS. R. Manufacturing Pro-
cesses for Engineering Materials, 6th ed. Pearson
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey,
2010.
[14] Lange, K. Handbook of Metal Forming. Society of
Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 2006.
[15] Laue, K., and Stenger, H. Extrusion: Processes,
Machinery, and Tooling. American Society for Met-
als, Metals Park, Ohio, 1981.
FIGURE 19.45
Tube drawing with mandrels: (a) ﬁxed mandrel, (b) ﬂoating plug.
436
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

[16] Mielnik, E. M. Metalworking Science and Engineer-
ing. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, 1991.
[17] Roberts, W. L. Hot Rolling of Steel. Marcel Dekker,
Inc., New York, 1983.
[18] Roberts, W. L. Cold Rolling of Steel. Marcel Dek-
ker, Inc., New York, 1978.
[19] Schey, J. A. Introduction to Manufacturing Pro-
cesses, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York, 2000.
[20] Wick, C., et al. (eds.). Tool and Manufacturing Engi-
neers Handbook, 4th ed. Vol. II, Forming. Society of
Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1984.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
19.1.
What are the reasons why the bulk deformation
processes
are
important
commercially
and
technologically?
19.2.
Name the four basic bulk deformation processes.
19.3.
What is rolling in the context of the bulk deforma-
tion processes?
19.4.
In rolling of steel, what are the differences between
a bloom, a slab, and a billet?
19.5.
List some of the products produced on a rolling mill.
19.6.
What is draft in a rolling operation?
19.7.
What is sticking in a hot rolling operation?
19.8.
Identify some of the ways in which force in flat
rolling can be reduced.
19.9.
What is a two-high rolling mill?
19.10.
What is a reversing mill in rolling?
19.11.
Besides flat rolling and shape rolling, identify some
additional bulk forming processes that use rolls to
effect the deformation.
19.12.
What is forging?
19.13.
One way to classify forging operations is by the
degree to which the work is constrained in the die.
By this classification, name the three basic types.
19.14.
Why is flash desirable in impression-die forging?
19.15.
What is a trimming operation in the context of
impression-die forging?
19.16.
What are the two basic types of forging equipment?
19.17.
What is isothermal forging?
19.18.
What is extrusion?
19.19.
Distinguish between direct and indirect extrusion.
19.20.
Name
some
products
that
are
produced
by
extrusion.
19.21.
Why is friction a factor in determining the ram
force in direct extrusion but not a factor in indirect
extrusion?
19.22.
What does the centerburst defect in extrusion have
in common with the roll piercing process?
19.23.
What is wire drawing and bar drawing?
19.24.
Although the workpiece in a wire drawing opera-
tion is obviously subjected to tensile stresses, how
do compressive stresses also play a role in the
process?
19.25.
In a wire drawing operation, why must the drawing
stress never exceed the yield strength of the work
metal?
19.26.
(Video) According to the video on forming, what is
the primary factor that makes the mechanical
performance of forged parts better than cast parts
in many situations?
19.27.
(Video) List the accessory tools that can be used
during open-die forging according to the video on
forging.
19.28.
(Video) List the performing operations discussed
in the forming video.
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 27 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
19.1.
The starting workpiece in steel hot rolling of plate
and sheet stock is which of the following (one best
answer): (a) bar stock, (b) billet, (c) bloom, (d)
slab, or (e) wire stock?
19.2.
The maximum possible draft in a rolling operation
depends on which of the following parameters (two
correct answers): (a) coefficient of friction between
roll and work, (b) roll diameter, (c) roll velocity, (d)
stock thickness, (e) strain, and (f) strength co-
efficient of the work metal?
19.3.
Which of the following stress or strength parame-
ters is used in the computation of rolling force (one
Multiple Choice Quiz
437

best answer): (a) average flow stress, (b) compres-
sion strength, (c) final flow stress, (d) tensile
strength, or (e) yield strength?
19.4.
Whichofthefollowingrollingmilltypesareassociated
with relatively small diameter rolls in contact with the
work (two correct answers): (a) cluster mill, (b)
continuous
rolling
mill,
(c)
four-high
mill,
(d)reversing mill,and (e)three-high configuration?
19.5.
Production of pipes and tubes is associated with
which of the following bulk deformation processes
(three correct answers): (a) extrusion, (b) hobbing,
(c) ring rolling, (d) roll forging, (e) roll piercing,
(f) tube sinking, and (g) upsetting?
19.6.
Which of the following stress or strength parame-
ters is used in the computation of the maximum
force in a forging operation (one best answer):
(a) average flow stress, (b) compression strength,
(c) final flow stress, (d) tensile strength, or (e) yield
strength?
19.7.
Which of the following operations are closely re-
lated to open-die forging (three best answers):
(a) cogging, (b) flashless forging, (c) fullering,
(d) impression-die forging, (e) Mannesmann pro-
cess,
(f)
precision
forging,
(g)
soaking,
and
(h) upsetting?
19.8.
Flash in impression-die forging serves no useful
purpose and is undesirable because it must be
trimmed from the part after forming: (a) true or
(b) false?
19.9.
Which of the following are classified as forging
operations (four correct answers): (a) coining,
(b) fullering, (c) impact extrusion, (d) roll piercing,
(e) swaging, (f) thread rolling, (g) trimming, and
(h) upsetting?
19.10.
Which of the following are alternative names for
indirect extrusion (two correct answers): (a) back-
ward extrusion, (b) direct extrusion, (c) forward
extrusion, (d) impact extrusion, and (e) reverse
extrusion?
19.11.
The production of tubing is possible in indirect
extrusion but not in direct extrusion: (a) true or
(b) false?
19.12.
Which of the following stress or strength param-
eters is used in the computation of the force in an
extrusion operation (one best answer): (a) aver-
age flow stress, (b) compression strength, (c) final
flow stress, (d) tensile strength, or (e) yield
strength?
19.13.
In which of the following extrusion operations is
friction a factor in determining the extrusion force
(one best answer): (a) direct extrusion or (b) in-
direct extrusion?
19.14.
Theoretically, the maximum reduction possible in a
wire drawing operation, under the assumptions of a
perfectly plastic metal, no friction, and no redun-
dant work, is which of the following (one answer):
(a) zero, (b) 0.63, (c) 1.0, or (d) 2.72?
19.15.
Which of the following bulk deformation processes
are involved in the production of nails for lumber
construction (three best answers): (a) bar and
wire drawing, (b) extrusion, (c) flashless forging,
(d)
impression-die
forging,
(e)
rolling,
and
(f) upsetting?
19.16.
Johnson’s formula is associated with which one of
the four bulk deformation processes: (a) bar and
wire drawing, (b) extrusion, (c) forging, and
(d) rolling?
PROBLEMS
Rolling
19.1.
A 42.0-mm-thick plate made of low carbon steel is
to be reduced to 34.0 mm in one pass in a rolling
operation. As the thickness is reduced, the plate
widens by 4%. The yield strength of the steel plate
is 174 MPa and the tensile strength is 290 MPa. The
entrance speed of the plate is 15.0 m/min. The roll
radius is 325 mm and the rotational speed is 49.0
rev/min. Determine (a) the minimum required
coefficient of friction that would make this rolling
operation possible, (b) exit velocity of the plate,
and (c) forward slip.
19.2.
A 2.0-in-thick slab is 10.0 in wide and 12.0 ft long.
Thickness is to be reduced in three steps in a hot
rolling operation. Each step will reduce the slab to
75% of its previous thickness. It is expected that for
this metal and reduction, the slab will widen by 3%
in each step. If the entry speed of the slab in the first
step is 40 ft/min, and roll speed is the same for the
three steps, determine: (a) length and (b) exit
velocity of the slab after the final reduction.
19.3.
A series of cold rolling operations are to be used to
reduce the thickness of a plate from 50 mm down to
25 mm in a reversing two-high mill. Roll diameter
¼ 700 mm and coefficient of friction between rolls
and work ¼ 0.15. The specification is that the draft
is to be equal on each pass. Determine (a) mini-
mum number of passes required, and (b) draft for
each pass?
438
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

19.4.
In the previous problem, suppose that the percent
reduction were specified to be equal for each pass,
rather than the draft. (a) What is the minimum
number of passes required? (b) What is the draft
for each pass?
19.5.
Acontinuoushotrollingmillhastwostands.Thickness
of the starting plate ¼ 25 mm and width¼ 300mm.
Final thickness is to be 13 mm. Roll radius at each
stand ¼ 250 mm. Rotational speed at the first stand ¼
20 rev/min. Equal drafts of 6 mm are to be taken at
each stand. The plate is wide enough relative to its
thickness that no increase in width occurs. Under the
assumptionthattheforwardslipisequalateachstand,
determine(a)speedvrateach stand, and(b) forward
slip s. (c) Also, determine the exiting speeds at
each rolling stand, if the entering speed at the first
stand ¼ 26 m/min.
19.6.
A continuous hot rolling mill has eight stands. The
dimensions of the starting slab are: thickness ¼
3.0 in, width ¼ 15.0 in, and length ¼ 10 ft. The final
thickness is to be 0.3 in. Roll diameter at each stand
¼ 36 in, and rotational speed at stand number 1 ¼
30 rev/min. It is observed that the speed of the slab
entering stand 1 ¼ 240 ft/min. Assume that no
widening of the slab occurs during the rolling
sequence. Percent reduction in thickness is to be
equal at all stands, and it is assumed that the
forward slip will be equal at each stand. Determine
(a) percentage reduction at each stand, (b) rota-
tional speed of the rolls at stands 2 through 8, and
(c) forward slip. (d) What is the draft at stands 1
and 8? (e) What is the length and exit speed of the
final strip exiting stand 8?
19.7.
A plate that is 250 mm wide and 25 mm thick is to
be reduced in a single pass in a two-high rolling mill
to a thickness of 20 mm. The roll has a radius ¼ 500
mm, and its speed ¼ 30 m/min. The work material
has a strength coefficient ¼ 240 MPa and a strain-
hardening exponent ¼ 0.2. Determine (a) roll
force, (b) roll torque, and (c) power required to
accomplish this operation.
19.8.
Solve Problem 19.7 using a roll radius ¼ 250 mm.
19.9.
Solve Problem 19.7, only assume a cluster mill with
working rolls of radius ¼ 50 mm. Compare the
results with the previous two problems, and note
the important effect of roll radius on force, torque
and power.
19.10.
A 4.50-in-thick slab that is 9 in wide and 24 in long
is to be reduced in a single pass in a two-high rolling
mill to a thickness of 3.87 in. The roll rotates at a
speed of 5.50 rev/min and has a radius of 17.0 in.
The work material has a strength coefficient ¼
30,000 lb/in2 and a strain-hardening exponent ¼
0.15. Determine (a) roll force, (b) roll torque, and
(c) power required to accomplish this operation.
19.11.
A single-pass rolling operation reduces a 20 mm
thick plate to 18 mm. The starting plate is 200 mm
wide. Roll radius ¼ 250 mm and rotational speed ¼
12 rev/min. The work material has a strength co-
efficient ¼ 600 MPa and a strength coefficient ¼
0.22. Determine (a) roll force, (b) roll torque, and
(c) power required for this operation.
19.12.
A hot rolling mill has rolls of diameter ¼ 24 in. It
can exert a maximum force ¼ 400,000 lb. The mill
has a maximum horsepower ¼ 100 hp. It is desired
to reduce a 1.5-in thick plate by the maximum
possible draft in one pass. The starting plate is
10 in wide. In the heated condition, the work
material has a strength coefficient ¼ 20,000 lb/
in2 and a strain-hardening exponent ¼ zero. Deter-
mine (a) maximum possible draft, (b) associated
true strain, and (c) maximum speed of the rolls for
the operation.
19.13.
Solve Problem 19.12 except that the operation is
warm rolling and the strain-hardening exponent is
0.18. Assume the strength coefficient remains at
20,000 lb/in2.
Forging
19.14.
A cylindrical part is warm upset forged in an open
die. The initial diameter is 45 mm and the initial
height is 40 mm. The height after forging is 25 mm.
The coefficient of friction at the die–work interface
is 0.20. The yield strength of the work material is
285 MPa, and its flow curve is defined by a strength
coefficient of 600 MPa and a strain-hardening
exponent of 0.12. Determine the force in the oper-
ation (a) just as the yield point is reached (yield at
strain ¼ 0.002), (b) at a height of 35 mm, (c) at a
height of 30 mm, and (d) at a height of 25 mm. Use
of a spreadsheet calculator is recommended.
19.15.
AcylindricalworkpartwithD¼ 2.5inandh¼ 2.5inis
upset forged in an open die to a height ¼ 1.5 in.
Coefficient of friction at the die–work interface ¼
0.10.Theworkmaterialhasaflowcurvedefinedby:K
¼ 40,000 lb/in2 and n ¼ 0.15. Yield strength ¼ 15,750
lb/in2. Determine the instantaneous force in the op-
eration (a) just as the yield point is reached (yield at
strain ¼ 0.002), (b) at height h ¼ 2.3 in, (c) h ¼ 2.1 in,
(d) h ¼ 1.9 in, (e) h ¼ 1.7 in, and (f) h ¼ 1.5 in. Use of
a spreadsheet calculator is recommended.
19.16.
A cylindrical workpart has a diameter ¼ 2.5 in and a
height ¼ 4.0 in. It is upset forged to a height ¼ 2.75 in.
Problems
439

Coefficient of friction at the die–work interface ¼
0.10.Theworkmaterialhasaflowcurvewithstrength
coefficient ¼ 25,000 lb/in2 and strain-hardening expo-
nent ¼ 0.22. Determine the plot of force vs. work
height.
Use
of
a
spreadsheet
calculator
is
recommended.
19.17.
A cold heading operation is performed to produce
the head on a steel nail. The strength coefficient for
this steel is 600 MPa, and the strain-hardening
exponent is 0.22. Coefficient of friction at the
die–work interface is 0.14. The wire stock out of
which the nail is made is 5.00 mm in diameter. The
head is to have a diameter of 9.5 mm and a
thickness of 1.6 mm. The final length of the nail
is 120 mm. (a) What length of stock must project
out of the die in order to provide sufficient volume
of material for this upsetting operation? (b) Com-
pute the maximum force that the punch must apply
to form the head in this open-die operation.
19.18.
Obtain a large common nail (flat head). Measure
the head diameter and thickness, as well as the
diameter of the nail shank. (a) What stock length
must project out of the die in order to provide
sufficient material to produce the nail? (b) Using
appropriate values for strength coefficient and
strain-hardening exponent for the metal out of
which the nail is made (Table 3.4), compute the
maximum force in the heading operation to form
the head.
19.19.
A hot upset forging operation is performed in an
open die. The initial size of the workpart is: Do ¼ 25
mm, and ho ¼ 50 mm. The part is upset to a
diameter ¼ 50 mm. The work metal at this elevated
temperature yields at 85 MPa (n ¼ 0). Coefficient
of friction at the die–work interface ¼ 0.40. Deter-
mine (a) final height of the part, and (b) maximum
force in the operation.
19.20.
A hydraulic forging press is capable of exerting a
maximum force ¼ 1,000,000 N. A cylindrical work-
part is to be cold upset forged. The starting part has
diameter ¼ 30 mm and height ¼ 30 mm. The flow
curve of the metal is defined by K ¼ 400 MPa and n
¼ 0.2. Determine the maximum reduction in height
to which the part can be compressed with this
forging press, if the coefficient of friction ¼ 0.1.
Use of a spreadsheet calculator is recommended.
19.21.
A part is designed to be hot forged in an impression
die. The projected area of the part, including flash,
is 16 in2. After trimming, the part has a projected
area of 10 in2. Part geometry is complex. As heated
the work material yields at 10,000 lb/in2, and has no
tendency to strain harden. At room temperature,
the material yields at 25,000 lb/in2 Determine the
maximum force required to perform the forging
operation.
19.22.
A connecting rod is designed to be hot forged in an
impression die. The projected area of the part is
6,500 mm2. The design of the die will cause flash to
form during forging, so that the area, including flash,
will be 9,000 mm2. The part geometry is considered
to be complex. As heated the work material yields at
75 MPa, and has no tendency to strain harden.
Determine the maximum force required to perform
the operation.
Extrusion
19.23.
A cylindrical billet that is 100 mm long and 50 mm
in diameter is reduced by indirect (backward)
extrusion to a 20 mm diameter. The die angle is
90. The Johnson equation has a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.4,
and the flow curve for the work metal has a
strength coefficient of 800 MPa and strain-harden-
ing exponent of 0.13. Determine (a) extrusion
ratio, (b) true strain (homogeneous deformation),
(c) extrusion strain, (d) ram pressure, and (e) ram
force.
19.24.
A 3.0-in-long cylindrical billet whose diameter ¼ 1.5
in is reduced by indirect extrusion to a diameter ¼
0.375 in. Die angle ¼ 90. In the Johnson equation,
a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.5. In the flow curve for the work
metal, K ¼ 75,000 lb/in2 and n ¼ 0.25. Determine
(a) extrusion ratio, (b) true strain (homogeneous
deformation), (c) extrusion strain, (d) ram pressure,
(e) ram force, and (f) power if the ram speed ¼
20 in/min.
19.25.
A billet that is 75 mm long with diameter ¼ 35 mm
is direct extruded to a diameter of 20 mm. The
extrusion die has a die angle ¼ 75. For the work
metal, K ¼ 600 MPa and n ¼ 0.25. In the Johnson
extrusion strain equation, a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.4.
Determine (a) extrusion ratio, (b) true strain (ho-
mogeneous deformation), (c) extrusion strain, and
(d) ram pressure and force at L ¼ 70, 60, 50, 40, 30,
20, and 10 mm. Use of a spreadsheet calculator is
recommended for part (d).
19.26.
A 2.0-in-long billet with diameter ¼ 1.25 in is direct
extruded to a diameter of 0.50 in. The extrusion die
angle ¼ 90. For the work metal, K ¼ 45,000 lb/in2,
and n ¼ 0.20. In the Johnson extrusion strain equa-
tion, a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.5. Determine (a) extrusion
ratio, (b) true strain (homogeneous deformation),
(c) extrusion strain, and (d) ram pressure at L ¼ 2.0,
1.5, 1.0, 0.5 and 0.0 in.
Use of a spreadsheet
calculator is recommended for part (d).
440
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

19.27.
A direct extrusion operation is performed on a
cylindrical billet with an initial diameter of 2.0 in
and an initial length of 4.0 in. The die angle ¼ 60
and orifice diameter is 0.50 in. In the Johnson
extrusion strain equation, a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.5.
The operation is carried out hot and the hot metal
yields at 13,000 lb/in2 and does not strain harden
when hot. (a) What is the extrusion ratio? (b)
Determine the ram position at the point when
the metal has been compressed into the cone of
the die and starts to extrude through the die open-
ing. (c) What is the ram pressure corresponding to
this position? (d) Also determine the length of the
final part if the ram stops its forward movement at
the start of the die cone.
19.28.
An indirect extrusion process starts with an alumi-
num billet with diameter ¼ 2.0 in and length ¼ 3.0
in. Final cross section after extrusion is a square
with 1.0 in on a side. The die angle ¼ 90. The
operation is performed cold and the strength co-
efficient of the metal K ¼ 26,000 lb/in2 and strain-
hardening exponent n ¼ 0.20. In the Johnson extru-
sion strain equation, a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.2. (a) Com-
pute the extrusion ratio, true strain, and extrusion
strain. (b) What is the shape factor of the product?
(c) If the butt left in the container at the end of the
stroke is 0.5 in thick, what is the length of the
extruded section? (d) Determine the ram pressure
in the process.
19.29.
An L-shaped structural section is direct extruded
from an aluminum billet in which Lo ¼ 500 mm and
Do ¼ 100 mm. Dimensions of the cross section are
given in Figure P19.29. Die angle ¼ 90. Determine
(a) extrusion ratio, (b) shape factor, and (c) length
of the extruded section if the butt remaining in the
container at the end of the ram stroke is 25 mm.
19.30.
The flow curve parameters for the aluminum alloy
of Problem 19.29 are: K ¼ 240 MPa and n ¼ 0.16. If
the die angle in this operation ¼ 90, and the
corresponding Johnson strain equation has con-
stants a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.5, compute the maximum
force required to drive the ram forward at the start
of extrusion.
19.31.
A cup-shaped part is backward extruded from an
aluminum slug that is 50 mm in diameter. The final
dimensions of the cup are: OD ¼ 50 mm, ID ¼
40 mm, height ¼ 100 mm, and thickness of base ¼
5 mm. Determine (a) extrusion ratio, (b) shape
factor, and (c) height of starting slug required to
achieve the final dimensions. (d) If the metal has
flow curve parameters K ¼ 400 MPa and n ¼ 0.25,
and the constants in the Johnson extrusion strain
equation are: a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.5, determine the
extrusion force.
19.32.
Determine the shape factor for each of the extru-
sion die orifice shapes in Figure P19.32.
12
12
50
62
FIGURE P19.29
Part for Problem 19.29 (dimensions are
in mm).
FIGURE P19.32
Cross-sectional shapes for Problem 19.32 (dimensions are in mm): (a) rectangular bar, (b) tube,
(c) channel, and (d) cooling ﬁns.
Problems
441

19.33.
A direct extrusion operation produces the cross
section shown in Figure P19.32(a) from a brass
billet whose diameter ¼ 125 mm and length ¼
350 mm. The flow curve parameters of the brass
are K ¼ 700 MPa and n ¼ 0.35. In the Johnson
strain equation, a ¼ 0.7 and b ¼ 1.4. Determine
(a) the extrusion ratio, (b) the shape factor, (c) the
force required to drive the ram forward during
extrusion at the point in the process when the billet
length remaining in the container ¼ 300 mm, and
(d) the length of the extruded section at the end of
the operation if the volume of the butt left in the
container is 600,000 mm3.
19.34.
In a direct extrusion operation the cross section
shown in Figure P19.32(b) is produced from a
copper billet whose diameter ¼ 100 mm and length
¼ 500 mm. In the flow curve for copper, the
strength coefficient ¼ 300 MPa and strain-harden-
ing exponent ¼ 0.50. In the Johnson strain equa-
tion, a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.5. Determine (a) the
extrusion ratio, (b) the shape factor, (c) the force
required to drive the ram forward during extrusion
at the point in the process when the billet length
remaining in the container ¼ 450 mm, and (d) the
length of the extruded section at the end of
the operation if the volume of the butt left in
the container is 350,000 mm3.
19.35.
A direct extrusion operation produces the cross
section shown in Figure P19.32(c) from an alumi-
num billet whose diameter ¼ 150 mm and length ¼
500 mm. The flow curve parameters for the alumi-
num are K ¼ 240 MPa and n ¼ 0.16. In the Johnson
strain equation, a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.2. Determine
(a) the extrusion ratio, (b) the shape factor, (c) the
force required to drive the ram forward during
extrusion at the point in the process when the billet
length remaining in the container ¼ 400 mm, and
(d) the length of the extruded section at the end of
the operation if the volume of the butt left in the
container is 600,000 mm3.
19.36.
A direct extrusion operation produces the cross
section shown in Figure P19.32(d) from an alumi-
num billet whose diameter ¼ 150 mm and length ¼
900 mm. The flow curve parameters for the alumi-
num are K ¼ 240 MPa and n ¼ 0.16. In the Johnson
strain equation, a ¼ 0.8 and b ¼ 1.5. Determine
(a) the extrusion ratio, (b) the shape factor, (c) the
force required to drive the ram forward during
extrusion at the point in the process when the billet
length remaining in the container ¼ 850 mm, and
(d) the length of the extruded section at the end of
the operation if the volume of the butt left in the
container is 600,000 mm3.
Drawing
19.37.
A spool of wire has a starting diameter of 2.5 mm. It
is drawn through a die with an opening that is to 2.1
mm. The entrance angle of the die is 18. Co-
efficient of friction at the work–die interface is
0.08. The work metal has a strength coefficient
of 450 MPa and a strain-hardening coefficient of
0.26. The drawing is performed at room tempera-
ture. Determine (a) area reduction, (b) draw stress,
and (c) draw force required for the operation.
19.38.
Rod stock that has an initial diameter of 0.50 in is
drawn through a draw die with an entrance angle of
13. The final diameter of the rod is ¼ 0.375 in. The
metal has a strength coefficient of 40,000 lb/in2 and
a strain-hardening exponent of 0.20. Coefficient of
friction at the work–die interface ¼ 0.1. Determine
(a) area reduction, (b) draw force for the opera-
tion, and (c) horsepower to perform the operation
if the exit velocity of the stock ¼ 2 ft/sec.
19.39.
Barstock ofinitialdiameter¼ 90mmisdrawnwitha
draft¼ 15mm.Thedrawdie has anentrance angle¼
18, and the coefficient of friction at the work–die
interface ¼ 0.08. The metal behaves as a perfectly
plastic material with yield stress ¼ 105 MPa. Deter-
mine (a) area reduction, (b) draw stress, (c) draw
force required for the operation, and (d) power to
perform the operation if exit velocity ¼ 1.0 m/min.
19.40.
Wire stock of initial diameter ¼ 0.125 in is drawn
through two dies each providing a 0.20 area reduc-
tion. The starting metal has a strength coefficient ¼
40,000 lb/in2 and a strain-hardening exponent ¼
0.15. Each die has an entrance angle of 12, and the
coefficient of friction at the work–die interface is
estimated to be 0.10. The motors driving the cap-
stans at the die exits can each deliver 1.50 hp at
90% efficiency. Determine the maximum possible
speed of the wire as it exits the second die.
442
Chapter 19/Bulk Deformation Processes in Metal Working

20
SHEET
METALWORKING
Chapter Contents
20.1
Cutting Operations
20.1.1
Shearing, Blanking, and Punching
20.1.2
Engineering Analysis of Sheet-Metal
Cutting
20.1.3
Other Sheet-Metal-Cutting
Operations
20.2
Bending Operations
20.2.1
V-Bending and Edge Bending
20.2.2
Engineering Analysis of Bending
20.2.3
Other Bending and Forming
Operations
20.3
Drawing
20.3.1
Mechanics of Drawing
20.3.2
Engineering Analysis of Drawing
20.3.3
Other Drawing Operations
20.3.4
Defects in Drawing
20.4
Other Sheet-Metal-Forming Operations
20.4.1
Operations Performed with Metal
Tooling
20.4.2
Rubber Forming Processes
20.5
Dies and Presses for Sheet-Metal Processes
20.5.1
Dies
20.5.2
Presses
20.6
Sheet-Metal Operations Not Performed on
Presses
20.6.1
Stretch Forming
20.6.2
Roll Bending and Roll Forming
20.6.3
Spinning
20.6.4
High-Energy-Rate Forming
20.7
Bending of Tube Stock
Sheet metalworking includes cutting and forming opera-
tions performed on relatively thin sheets of metal. Typical
sheet-metal thicknesses are between 0.4 mm (1/64 in) and 6
mm (1/4 in). When thickness exceeds about 6 mm, the stock
is usually referred to as plate rather than sheet. The sheet or
plate stock used in sheet metalworking is produced by flat
rolling (Section 19.1). The most commonly used sheet
metal is low carbon steel (0.06%–0.15% C typical). Its
low cost and good formability, combined with sufficient
strength for most product applications, make it ideal as a
starting material.
The commercial importance of sheet metalworking is
significant. Consider the number of consumer and industrial
products that include sheet or plate metal parts: automobile
and truck bodies, airplanes, railway cars, locomotives, farm
and construction equipment, appliances, office furniture,
and more. Although these examples are conspicuous be-
cause they have sheet-metal exteriors, many of their internal
components are also made of sheet or plate stock. Sheet-
metal parts are generally characterized by high strength,
good dimensional accuracy, good surface finish, and rela-
tively low cost. For components that must be made in large
quantities, economical mass-production operations can be
designed to process theparts. Aluminum beverage cans area
prime example.
Sheet-metal processing is usually performed at room
temperature (cold working). The exceptions are when the
stock is thick, the metal is brittle, or the deformation is
significant. These are usually cases of warm working rather
than hot working.
Most sheet-metal operations are performed on ma-
chine tools called presses. The term stamping press is used
to distinguish these presses from forging and extrusion
presses. The tooling that performs sheet metalwork is
called a punch-and-die; the term stamping die is also
used. The sheet-metal products are called stampings. To
facilitate mass production, the sheet metal is often pre-
sented to the press as long strips or coils. Various types of
443

punch-and-die tooling and stamping presses are described in Section 20.5. Final sections
of the chapter cover various operations that do not utilize conventional punch-and-die
tooling, and most of them are not performed on stamping presses. Two video clips on our
DVD illustrate many of the topics discussed in this chapter.
VIDEO CLIP
Sheet-Metal Shearing and Bending. This clip has two segments on shearing and bending.
VIDEO CLIP
Sheet-Metal Stamping Dies and Processes. Two segments are included: (1) sheet metal
formability and (2) basic stamping die operations.
The three major categories of sheet-metal processes are (1) cutting,
(2)
bending, and (3) drawing. Cutting is used to separate large sheets into smaller pieces, to
cut out part perimeters, and to make holes in parts. Bending and drawing are used to form
sheet-metal parts into their required shapes.
20.1
CUTTING OPERATIONS
Cutting of sheet metal is accomplished by a shearing action between two sharp cutting
edges. The shearing action is depicted in the four stop-action sketches of Figure 20.1, in
which the upper cutting edge (the punch) sweeps down past a stationary lower cutting edge
(the die). As the punch begins to push into the work, plastic deformation occurs in the
surfaces of the sheet. As the punch moves downward, penetration occurs in which the
punch compresses the sheet and cuts into the metal. This penetration zone is generally
about one-third the thickness of the sheet. As the punch continues to travel into the work,
fracture is initiated in the work at the two cutting edges. If the clearance between the punch
Punch
Die
v
t
c
(1)
(2)
v, F
v, F
Plastic
deformation
(3)
Penetration
v, F
(4)
Fracture
FIGURE 20.1
Shearing of sheet metal between two cutting edges: (1) just before the punch contacts work;
(2) punch begins to push into work, causing plastic deformation; (3) punch compresses and penetrates into work
causing a smooth cut surface; and (4) fracture is initiated at the opposing cutting edges that separate the sheet.
Symbols v and F indicate motion and applied force, respectively, t ¼ stock thickness, c ¼ clearance.
444
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

and die is correct, the two fracture lines meet, resulting in a clean separation of the work
into two pieces.
The sheared edges of the sheet have characteristic features as in Figure 20.2. At the
top of the cut surface is a region called the rollover. This corresponds to the depression
made by the punch in the work prior to cutting. It is where initial plastic deformation
occurred in the work. Just below the rollover is a relatively smooth region called the
burnish. This results from penetration of the punch into the work before fracture began.
Beneath the burnish is the fractured zone, a relatively rough surface of the cut edge where
continued downward movement of the punch caused fracture of the metal. Finally, at the
bottom of the edge is a burr, a sharp corner on the edge caused by elongation of the metal
during final separation of the two pieces.
20.1.1 SHEARING, BLANKING, AND PUNCHING
The three most important operations in pressworking that cut metal by the shearing
mechanism just described are shearing, blanking, and punching.
Shearing is a sheet-metal cutting operation along a straight line between two
cutting edges, as shown in Figure 20.3(a). Shearing is typically used to cut large sheets
into smaller sections for subsequent pressworking operations. It is performed on a
machine called a power shears, or squaring shears. The upper blade of the power
shears is often inclined, as shown in Figure 20.3(b), to reduce the required cutting force.
Blanking involves cutting of the sheet metal along a closed outline in a single
step to separate the piece from the surrounding stock, as in Figure 20.4(a). The part
that is cut out is the desired product in the operation and is called the blank. Punching
is similar to blanking except that it produces a hole, and the separated piece is scrap,
called the slug. The remaining stock is the desired part. The distinction is illustrated in
Figure 20.4(b).
FIGURE 20.2
Characteristic
sheared edges of the work.
FIGURE 20.3
Shearing
operation: (a) side view of
the shearing operation;
(b) front view of power
shears equipped with in-
clined upper cutting
blade. Symbol v indicates
motion.
Section 20.1/Cutting Operations
445

20.1.2 ENGINEERING ANALYSIS OF SHEET-METAL CUTTING
Process parameters in sheet-metal cutting are clearance between punch and die, stock
thickness, type of metal and its strength, and length of the cut. Let us define these
parameters and some of the relationships among them.
Clearance
The clearance c in a shearing operation is the distance between the punch
and die, as shown in Figure 20.1(a). Typical clearances in conventional pressworking
range between 4% and 8% of the sheet-metal thickness t. The effect of improper
clearances is illustrated in Figure 20.5. If the clearance is too small, then the fracture
lines tend to pass each other, causing a double burnishing and larger cutting forces. If the
clearance is too large, the metal becomes pinched between the cutting edges and an
excessive burr results. In special operations requiring very straight edges, such as shaving
and fine blanking (Section 20.1.3), clearance is only about 1% of stock thickness.
The correct clearance depends on sheet-metal type and thickness. The recom-
mended clearance can be calculated by the following formula:
c ¼ Act
ð20:1Þ
where c ¼ clearance, mm (in); Ac ¼ clearance allowance; and t ¼ stock thickness, mm (in).
The clearance allowance is determined according to type of metal. For convenience,
metals are classified into three groups given in Table 20.1, with an associated allowance
value for each group.
FIGURE 20.5
Effect of
clearance: (a) clearance
toosmallcausesless-than-
optimal fracture and
excessive forces; and
(b) clearance too large
causes oversized burr.
Symbols v and F indicate
motion and applied force,
respectively.
FIGURE 20.4
(a) Blanking
and (b) punching.
446
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

These calculated clearance values can be applied to conventional blanking and hole-
punching operations to determine the proper punch and die sizes. The die opening must
always be larger than the punch size (obviously). Whether to add the clearance value to the
die size or subtract it from the punch size depends on whether the part being cut out is a
blank or a slug, as illustrated in Figure 20.6 for a circular part. Because of the geometry of
the sheared edge, the outer dimension of the part cut out of the sheet will be larger than the
hole size. Thus, punch and die sizes for a round blank of diameter Db are determined as
Blanking punch diameter ¼ Db  2c
ð20:2aÞ
Blanking die diameter ¼ Db
ð20:2bÞ
Punch and die sizes for a round hole of diameter Dh are determined as:
Hole punch diameter ¼ Dh
ð20:3aÞ
Hole die diameter ¼ Dh þ 2c
ð20:3bÞ
In order for the slug or blank to drop through the die, the die opening must have an
angular clearance (see Figure 20.7) of 0.25 to 1.5 on each side.
Cutting Forces
Estimates of cutting force are important because this force determines
the size (tonnage) of the press needed. Cutting force F in sheet metalworking can be
determined by
F ¼ StL
ð20:4Þ
where S ¼ shear strength of the sheet metal, MPa (lb/in2); t ¼ stock thickness, mm (in),
and L ¼ length of the cut edge, mm (in). In blanking, punching, slotting, and similar
operations, L is the perimeter length of the blank or hole being cut. The minor effect of
clearance in determining the value of L can be neglected. If shear strength is unknown, an
TABLE 20.1
Clearance allowance value for three sheet-metal groups.
Metal Group
Ac
1100S and 5052S aluminum alloys, all tempers
0.045
2024STand 6061STaluminum alloys; brass, all tempers; soft cold-
rolled steel, soft stainless steel
0.060
Cold-rolled steel, half hard; stainless steel, half-hard and full-hard
0.075
Compiled from [3].
FIGURE 20.6
Die size
determines blank size
Db; punch size determines
hole size Dh.; c ¼
clearance.
Section 20.1/Cutting Operations
447

alternative way of estimating the cutting force is to use the tensile strength:
F ¼ 0:7 TS
ð
ÞtL
ð20:5Þ
where TS ¼ ultimate tensile strength MPa (lb/in2).
These equations for estimating cutting force assume that the entire cut along the
sheared edge length L is made at the same time. In this case the cutting force will be a
maximum. It is possible to reduce the maximum force by using an angled cutting edge on
the punch or die, as in Figure 20.3(b). The angle (called the shear angle), spreads the cut
over time and reduces theforce experienced at any one moment.However, thetotalenergy
required in the operation is the same, whether it is concentrated into a brief moment or
distributed over a longer time period.
Example 20.1
Blanking
Clearance and
Force
A round disk of 150-mm diameter is to be blanked from a strip of 3.2-mm, half-hard cold-
rolled steel whose shear strength ¼ 310 MPa. Determine (a) the appropriate punch and
die diameters, and (b) blanking force.
Solution:
(a) From Table 20.1, the clearance allowance for half-hard cold-rolled steel is
Ac ¼ 0.075. Accordingly,
c ¼ 0:075 3:2 mm
ð
Þ ¼ 0:24 mm
The blank is to have a diameter ¼ 150 mm, and die size determines blank size.
Therefore,
Die opening diameter ¼ 150:00 mm
Punch diameter ¼ 150  2 0:24
ð
Þ ¼ 149:52 mm
(b) To determine the blanking force, we assume that the entire perimeter of the part is
blanked at one time. The length of the cut edge is
L ¼ pDb ¼ 150p ¼ 471:2 mm
and the force is
F ¼ 310 471:2
ð
Þ 3:2
ð
Þ ¼ 467; 469 N 53 tons
½

n
20.1.3 OTHER SHEET-METAL-CUTTING OPERATIONS
In addition to shearing, blanking, and punching, there are several other cutting opera-
tions in pressworking. The cutting mechanism in each case involves the same shearing
action discussed above.
FIGURE 20.7
Angular clearance.
448
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

Cutoff and Parting
Cutoff is a shearing operation in which blanks are separated
from a sheet-metal strip by cutting the opposite sides of the part in sequence, as shown in
Figure 20.8(a). With each cut, a new part is produced. The features of a cutoff operation
that distinguish it from a conventional shearing operation are (1) the cut edges are not
necessarily straight, and (2) the blanks can be nested on the strip in such a way that scrap
is avoided.
Parting involves cutting a sheet-metal strip by a punch with two cutting edges that
match the opposite sides of the blank, as shown in Figure 20.8(b). This might be required
because the part outline has an irregular shape that precludes perfect nesting of the
blanks on the strip. Parting is less efficient than cutoff in the sense that it results in some
wasted material.
Slotting, Perforating, and Notching
Slotting is theterm sometimes used for a punching
operation that cuts out an elongated or rectangular hole, as pictured in Figure 20.9(a).
Perforating involves the simultaneous punching of a pattern of holes in sheet metal, as in
Figure 20.9(b). The hole pattern is usually for decorative purposes, or to allow passage of
light, gas, or fluid.
To obtain the desired outline of a blank, portions of the sheet metal are often
removed by notching and seminotching. Notching involves cutting out a portion of metal
from the side of the sheet or strip. Seminotching removes a portion of metal from the
interior of the sheet. These operations are depicted in Figure 20.9(c). Seminotching might
seem to the reader to be the same as a punching or slotting operation. The difference is
FIGURE 20.8
(a) Cutoff
and (b) parting.
Slot
Slug
(a)
(b)
(c)
Notching
Seminotching
Completed
blank
Cutoff line
V
FIGURE 20.9
(a) Slotting, (b) perforating, (c) notching and seminotching. Symbol v indicates motion of strip.
Section 20.1/Cutting Operations
449

that the metal removed by seminotching creates part of the blank outline, while punching
and slotting create holes in the blank.
Trimming, Shaving, and Fine Blanking
Trimming is a cutting operation performed on a
formed part to remove excess metal and establish size. The term has the same basic
meaning here as in forging (Section 19.4). A typical example in sheet metalwork is
trimming the upper portion of a deep drawn cup to leave the desired dimensions on
the cup.
Shaving is a shearing operation performed with very small clearance to obtain
accurate dimensions and cut edges that are smooth and straight, as pictured in
Figure 20.10(a). Shaving is typically performed as a secondary or finishing operation
on parts that have been previously cut.
Fine blanking is a shearing operation used to blank sheet-metal parts with close
tolerances and smooth, straight edges in one step, as illustrated in Figure 20.10(b). At the
start of the cycle, a pressure pad with a V-shaped projection applies a holding force Fh
against the work adjacent to the punch in order to compress the metal and prevent
distortion. The punch then descends with a slower-than-normal velocity and smaller
clearances to provide the desired dimensions and cut edges. The process is usually reserved
for relatively small stock thicknesses.
20.2
BENDING OPERATIONS
Bending insheet-metalworkisdefinedas the straining of the metal arounda straight axis, as
in Figure 20.11. During the bending operation, the metal on the inside of the neutral plane is
compressed, while the metal on the outside of the neutral plane is stretched. These strain
conditions can be seen in Figure 20.11(b). The metal is plastically deformed so that the bend
takes a permanent set upon removal of the stresses that caused it. Bending produces little or
no change in the thickness of the sheet metal.
20.2.1 V-BENDING AND EDGE BENDING
Bending operations are performed using punch and die tooling. The two common
bending methods and associated tooling are V-bending, performed with a V-die; and
edge bending, performed with a wiping die. These methods are illustrated in Figure 20.12.
FIGURE 20.10
(a) Shaving and (b) ﬁne
blanking. Symbols: v ¼
motion of punch, Fh ¼
blank holding force.
450
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

In V-bending, the sheet metal is bent between a V-shaped punch and die. Included
angles ranging from very obtuse to very acute can be made with V-dies. V-bending is
generallyusedforlow-productionoperations.Itisoftenperformedonapressbrake(Section
20.5.2), and the associated V-dies are relatively simple and inexpensive.
Edge bending involves cantilever loading of the sheet metal. A pressure pad is used
to apply a force Fh to hold the base of the part against the die, while the punch forces the
part to yield and bend over the edge of the die. In the setup shown in Figure 20.12(b),
edge bending is limited to bends of 90 or less. More complicated wiping dies can be
designed for bend angles greater than 90. Because of the pressure pad, wiping dies are
more complicated and costly than V-dies and are generally used for high-production
work.
20.2.2 ENGINEERING ANALYSIS OF BENDING
Some of the important terms in sheet-metal bending are identified in Figure 20.11. The
metal of thickness t is bent through an angle called the bend angle a. This results in a
sheet-metal part with an included angle a0, where a + a0 ¼ 180. The bend radius R is
normally specified on the inside of the part, rather than at the neutral axis, and
is determined by the radius on the tooling used to perform the operation. The bend
is made over the width of the workpiece w.
Bend Allowance
If the bend radius is small relative to stock thickness, the metal tends
to stretch during bending. It is important to be able to estimate the amount of stretching
FIGURE 20.12
Two common bending methods: (a) V-bending and (b) edge bending; (1) before and (2) after
bending. Symbols: v ¼ motion, F ¼ applied bending force, Fh ¼ blank.
FIGURE 20.11
(a)Bendingofsheetmetal;
(b) both compression and
tensile elongation of the
metal occur in bending.
R
t
Bend axis
w
Neutral axis
plane
(a)
(b)
Metal stretched
Metal compressed
Neutral axis
α′
Section 20.2/Bending Operations
451

that occurs, if any, so that the final part length will match the specified dimension. The
problem is to determine the length of the neutral axis before bending to account for
stretching of the final bent section. This length is called the bend allowance, and it can be
estimated as follows:
Ab ¼ 2p a
360 R þ Kbat
ð
Þ
ð20:6Þ
where Ab ¼ bend allowance, mm (in); a ¼ bend angle, degrees; R ¼ bend radius, mm (in);
t ¼ stock thickness, mm (in); and Kba is factor to estimate stretching. The following design
values are recommended for Kba [3]: if <2t, Kba ¼ 0.33; and if R  2t, Kba ¼ 0.50. The
values of Kba predict that stretching occurs only if bend radius is small relative to sheet
thickness.
Springback
When the bending pressure is removed at the end of the deformation
operation, elastic energy remains in the bent part, causing it to recover partially toward its
originalshape. This elasticrecoveryiscalled springback, definedastheincrease inincluded
angle of the bent part relative to the included angle of the forming tool after the tool is
removed. This is illustrated in Figure 20.13 and is expressed:
SB ¼ a0  a0 t
a0 t
ð20:7Þ
where SB ¼ springback; a0 ¼ included angle of the sheet-metal part, degrees; and a0 t ¼
included angle of the bending tool, degrees. Although not as obvious, an increase in the
bend radius also occurs due to elastic recovery. The amount of springback increases with
modulus of elasticity E and yield strength Y of the work metal.
Compensation for springback can be accomplished by several methods. Two
common methods are overbending and bottoming. In overbending, the punch angle
and radius are fabricated slightly smaller than the specified angle on the final part so
that the sheet metal springs back to the desired value. Bottoming involves squeezing
the part at the end of the stroke, thus plastically deforming it in the bend region.
Bending Force
The force required to perform bending depends on the geometry of the
punch-and-die and the strength, thickness, and length of the sheet metal. The maximum
FIGURE 20.13
Springback in bending shows itself as a decrease in bend angle and an
increase in bend radius: (1) during the operation, the work is forced to take the radius
Rt and included angle a0 t ¼ determined by the bending tool (punch in V-bending); (2) after
the punch is removed, the work springs back to radius R and included angle a0. Symbol:
F ¼ applied bending force.
452
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

bending force can be estimated by means of the following equation:
F ¼ Kbf TS
ð
Þwt2
D
ð20:8Þ
whereF¼ bending force, N (lb); TS ¼ tensile strength of the sheet metal, MPa (lb/in2); w ¼
width of part in the direction of the bend axis, mm (in); t ¼ stock thickness, mm (in); and
D ¼ die opening dimension as defined in Figure 20.14, mm (in). Eq. (20.8) is based on
bending of a simple beam in mechanics, and Kbf is a constant that accounts for differences
encountered in an actual bending process. Its value depends on type of bending: for
V-bending, Kbf ¼ 1.33; and for edge bending, Kbf ¼ 0.33.
Example 20.2
Sheet-Metal
Bending
A sheet-metal blank is to be bent as shown in Figure 20.15. The metal has a modulus of
elasticity ¼ 205 (103) MPa, yield strength ¼ 275 MPa, and tensile strength ¼ 450 MPa.
Determine (a) the starting blank size and (b) the bending force if a V-die is used with a die
opening dimension ¼ 25 mm.
Solution:
(a) The starting blank ¼ 44.5 mm wide. Its length ¼ 38 þ Ab þ 25 (mm). For the
included angle a0 ¼ 120, the bend angle a ¼ 60. The value of Kba in Eq. (20.6) ¼ 0.33 since
R=t ¼ 4.75=3.2 ¼ 1.48 (less than 2.0).
Ab ¼ 2p 60
360 4:75 þ 0:33  3:2
ð
Þ ¼ 6:08 mm
Length of the blank is therefore 38 + 6.08 + 25 ¼ 69.08 mm.
(b) Force is obtained from Eq. (20.8) using Kbf ¼ 1.33.
F ¼ 1:33 450
ð
Þ 44:5
ð
Þ 3:2
ð
Þ2
2:5
¼ 10; 909 N
n
20.2.3 OTHER BENDING AND FORMING OPERATIONS
Some sheet-metal operations involve bending over a curved axis rather than a straight
axis, or they have other features that differentiate them from the bending operations
described above.
FIGURE 20.14
Die opening
dimension D: (a) V-die, (b) wiping die.
FIGURE 20.15
Sheet-metal part
of Example 20.220.2 (dimensions
in mm).
120°
(Side view)
(End view)
38
w = 44.5
t = 3.2
R = 4.75
25
Section 20.2/Bending Operations
453

Flanging, Hemming, Seaming, and Curling
Flanging is a bending operation in which
the edge of a sheet-metal part is bent at a 90 angle (usually) to form a rim or flange. It is
often used to strengthen or stiffen sheet metal. The flange can be formed over a straight
bend axis, as illustrated in Figure 20.16(a), or it can involve some stretching or shrinking
of the metal, as in (b) and (c).
Hemming involves bending the edge of the sheet over on itself, in more than one
bendingstep.Thisisoftendonetoeliminatethesharpedgeonthepiece,toincreasestiffness,
and to improve appearance. Seaming is a related operation in which two sheet-metal edges
are assembled. Hemming and seaming are illustrated in Figure 20.17(a) and (b).
Curling,alsocalled beading, formstheedgesofthepart intoa rollorcurl,asinFigure
20.17(c).Asinhemming,itisdoneforpurposesofsafety,strength,andaesthetics.Examples
of products in which curling is used include hinges, pots and pans, and pocket-watch cases.
These examples show that curling can be performed over straight or curved bend axes.
Miscellaneous Bending Operations
Various other bending operations are depicted in
Figure 20.18 to illustrate the variety of shapes that can be bent. Most of these operations
are performed in relatively simple dies similar to V-dies.
20.3
DRAWING
Drawing is a sheet-metal-forming operation used to make cup-shaped, box-shaped, or
other complex-curved and concave parts. It is performed by placing a piece of sheet metal
over a die cavity and then pushing the metal into the opening with a punch, as in Figure
20.19. The blank must usually be held down flat against the die by a blankholder.
Common parts made by drawing include beverage cans, ammunition shells, sinks,
cooking pots, and automobile body panels.
20.3.1 MECHANICS OF DRAWING
Drawing of a cup-shaped part is the basic drawing operation, with dimensions and
parameters as pictured in Figure 20.19. A blank of diameter Db is drawn into a die cavity
by means of a punch with diameter Dp. The punch and die must have corner radii, given by
FIGURE 20.16
Flanging: (a) straight
ﬂanging, (b) stretch ﬂang-
ing,and(c)shrinkﬂanging.
FIGURE 20.17
(a) Hemming, (b) seaming,
and (c) curling.
454
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

FIGURE 20.18
Miscellaneous bending
operations: (a) channel
bending, (b) U-bending,
(c) air bending, (d) offset
bending, (e) corrugating,
and (f) tube forming.
Symbol: F ¼ applied force.
FIGURE 20.19
(a) Drawing of a cup-
shaped part: (1) start of
operation
before punch contacts
work, and (2) near end of
stroke; and (b) corre-
sponding workpart:
(1) starting blank, and
(2) drawn part. Symbols: c
¼ clearance, Db ¼ blank
diameter, Dp ¼ punch
diameter, Rd ¼ die corner
radius, Rp ¼ punch corner
radius, F ¼ drawing force,
Fh ¼ holding force.
Section 20.3/Drawing
455

Rp and Rd. If the punch and die were to havesharp corners (Rp and Rd ¼ 0), a hole-punching
operation (and not a very good one) would be accomplished rather than a drawing
operation. The sides of the punch and die are separated by a clearance c. This clearance
in drawing is about 10% greater than the stock thickness:
c ¼ 1:1 t
ð20:9Þ
The punch applies a downward force F to accomplish the deformation of the metal, and a
downward holding force Fh is applied by the blankholder, as shown in the sketch.
As the punch proceeds downward toward its final bottom position, the work
experiences a complex sequence of stresses and strains as it is gradually formed into the
shape defined by the punch and die cavity. The stages in the deformation process are
illustrated in Figure 20.20. As the punch first begins to push into the work, the metal is
subjected to a bending operation. The sheet is simply bent over the corner of the punch
and the corner of the die, as in Figure 20.20(2). The outside perimeter of the blank moves
in toward the center in this first stage, but only slightly.
As the punch moves further down, a straightening action occurs in the metal that
was previously bent over the die radius, as in Figure 20.20(3). The metal at the bottom of
the cup, as well as along the punch radius, has been moved downward with the punch, but
the metal that was bent over the die radius must now be straightened in order to be pulled
into the clearance to form the wall of the cylinder. At the same time, more metal must be
added to replace that being used in the cylinder wall. This new metal comes from the
FIGURE 20.20
Stages in deformation of the work in deep drawing: (1) punch makes initial contact with work,
(2) bending, (3) straightening, (4) friction and compression, and (5) ﬁnal cup shape showing effects of thinning in the
cup walls. Symbols: v ¼ motion of punch, F ¼ punch force, Fh ¼ blankholder force.
456
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

outside edge of the blank. The metal in the outer portions of the blank is pulled or drawn
toward the die opening to resupply the previously bent and straightened metal now
forming the cylinder wall. This type of metal flow through a constricted space gives the
drawing process its name.
During this stage of the process, friction and compression play important roles in
the flange of the blank. In order for the material in the flange to move toward the die
opening, friction between the sheet metal and the surfaces of the blankholder and the die
must be overcome. Initially, static friction is involved until the metal starts to slide; then,
after metal flow begins, dynamic friction governs the process. The magnitude of the
holding force applied by the blankholder, as well as the friction conditions at the two
interfaces, are determining factors in the success of this aspect of the drawing operation.
Lubricants or drawing compounds are generally used to reduce friction forces. In
addition to friction, compression is also occurring in the outer edge of the blank. As
the metal in this portion of the blank is drawn toward the center, the outer perimeter
becomes smaller. Because the volume of metal remains constant, the metal is squeezed
and becomes thicker as the perimeter is reduced. This often results in wrinkling of the
remaining flange of the blank, especially when thin sheet metal is drawn, or when the
blankholder force is too low. It is a condition which cannot be corrected once it has
occurred. The friction and compression effects are illustrated in Figure 20.20(4).
The holding force applied by the blankholder is now seen to be a critical factor in
deep drawing. If it is too small, wrinkling occurs. If it is too large, it prevents the metal
from flowing properly toward the die cavity, resulting in stretching and possible tearing of
the sheet metal. Determining the proper holding force involves a delicate balance
between these opposing factors.
Progressive downward motion of the punch results in a continuation of the metal
flow caused by drawing and compression. In addition, some thinning of the cylinder wall
occurs, as in Figure 20.20(5). The force being applied by the punch is opposed by the
metal in the form of deformation and friction in the operation. A portion of the
deformation involves stretching and thinning of the metal as it is pulled over the
edge of the die opening. Up to 25% thinning of the side wall may occur in a successful
drawing operation, mostly near the base of the cup.
20.3.2 ENGINEERING ANALYSIS OF DRAWING
It is important to assess the limitations on the amount of drawing that can be accom-
plished. This is often guided by simple measures that can be readily calculated for a given
operation. In addition, drawing force and holding force are important process variables.
Finally, the starting blank size must be determined.
Measures of Drawing
One of the measures of the severity of a deep drawing operation
is the drawing ratio DR. This is most easily defined for a cylindrical shape as the ratio of
blank diameter Db to punch diameter Dp. In equation form,
DR ¼ Db
Dp
ð20:10Þ
The drawing ratio provides an indication, albeit a crude one, of the severity of a given
drawing operation. The greater the ratio, the more severe the operation. An approximate
upper limit on the drawing ratio is a value of 2.0. The actual limiting value for a given
operation depends on punch and die corner radii (Rp and Rd), friction conditions, depth
of draw, and characteristics of the sheet metal (e.g., ductility, degree of directionality of
strength properties in the metal).
Section 20.3/Drawing
457

Another way to characterize a given drawing operation is by the reduction r, where
r ¼ Db  Dp
Db
ð20:11Þ
It is very closely related to drawing ratio. Consistent with the previous limit on DR
(DR  2.0), the value of reduction r should be less than 0.50.
A third measure in deep drawing is the thickness-to-diameter ratio t/Db (thickness
of the starting blank t divided by the blank diameter Db). Often expressed as a
percentage, it is desirable for the t/Db ratio to be greater than 1%. As t/Db decreases,
tendency for wrinkling (Section 20.3.4) increases.
In cases where these limits on drawing ratio, reduction, and t/Db ratio are exceeded
by the design of the drawn part, the blank must be drawn in two or more steps, sometimes
with annealing between the steps.
Example 20.3 Cup
Drawing
A drawing operation is used to form a cylindrical cup with inside diameter ¼ 75 mm and
height ¼ 50 mm. The starting blank size ¼ 138 mm and the stock thickness ¼ 2.4 mm. Based
on these data, is the operation feasible?
Solution:
To assess feasibility, we determine the drawing ratio, reduction, and thickness-
to-diameter ratio.
DR ¼ 138=75 ¼ 1:84
r ¼ 138  75
ð
Þ=138 ¼ 0:4565 ¼ 45:65%
t=Db ¼ 2:4=138 ¼ 0:017 ¼ 1:7%
According to these measures, the drawing operation is feasible. The drawing ratio is less
than 2.0, the reduction is less than 50%, and the t/Db ratio is greater than 1%. These are
general guidelines frequently used to indicate technical feasibility.
n
Forces
The drawing force required to perform a given operation can be estimated
roughly by the formula:
F ¼ pDpt TS
ð
Þ Db
Dp
 0:7


ð20:12Þ
where F ¼ drawing force, N (lb); t ¼ original blank thickness, mm (in); TS ¼ tensile
strength, MPa (lb/in2); and Db and Dp are the starting blank diameter and punch
diameter, respectively, mm (in). The constant 0.7 is a correction factor to account for
friction. Eq. (20.12) estimates the maximum force in the operation. The drawing force
varies throughout the downward movement of the punch, usually reaching its maximum
value at about one-third the length of the punch stroke.
The holding force is an important factor in a drawing operation. As a rough
approximation, the holding pressure can be set at a value ¼ 0.015 of the yield strength of
the sheet metal [8]. This value is then multiplied by that portion of the starting area of the
blank that is to be held by the blankholder. In equation form,
Fh ¼ 0:015Yp D2
b  Dp þ 2:2t þ 2Rd

2
n
o
ð20:13Þ
where Fh ¼ holding force in drawing, N (lb); Y ¼ yield strength of the sheet metal, MPa
(lb/in2); t ¼ starting stock thickness, mm (in); Rd ¼ die corner radius, mm (in); and the
other terms have been previously defined. The holding force is usually about one-third
the drawing force [10].
458
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

Example 20.4
Forces in
Drawing
For the drawing operation of Example 20.3, determine (a) drawing force and
(b) holding force, given that the tensile strength of the sheet metal (low-carbon steel)
¼ 300 MPa and yield strength ¼ 175 MPa. The die corner radius ¼ 6 mm.
Solution:
(a) Maximum drawing force is given by Eq. (20.12):
F ¼ p 75
ð
Þ 2:4
ð
Þ 300
ð
Þ 138
75  0:7


¼ 193; 396 N
(b) Holding force is estimated by Eq. (20.13):
Fh ¼ 0:015 175
ð
Þ pð1382  75 þ 2:2  2:4 þ 2  6
ð
Þ2Þ ¼ 86; 824 N
n
Blank Size Determination
For the final dimensions to be achieved on the cylindrical
drawn shape, the correct starting blank diameter is needed. It must be large enough to
supply sufficient metal to complete the cup. Yet if there is too much material, unnecessary
waste will result. For drawn shapes other than cylindrical cups, the same problem of
estimatingthestartingblanksizeexists,onlytheshapeoftheblankmaybeotherthanround.
The following is a reasonable method for estimating the starting blank diameter in
a deep drawing operation that produces a round part (e.g., cylindrical cup and more
complex shapes so long as they are axisymmetric). Because the volume of the final
product is the same as that of the starting sheet-metal blank, then the blank diameter can
be calculated by setting the initial blank volume equal to the final volume of the product
and solving for diameter Db. To facilitate the calculation, it is often assumed that
negligible thinning of the part wall occurs.
20.3.3 OTHER DRAWING OPERATIONS
Our discussion has focused on a conventional cup-drawing operation that produces a
simple cylindrical shape in a single step and uses a blankholder to facilitate the process.
Let us consider some of the variations of this basic operation.
Redrawing
If the shape change required by the part design is too severe (drawing ratio
is too high), complete forming of the part may require more than one drawing step. The
second drawing step, and any further drawing steps if needed, are referred to as
redrawing. A redrawing operation is illustrated in Figure 20.21.
When the part design indicates a drawing ratio that is too large to form the part in a
single step, the following is a general guide to the amount of reduction that can be taken in
FIGURE 20.21
Redrawing of a cup:
(1) start of redraw, and
(2)endofstroke. Symbols:
v ¼ punch velocity, F ¼
applied punch force, Fh ¼
blankholder force.
Section 20.3/Drawing
459

eachdrawingoperation[10]:Forthefirstdraw,themaximumreductionofthestartingblank
shouldbe40%to45%;fortheseconddraw(firstredraw),themaximumreductionshouldbe
30%; and for the third draw (second redraw), the maximum reduction should be 16%.
A related operation is reverse drawing, in which a drawn part is positioned face
down on the die so that the second drawing operation produces a configuration such as
that shown in Figure 20.22. Although it may seem that reverse drawing would produce a
more severe deformation than redrawing, it is actually easier on the metal. The reason is
that the sheet metal is bent in the same direction at the outside and inside corners of the
die in reverse drawing; while in redrawing the metal is bent in the opposite directions at
the two corners. Because of this difference, the metal experiences less strain hardening in
reverse drawing and the drawing force is lower.
Drawing of Shapes Other than Cylindrical Cups
Many products require drawing of
shapes other than cylindrical cups. The variety of drawn shapes include square or
rectangular boxes (as in sinks), stepped cups, cones, cups with spherical rather than flat
bases, and irregular curved forms (as in automobile body panels). Each of these shapes
presents unique technical problems in drawing. Eary and Reed [2] provide a detailed
discussion of the drawing of these kinds of shapes.
Drawing Without a Blankholder
One of the primary functions of the blankholder is to
prevent wrinkling of the flange while the cup is being drawn. The tendency for wrinkling
is reduced as the thickness-to-diameter ratio of the blank increases. If the t=Db ratio is
large enough, drawing can be accomplished without a blankholder, as in Figure 20.23.
FIGURE 20.22
Reverse
drawing: (1) start and
(2) completion. Symbols:
v ¼ punch velocity, F ¼
applied punch force, Fh ¼
blankholder force.
FIGURE 20.23
Drawing
without a blankholder:
(1) start of process, (2) end
of stroke. Symbols v and F
indicate motion and ap-
plied force, respectively.
460
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

The limiting condition for drawing without a blankholder can be estimated from the
following [5]:
Db  Dp < 5t
ð20:14Þ
The draw die must have the shape of a funnel or cone to permit the material to be drawn
properly into the die cavity. When drawing without a blankholder is feasible, it has the
advantages of lower cost tooling and a simpler press, because the need to separately control
the movements of the blankholder and punch can be avoided.
20.3.4 DEFECTS IN DRAWING
Sheet-metal drawing is a more complex operation than cutting or bending, and more
things can go wrong. A number of defects can occur in a drawn product, some of
which we have already alluded to. Following is a list of common defects, with sketches in
Figure 20.24:
(a) Wrinkling in the flange. Wrinkling in a drawn part consists of a series of ridges that
form radially in the undrawn flange of the workpart due to compressive buckling.
(b) Wrinkling in the wall. If and when the wrinkled flange is drawn into the cup, these
ridges appear in the vertical wall.
(c) Tearing. Tearing is an open crack in the vertical wall, usually near the base of the
drawn cup, due to high tensile stresses that cause thinning and failure of the metal at
this location. This type of failure can also occur as the metal is pulled over a sharp die
corner.
(d) Earing. This is the formation of irregularities (called ears) in the upper edge of a deep
drawn cup, caused by anisotropy in the sheet metal. If the material is perfectly
isotropic, ears do not form.
(e) Surface scratches. Surface scratches can occur on the drawn part if the punch and die
are not smooth or if lubrication is insufficient.
20.4
OTHER SHEET-METAL-FORMING OPERATIONS
In addition to bending and drawing, several other sheet-metal-forming operations can be
accomplished on conventional presses. We classify these as (1) operations performed with
metal tooling and (2) operations performed with flexible rubber tooling.
FIGURE 20.24
Common defects in drawn parts: (a) wrinkling can occur either in the ﬂange or (b) in the
wall, (c) tearing, (d) earing, and (e) surface scratches.
Section 20.4/Other Sheet-Metal-Forming Operations
461

20.4.1 OPERATIONS PERFORMED WITH METAL TOOLING
Operations performed with metal tooling include (1) ironing, (2) coining and embossing,
(3) lancing, and (4) twisting.
Ironing
In deep drawing the flange is compressed by the squeezing action of the blank
perimeter seeking a smaller circumference as it is drawn toward the die opening. Because
of this compression, the sheet metal near the outer edge of the blank becomes thicker as it
moves inward. If the thickness of this stock is greater than the clearance between the
punch and die, it will be squeezed to the size of the clearance, a process known as ironing.
Sometimes ironing is performed as a separate step that follows drawing. This
case is illustrated in Figure 20.25. Ironing makes the cylindrical cup more uniform in
wall thickness. The drawn part is therefore longer and more efficient in terms of
material usage. Beverage cans and artillery shells, two very high-production items,
include ironing among their processing steps to achieve economy in material usage.
Coining and Embossing
Coining is a bulk deformation operation discussed in the
previous chapter. It is frequently used in sheet-metal work to form indentations and
raised sections in the part. The indentations result in thinning of the sheet metal, and the
raised sections result in thickening of the metal.
Embossing is a forming operation used to create indentations in the sheet, such as
raised (or indented) lettering or strengthening ribs, as depicted in Figure 20.26. Some
stretching and thinning of the metal are involved. This operation may seem similar to
coining. However, embossing dies possess matching cavity contours, the punch contain-
ing the positive contour and the die containing the negative; whereas coining dies may
have quite different cavities in the two die halves, thus causing more significant metal
deformation than embossing.
FIGURE 20.25
Ironing to
achieve a more uniform wall
thickness in a drawn cup: (1) start
of process; (2) during process.
Note thinning and elongation of
walls. Symbols v and F indicate
motion and applied force,
respectively.
FIGURE 20.26
Embossing: (a) cross
section of punch and die
conﬁguration during
pressing; (b) ﬁnished part
with embossed ribs.
462
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

Lancing
Lancing is a combined cutting and bending or cutting and forming operation
performed in one step to partially separate the metal from the sheet. Several examples are
shown in Figure 20.27. Among other applications, lancing is used to make louvers in sheet-
metal air vents for heating and air conditioning systems in buildings.
Twisting
Twisting subjects the sheet metal to a torsion loading rather than a bending
load, thus causing a twist in the sheet over its length. This type of operation has limited
applications. It is used to make such products as fan and propeller blades. It can be
performed in a conventional punch and die which has been designed to deform the part in
the required twist shape.
20.4.2 RUBBER FORMING PROCESSES
The two operations discussed in this article are performed on conventional presses, but
the tooling is unusual in that it uses a flexible element (made of rubber or similar
material) to effect the forming operation. The operations are (1) the Guerin process, and
(2) hydroforming.
Guerin Process
The Guerin process uses a thick rubber pad (or other flexible material)
to form sheet metal over a positive form block, as in Figure 20.28. The rubber pad is
confined in a steel container. As the ram descends, the rubber gradually surrounds the
sheet, applyingpressuretodeform ittotheshape oftheformblock. Itislimited torelatively
FIGURE 20.27
Lancing
in several forms:
(a) cutting and bending;
(b) and (c) two types of
cutting and forming.
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 20.28
Guerin
process: (1) before and
(2) after. Symbols v and
F indicate motion and
appliedforce,respectively.
Section 20.4/Other Sheet-Metal-Forming Operations
463

shallow forms, because the pressures developed by the rubber—up to about 10 MPa
(1500 lb/in2)—are not sufficient to prevent wrinkling in deeper formed parts.
The advantage of the Guerin process is the relatively low cost of the tooling. The
form block can be made of wood, plastic, or other materials that are easy to shape, and the
rubber pad can be used with different form blocks. These factors make rubber forming
attractive in small-quantity production, such as the aircraft industry, where the process was
developed.
Hydroforming
Hydroforming is similar to the Guerin process; the difference is that it
substitutesa rubberdiaphragmfilledwith hydraulicfluidinplace ofthethickrubberpad, as
illustrated in Figure 20.29. This allows the pressure that forms the workpart to be
increased—to around 100 MPa (15,000 lb/in2)—thus preventing wrinkling in deep formed
parts. In fact, deeper draws can be achieved with the hydroform process than with
conventional deep drawing. This is because the uniform pressure in hydroforming forces
the work to contact the punch throughout its length, thus increasing friction and reducing
the tensile stresses that cause tearing at the base of the drawn cup.
20.5
DIES AND PRESSES FOR SHEET-METAL PROCESSES
In this section we examine the punch-and-die tooling and production equipment used in
conventional sheet-metal processing.
20.5.1 DIES
Nearly all of the preceding pressworking operations are performed with conventional
punch-and-die tooling. The tooling is referred to as a die. It is custom-designed for the
particular part to be produced. The term stamping die is sometimes used for high-
production dies. Typical materials for stamping dies are tool steel types D, A, O, and S
(Table 6.5).
FIGURE 20.29
Hydroform process: (1) start-up, no ﬂuid in cavity; (2) press closed, cavity pressurized
with hydraulic ﬂuid; (3) punch pressed into work to form part. Symbols: v ¼ velocity, F ¼ applied force,
p ¼ hydraulic pressure.
464
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

Components of a Stamping Die
The components of a stamping die to perform a
simple blanking operation are illustrated in Figure 20.30. The working components are
the punch and die, which perform the cutting operation. They are attached to the upper
and lower portions of the die set, respectively called the punch holder (or upper shoe) and
die holder (lower shoe). The die set also includes guide pins and bushings to ensure
proper alignment between the punch and die during the stamping operation. The die
holder is attached to the base of the press, and the punch holder is attached to the ram.
Actuation of the ram accomplishes the pressworking operation.
Inadditiontothesecomponents,adieusedforblankingorhole-punchingmustinclude
a means of preventing the sheet metal from sticking to the punch when it is retracted upward
after the operation. The newly created hole in the stock is the same size as the punch, and it
tends to cling to the punch on its withdrawal. The device in the die that strips the sheet metal
from the punch is called a stripper. It is often a simple plate attached to the die as in Figure
20.30, with a hole slightly larger than the punch diameter.
Fordiesthatprocessstripsorcoilsofsheetmetal,adeviceisrequiredtostopthe sheet
metal asitadvances throughthedie betweenpresscycles. That deviceiscalled(try to guess)
a stop. Stops range from simple solidpins located in the path of the strip to block its forward
motion,to morecomplexmechanisms synchronized to riseandretractwith theactuation of
the press. The simpler stop is shown in Figure 20.30.
There are other components in pressworking dies, but the preceding description
provides an introduction to the terminology.
Types of Stamping Dies
Aside from differences in stamping dies related to the
operations they perform (e.g., cutting, bending, drawing), other differences deal with
the number of separate operations to be performed in each press actuation and how they
are accomplished.
The type of die considered above performs a single blanking operation with each
stroke of the press and is called a simple die. Other dies that perform a single operation
include V-dies (Section 20.2.1). More complicated pressworking dies include compound
dies, combination dies, and progressive dies. A compound die performs two operations at
a single station, such as blanking and punching, or blanking and drawing [2]. A good
example is a compound die that blanks and punches a washer. A combination die is less
common; it performs two operations at two different stations in the die. Examples of
applications include blanking two different parts (e.g., right-hand and left-hand parts), or
blanking and then bending the same part [2].
A progressive die performs two or more operations on a sheet-metal coil at two or
more stations with each press stroke. The part is fabricated progressively. The coil is fed
FIGURE 20.30
Components of a punch
and die for a blanking
operation.
Section 20.5/Dies and Presses for Sheet-Metal Processes
465

fromonestationtothe nextanddifferentoperations(e.g.,punching, notching, bending, and
blanking) are performed at each station. When the part exits the final station it has been
completed and separated (cut) from the remaining coil. Design of a progressive die begins
with the layout of thepart on thestrip or coil and the determination of which operations are
to beperformed ateach station.Theresult of this procedure iscalled the stripdevelopment.
A progressive die and associated strip development are illustrated in Figure 20.31.
Progressive dies can have a dozen or more stations. They are the most complicated and
most costly stamping dies, economically justified only for complex parts requiring multiple
operations at high-production rates.
20.5.2 PRESSES
A press used for sheet metalworking is a machine tool with a stationary bed and a
powered ram (or slide) that can be driven toward and away from the bed to perform
various cutting and forming operations. A typical press, with principal components
labeled, is diagrammed in Figure 20.32. The relative positions of the bed and ram are
established by the frame, and the ram is driven by mechanical or hydraulic power. When
a die is mounted in the press, the punch holder is attached to the ram, and the die holder is
attached to a bolster plate of the press bed.
Presses are available in a variety of capacities, power systems, and frame types. The
capacity of a press is its ability to deliver the required force and energy to accomplish the
stamping operation. This is determined by the physical size of the press and by its power
system. The power system refers to whether mechanical or hydraulic power is used and the
type of drive used to transmit the power to the ram. Production rate is another important
aspectofcapacity.Typeofframereferstothephysicalconstructionofthepress.Therearetwo
frame types in common use: gap frame and straight-sided frame.
Gap Frame Presses
The gap frame has the general configuration of the letter C and is
often referred to as a C-frame. Gap frame presses provide good access to the die, and
FIGURE 20.31
(a) Progressive die and
(b) associated strip
development.
466
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

they are usually open in the back to permit convenient ejection of stampings or scrap. The
principal types of gap frame press are (a) solid gap frame, (b) adjustable bed, (c) open-
back inclinable, (d) press brake, and (e) turret press.
Thesolidgapframe(sometimescalledsimplyagappress)hasone-piececonstruction,
asshowninFigure 20.32.Presses withthisframe are rigid, yetthe C-shape allowsconvenient
accessfromthe sidesforfeedingstriporcoilstock. Theyare availableinarangeofsizes,with
capacities up to around 9000kN (1000tons). The model shown inFigure 20.33 hasa capacity
of 1350 kN (150 tons). The adjustable bed frame press is a variation of the gap frame, in
which an adjustable bed is added to accommodate various die sizes. The adjustment feature
FIGURE 20.32
Components
of a typical (mechanical drive)
stamping press.
FIGURE 20.33
Gap frame
press for sheet metalworking.
(Photo courtesy of E. W. Bliss
Company, Hastings, Michigan.).
Capacity ¼ 1350 kN (150 tons).
Section 20.5/Dies and Presses for Sheet-Metal Processes
467

results in some sacrifice of tonnage capacity. The open-back inclinable press has a C-frame
assembled to a base in such a way that the frame can be tilted back to various angles so that
the stampings fall through the rear opening by gravity. Capacities of open-back inclinable
presses range between 1 ton and around 2250 kN (250 tons). They can be operated at high
speeds—up to around 1000 strokes per minute.
The press brake is a gap frame press with a very wide bed. The model in Figure 20.34
has a bed width of 9.15 m (30 ft). This allows a number of separate dies (simple V-bending
dies are typical) to be set up in the bed, so that small quantities of stampings can be made
economically. These low quantities of parts, sometimes requiring multiple bends at
different angles, necessitate a manual operation. For a part requiring a series of bends, the
operator moves the starting piece of sheet metal through the desired sequence of bending
dies, actuating the press at each die, to complete the work needed.
Whereas press brakes are well adapted to bending operations, turret presses are
suited to situations in which a sequence of punching, notching, and related cutting
operations must be accomplished on sheet-metal parts, as in Figure 20.35. Turret presses
have a C-frame, although this construction is not obvious in Figure 20.36. The conven-
tional ram and punch is replaced by a turret containing many punches of different sizes
and shapes. The turret works by indexing (rotating) to the position holding the punch to
perform the required operation. Beneath the punch turret is a corresponding die turret
that positions the die opening for each punch. Between the punch and die is the sheet-
metal blank, held by an xy positioning system that operates by computer numerical
control (Section 38.3). The blank is moved to the required coordinate position for each
cutting operation.
Straight-sided Frame Presses
For jobs requiring high tonnage, press frames with
greater structural rigidity are needed. Straight-sided presses have full sides, giving it a
FIGURE 20.34
Press
brake with bed width of
9.15 m (30 ft) and
capacity of 11,200 kN
(1250 tons); two workers
are shown positioning
plate stock for bending.
(Photo courtesy of
Niagara Machine & Tool
Works, Buffalo, New
York.)
468
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

FIGURE 20.35
Several
sheet-metal parts
produced on a turret
press, showing variety of
possible hole shapes.
(Photo courtesy of
Strippet, Inc., Akron, New
York.)
FIGURE 20.36
Computer numerical
control turret press.
(Photo courtesy of
Strippet, Inc., Akron, New
York.)
Section 20.5/Dies and Presses for Sheet-Metal Processes
469

box-like appearance as in Figure 20.37. This construction increases the strength and
stiffness of the frame. As a result, capacities up to 35,000 kN (4000 tons) are available in
straight-sided presses for sheet metalwork. Large presses of this frame type are used for
forging (Section 19.3).
In all of these presses, gap frame and straight-sided frame, the size is closely
correlated to tonnage capacity. Larger presses are built to withstand higher forces in
pressworking. Press size is also related to the speed at which it can operate. Smaller
presses are generally capable of higher production rates than larger presses.
Power and Drive Systems
Power systems on presses are either hydraulic or me-
chanical. Hydraulic presses use a large piston and cylinder to drive the ram. This power
system typically provides longer ram strokes than mechanical drives and can develop
the full tonnage force throughout the entire stroke. However, it is slower. Its applica-
tion for sheet metal is normally limited to deep drawing and other forming operations
where these load-stroke characteristics are advantageous. These presses are available
with one or more independently operated slides, called single action (single slide),
double action (two slides), and so on. Double-action presses are useful in deep drawing
operations where it is required to separately control the punch force and the blank-
holder force.
There are several types of drive mechanisms used on mechanical presses. These
include eccentric, crankshaft, and knuckle joint, illustrated in Figure 20.38. They convert the
rotational motion of a drive motor into the linear motion of the ram. A flywheel is used to
store the energy of the drive motor for use in the stamping operation. Mechanical presses
using these drives achieve very high forces at the bottom of their strokes, and are therefore
quite suited to blanking and punching operations. The knuckle joint delivers very high force
when it bottoms, and is therefore often used in coining operations.
FIGURE 20.37
Straight-sided
frame press. (Photo courtesy
Greenerd Press & Machine
Company, Inc., Nashua, New
Hampshire.)
470
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

20.6
SHEET-METAL OPERATIONS NOT PERFORMED ON PRESSES
A number of sheet-metal operations are not performed on conventional stamping presses. In
this section we examine several of these processes: (1) stretch forming, (2) roll bending and
forming, (3) spinning, and (4) high-energy-rate forming processes.
20.6.1 STRETCH FORMING
Stretch forming is a sheet-metal deformation process in which the sheet metal is
intentionally stretched and simultaneously bent in order to achieve shape change.
The process is illustrated in Figure 20.39 for a relatively simple and gradual bend.
The workpart is gripped by one or more jaws on each end and then stretched and bent
over a positive die containing the desired form. The metal is stressed in tension to a level
above its yield point. When the tension loading is released, the metal has been plastically
deformed. The combination of stretching and bending results in relatively little spring-
back in the part. An estimate of the force required in stretch forming can be obtained by
multiplying the cross-sectional area of the sheet in the direction of pulling by the flow
stress of the metal. In equation form,
F ¼ LtYf
ð20:15Þ
where F ¼ stretching force, N (lb); L ¼ length of the sheet in the direction perpendicular to
stretching, mm (in); t ¼ instantaneous stock thickness, mm (in); and Yf ¼ flow stress of the
work metal, MPa (lb/in2). The die force Fdie shown in the figure can be determined by
balancing vertical force components.
FIGURE 20.38
Types of
drives for sheet-metal
presses: (a) eccentric,
(b) crankshaft, and
(c) knuckle joint.
FIGURE 20.39
Stretch
forming: (1) start of
process; (2) form die is
pressedintotheworkwith
force Fdie, causing it to be
stretched and bent over
the form. F ¼ stretching
force.
Section 20.6/Sheet-Metal Operations Not Performed on Presses
471

More complex contours than that shown in our figure are possible by stretch
forming, but there are limitations on how sharp the curves in the sheet can be. Stretch
forming is widely used in the aircraft and aerospace industries to economically produce
large sheet-metal parts in the low quantities characteristic of those industries.
20.6.2 ROLL BENDING AND ROLL FORMING
The operations described in this section use rolls to form sheet metal. Roll bending is an
operation in which (usually) large sheet-metal or plate-metal parts are formed into
curved sections by means of rolls. One possible arrangement of the rolls is pictured in
Figure 20.40. As the sheet passes between the rolls, the rolls are brought toward each
other to a configuration that achieves the desired radius of curvature on the work.
Components for large storage tanks and pressure vessels are fabricated by roll bending.
The operation can also be used to bend structural shapes, railroad rails, and tubes.
A related operation is roll straightening in which nonflat sheets (or other cross-
sectional forms) are straightened by passing them between a series of rolls. The rolls
subject the work to a sequence of decreasing small bends in opposite directions, thus
causing it to be straight at the exit.
Roll forming (also called contour roll forming) is a continuous bending process in
which opposing rolls are used to produce long sections of formed shapes from coil or strip
stock. Several pairs of rolls are usually required to progressively accomplish the bending of
the stock into the desired shape. The process is illustrated in Figure 20.41 for a U-shaped
section. Products made by roll forming include channels, gutters, metal siding sections (for
homes),pipes and tubing with seams, and variousstructural sections. Although roll forming
has the general appearance of a rolling operation (and the tooling certainly looks similar),
the difference is that roll forming involves bending rather than compressing the work.
20.6.3 SPINNING
Spinning is a metal-forming process in which an axially symmetric part is gradually
shaped over a mandrel or form by means of a rounded tool or roller. The tool or roller
applies a very localized pressure (almost a point contact) to deform the work by axial and
radial motions over the surface of the part. Basic geometric shapes typically produced by
spinning include cups, cones, hemispheres, and tubes. There are three types of spinning
operations: (1) conventional spinning, (2) shear spinning, and (3) tube spinning.
Conventional Spinning
Conventional spinning is the basic spinning operation. As
illustrated in Figure 20.42, a sheet-metal disk is held against the end of a rotating mandrel
FIGURE 20.40
Roll bending.
Side view
FIGURE 20.41
Roll forming of a continuous channel section: (1) straight rolls, (2) partial form, and (3) ﬁnal form.
472
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

of the desired inside shape of the final part, while the tool or roller deforms the metal
against the mandrel. In some cases, the starting workpart is other than a flat disk. The
process requires a series of steps, as indicated in the figure, to complete the shaping of the
part. The tool position is controlled either by a human operator, using a fixed fulcrum to
achieve the required leverage, or by an automatic method such as numerical control.
These alternatives are manual spinning and power spinning. Power spinning has the
capability to apply higher forces to the operation, resulting in faster cycle times and
greater work size capacity. It also achieves better process control than manual spinning.
Conventional spinning bends the metal around a moving circular axis to conform to
the outside surface of the axisymmetric mandrel. The thickness of the metal therefore
remains unchanged (more or less) relativeto the starting diskthickness. The diameter of the
diskmustthereforebesomewhatlargerthanthediameteroftheresultingpart.Therequired
starting diameter can be figured by assuming constant volume, before and after spinning.
Applications of conventional spinning include production of conical and curved
shapesinlow quantities.Verylargediameterparts—upto5m(15ft)ormore—canbemade
by spinning. Alternative sheet-metal processes would require excessively high die costs.
The form mandrel in spinning can be made of wood or other soft materials that are easy to
shape. It is therefore a low-cost tool compared to the punch and die required for deep
drawing, which might be a substitute process for some parts.
Shear Spinning
In shear spinning, the part is formed over the mandrel by a shear
deformation process in which the outside diameter remains constant and the wall
thickness is therefore reduced, as in Figure 20.43. This shear straining (and consequent
thinning of the metal) distinguishes this process from the bending action in conventional
spinning. Several other names have been used for shear spinning, including flow turning,
shear forming, and spin forging. The process has been applied in the aerospace industry
to form large parts such as rocket nose cones.
For the simple conical shape in our figure, the resulting thickness of the spun wall
can be readily determined by the sine law relationship:
tf ¼ t sin a
ð20:16Þ
where tf ¼ the final thickness of the wall after spinning, t ¼ the starting thickness of the
disk, and a ¼ the mandrel angle (actually the half angle). Thinning is sometimes
quantified by the spinning reduction r:
r ¼ t  tf
t
ð20:17Þ
FIGURE 20.42
Conventional spinning:
(1)setupatstartofprocess;
(2) during spinning; and
(3) completion of process.
Section 20.6/Sheet-Metal Operations Not Performed on Presses
473

There are limits to the amount of thinning that the metal will endure in a spinning
operation before fracture occurs. The maximum reduction correlates well with reduction
of area in a tension test [8].
Tube Spinning
Tube spinning is used to reduce the wall thickness and increase the
length of a tube by means of a roller applied to the work over a cylindrical mandrel, as in
Figure 20.44. Tube spinning is similar to shear spinning except that the starting workpiece
is a tube rather than a flat disk. The operation can be performed by applying the roller
against the work externally (using a cylindrical mandrel on the inside of the tube) or
internally (using a die to surround the tube). It is also possible to form profiles in the walls
of the cylinder, as in Figure 20.44(c), by controlling the path of the roller as it moves
tangentially along the wall.
Spinning reduction for a tube-spinning operation that produces a wall of uniform
thickness can be determined as in shear spinning by Eq. (20.17).
20.6.4 HIGH-ENERGY-RATE FORMING
Several processes have been developed to form metals using large amounts of energy
applied in a very short time. Owing to this feature, these operations are called high-
FIGURE 20.43
Shear
spinning: (1) setup and
(2) completion of process.
FIGURE 20.44
Tube spinning: (a) external; (b) internal; and (c) proﬁling.
474
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

energy-rate forming (HERF) processes. They include explosive forming, electrohy-
draulic forming, and electromagnetic forming.
Explosive Forming
Explosive forming involves the use of an explosive charge to form
sheet (or plate) metal into a die cavity. One method of implementing the process is
illustrated in Figure 20.45. The workpart is clamped and sealed over the die, and a
vacuum is created in the cavity beneath. The apparatus is then placed in a large vessel of
water. An explosive charge is placed in the water at a certain distance above the work.
Detonation of the charge results in a shock wave whose energy is transmitted by the
water to cause rapid forming of the part into the cavity. The size of the explosive charge
and the distance at which it is placed above the part are largely a matter of art and
experience. Explosive forming is reserved for large parts, typical of the aerospace
industry.
Electrohydraulic Forming
Electrohydraulic forming is a HERF process in which a
shock wave to deform the work into a die cavity is generated by the discharge of electrical
energy between two electrodes submerged in a transmission fluid (water). Owing to its
principle of operation, this process is also called electric discharge forming. The setup for
theprocessisillustratedinFigure20.46. Electricalenergyisaccumulatedinlargecapacitors
and then released to the electrodes. Electrohydraulic forming is similar to explosive
forming. The difference is in the method of generating the energy and the smaller amounts
of energy that are released. This limits electrohydraulic forming to much smaller part sizes.
FIGURE 20.45
Explosive forming: (1) setup, (2) explosive is detonated, and (3) shock wave forms part and
plume escapes water surface.
FIGURE 20.46
Electrohydraulic forming
setup.
Section 20.6/Sheet-Metal Operations Not Performed on Presses
475

Electromagnetic Forming
Electromagnetic forming, also called magnetic pulse form-
ing, is a process in which sheet metal is deformed by the mechanical force of an electro-
magnetic field induced in the workpart by an energized coil. The coil, energized by a
capacitor, produces a magnetic field. This generates eddy currents in the work that produce
their own magnetic field. The induced field opposes the primary field, producing a
mechanical force that deforms the part into the surrounding cavity. Developed in the
1960s, electromagnetic forming is the most widely used HERF process [10]. It is typically
used to form tubular parts, as illustrated in Figure 20.47.
20.7
BENDING OF TUBE STOCK
Several methods of producing tubes and pipes are discussed in the previous chapter, and
tube spinning is described in Section 20.6.3. In this section, we examine methods by which
tubes are bent and otherwise formed. Bending of tube stock is more difficult than sheet
stock because a tube tends to collapse and fold when attempts are made to bend it.
Special flexible mandrels are usually inserted into the tube prior to bending to support
the walls during the operation.
Some of the terms in tube bending are defined in Figure 20.48. The radius of the
bend R is defined with respect to the centerline of the tube. When the tube is bent, the
wall on the inside of the bend is in compression, and the wall at the outside is in tension.
These stress conditions cause thinning and elongation of the outer wall and thickening
and shortening of the inner wall. As a result, there is a tendency for the inner and outer
walls to be forced toward each other to cause the cross section of the tube to flatten.
Because of this flattening tendency, the minimum bend radius R that the tube can be bent
is about 1.5 times the diameter D when a mandrel is used and 3.0 times D when no
mandrel is used [10]. The exact value depends on the wall factor WF, which is the
diameter D divided by wall thickness t. Higher values of WF increase the minimum bend
FIGURE 20.47
Electromagnetic
forming: (1) setup in which coil is
inserted into tubular workpart
surrounded by die; (2) formed
part.
FIGURE 20.48
Dimensions
and terms for a bent tube: D ¼
outside diameter of tube, R ¼
bend radius, t ¼ wall thickness.
476
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

radius; that is, tube bending is more difficult for thin walls. Ductility of the work material
is also an important factor in the process.
Several methods to bend tubes (and similar sections) are illustrated in Figure 20.49.
Stretch bending isaccomplishedby pulling andbending the tube around a fixed form block,
asinFigure20.49(a).Drawbendingisperformedbyclampingthetubeagainstaformblock,
and then pulling the tube through the bend by rotating the block as in (b). A pressure bar is
used to support the work as it is being bent. In compression bending, a wiper shoe is used to
wrap the tube around the contour of a fixed form block, as in (c). Roll bending (Section
20.6.2), generally associated with the forming of sheet stock, is also used for bending tubes
and other cross sections.
REFERENCES
[1] ASM Handbook, Vol. 14B, Metalworking: Sheet
Forming.
ASM
International,
Materials
Park,
Ohio, 2006.
[2] Eary, D. F., and Reed, E. A. Techniques of Press-
working Sheet Metal, 2nd ed. Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1974.
FIGURE 20.49
Tube
bending methods:
(a) stretch bending,
(b) draw bending, and
(c) compression bending.
For each method: (1) start
of process, and (2) during
bending. Symbols v and
F indicate motion and
applied force, respectively.
References
477

[3] Hoffman, E. G. Fundamentals of Tool Design, 2nd
ed. Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn,
Michigan, 1984.
[4] Hosford, W. F., and Caddell, R. M. Metal Forming:
Mechanics and Metallurgy, 3rd ed. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, UK, 2007.
[5] Kalpakjian, S. Manufacturing Processes for Engi-
neering Materials, 4th ed. Prentice Hall/Pearson,
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2003.
[6] Lange, K., et al. (eds.). Handbook of Metal Forming.
Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn,
Michigan, 1995.
[7] Mielnik, E. M. Metalworking Science and Engineer-
ing. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, 1991.
[8] Schey, J. A. Introduction to Manufacturing Pro-
cesses, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York, 2000.
[9] Spitler, D., Lantrip, J., Nee, J., and Smith, D. A.
Fundamentals of Tool Design, 5th ed. Society of
Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 2003.
[10] Wick, C., et al. (eds.). Tool and Manufacturing
Engineers Handbook, 4th ed. Vol. II, Forming. So-
ciety of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Mich-
igan, 1984.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
20.1.
Identify the three basic types of sheet metalwork-
ing operations.
20.2.
In conventional sheet metalworking operations, (a)
what is the name of the tooling and (b) what is the
name of the machine tool used in the operations?
20.3.
In blanking of a circular sheet-metal part, is the
clearance applied to the punch diameter or the die
diameter?
20.4.
What is the difference between a cutoff operation
and a parting operation?
20.5.
What is the difference between a notching opera-
tion and a seminotching operation?
20.6.
Describe each of the two types of sheet-metal-
bending operations: V-bending and edge bending.
20.7.
For what is the bend allowance intended to
compensate?
20.8.
What is springback in sheet-metal bending?
20.9.
Define drawing in the context of sheet metalworking.
20.10.
What are some of the simple measures used to assess
the feasibility of a proposed cup-drawing operation?
20.11.
Distinguish
between
redrawing
and
reverse
drawing.
20.12.
What are some of the possible defects in drawn
sheet-metal parts?
20.13.
What is an embossing operation?
20.14.
What is stretch forming?
20.15.
Identify the principal components of a stamping
die that performs blanking.
20.16.
What are the two basic categories of structural
frames used in stamping presses?
20.17.
What are the relative advantages and disadvan-
tages of mechanical presses versus hydraulic
presses in sheet metalworking?
20.18.
What is the Guerin process?
20.19.
Identify a major technical problem in tube bending.
20.20.
Distinguish between roll bending and roll forming.
20.21.
(Video) According to the video on sheet-metal
shearing, what is the blade rake angle?
20.22.
(Video) According to the video on sheet-metal
bending, what are the principal terms used to
describe bending on a press brake?
20.23.
(Video) According to the video on sheet-metal
stamping dies and processes, what are the factors
that affect the formability of a metal?
20.24.
(Video) Name the four forming processes listed in
the video clip on sheet-metal stamping dies and
processes.
20.25.
(Video) List the factors that affect the hold down
pressure in a drawing operation according to the
video on sheet-metal stamping dies and processes.
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 21 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
20.1.
Most sheet metalworking operations are per-
formed
as
which
one
of
the
following:
(a)
cold working, (b) hot working, or (c) warm
working?
20.2.
In a sheet-metal-cutting operation used to produce a
flat part with a hole in the center, the part itself is
called a blank, and the scrap piece that was cut out to
make the hole is called a slug: (a) true or (b) false?
478
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

20.3.
As sheet-metal stock hardness increases in a blank-
ing operation, the clearance between punch and
die should be (a) decreased, (b) increased, or (c)
remain the same?
20.4.
A circular sheet-metal slug produced in a hole
punching operation will have the same diameter
as (a) the die opening or (b) the punch?
20.5.
Thecuttingforceinasheet-metalblankingoperation
depends on which mechanical property of the metal
(one correct answer): (a) compressive strength, (b)
modulus of elasticity, (c) shear strength, (d) strain
rate, (e) tensile strength, or (f) yield strength?
20.6.
Which of the following descriptions applies to a V-
bending operation as compared to an edge-bending
operation (two best answers): (a) costly tooling, (b)
inexpensive tooling, (c) limited to 90 bends or less,
(d) used for high production, (e) used for low
production, and (f) uses a pressure pad to hold
down the sheet metal?
20.7.
Sheet-metal bending involves which of the follow-
ing stresses and strains (two correct answers):
(a) compressive, (b) shear, and (c) tensile?
20.8.
Which one of the following is the best definition of
bend allowance: (a) amount by which the die is
larger than the punch, (b) amount of elastic recov-
ery experienced by the metal after bending,
(c) safety factor used in calculating bending force,
or (d) length before bending of the straight sheet-
metal section to be bent?
20.9.
Springback in a sheet-metal-bending operation is
the result of which one of the following: (a) elastic
modulus of the metal, (b) elastic recovery of
the metal, (c) overbending, (d) overstraining, or
(e) yield strength of the metal?
20.10.
Which of the following are variations of sheet
metal-bending operations (two best answers):
(a) coining, (b) flanging, (c) hemming, (d) ironing,
(e) notching, (f) shear spinning, (g) trimming, and
(h) tube bending?
20.11.
The following are measures of feasibility for sev-
eral proposed cup-drawing operations; which of
the operations are likely to be feasible (three
best answers): (a) DR ¼ 1.7, (b) DR ¼ 2.7,
(c) r ¼ 0.35, (d) r ¼ 0.65, and (e) t/D ¼ 2%?
20.12.
The holding force in drawing is most likely to be
(a) greater than, (b) equal to, or (c) less than the
maximum drawing force?
20.13.
Which one of the following stamping dies is the
most complicated: (a) blanking die, (b) combina-
tion die, (c) compound die, (d) edge-bending die,
(e) progressive die, or (f) V-bending die?
20.14.
Which one of the following press types is usually
associated with the highest production rates in
sheet-metal-stamping operations: (a) adjustable
bed, (b) open-back inclinable, (c) press brake,
(d) solid gap, or (e) straight-sided?
20.15.
Whichofthe following processesare classified ashigh-
energy-rate forming processes (two best answers):
(a) electrochemical machining, (b) electromagnetic
forming, (c) electron beam cutting, (d) explosive
forming, (e) Guerin process, (f) hydroforming,
(g) redrawing, and (h) shear spinning?
PROBLEMS
Cutting Operations
20.1.
A power shears is used to cut soft cold-rolled steel
that is 4.75 mm thick. At what clearance should the
shears be set to yield an optimum cut?
20.2.
A blanking operation is to be performed on
2.0-mm thick cold-rolled steel (half hard). The
part is circular with diameter ¼ 75.0 mm. Deter-
mine the appropriate punch and die sizes for this
operation.
20.3.
A compound die will be used to blank and punch a
large washer out of 6061ST aluminum alloy sheet
stock 3.50 mm thick. The outside diameter of
the washer is 50.0 mm and the inside diameter is
15.0 mm. Determine (a) the punch and die sizes for
the blanking operation, and (b) the punch and die
sizes for the punching operation.
20.4.
A blanking die is to be designed to blank the part
outline shown in Figure P20.4. The material is 4-mm
25
25
25
85
50
FIGURE P20.4
Blanked part for Problem 20.4
(dimensions in mm).
Problems
479

thick stainless steel (half hard). Determine the di-
mensions of the blanking punch andthe dieopening.
20.5.
Determine the blanking force required in Problem
20.2, if the shear strength of the steel ¼ 325 MPa
and the tensile strength is 450 MPa.
20.6.
Determine the minimum tonnage press to perform
the blanking and punching operation in Problem
20.3. The aluminum sheet metal has a tensile
strength ¼ 310 MPa, a strength coefficient of 350
MPa, and a strain-hardening exponent of 0.12.
(a) Assume that blanking and punching occur
simultaneously. (b) Assume the punches are stag-
gered so that punching occurs first, then blanking.
20.7.
Determine the tonnage requirement for the blank-
ing operation in Problem 20.4, given that the stain-
less steel has a yield strength ¼ 500 MPa, a shear
strength ¼ 600 MPa, and a tensile strength ¼ 700
MPa.
20.8.
The foreman in the pressworking section comes to
you with the problem of a blanking operation that
is producing parts with excessive burrs. (a) What
are the possible reasons for the burrs? (b) What can
be done to correct the condition?
Bending
20.9.
A bending operation is to be performed on 5.00-mm
thick cold-rolled steel. The part drawing is given in
Figure P20.9. Determine the blank size required.
20.10.
Solve Problem 20.9 except that the bend radius R ¼
11.35 mm.
20.11.
An L-shaped part is to be bent in a V-bending opera-
tion on a press brake from a flat blank 4.0 in by 1.5 in
thatis5/32inthick.Thebendof90 istobemadeinthe
middle of the 4.0 in length. (a) Determine the dimen-
sions of the two equal sides that will result after the
bend, if the bend radius ¼ 3/16 in. For convenience,
these sides should be measured to the beginning of
thebendradius.(b)Also,determinethelengthofthe
part’s neutral axis after the bend. (c) Where should
the machine operator set the stop on the press brake
relative to the starting length of the part?
20.12.
A bending operation is to be performed on 4.0-mm
thick cold-rolled steel sheet that is 25 mm wide and
100 mm long. The sheet is bent along the 25 mm
direction, so that the bend is 25 mm long. The
resulting sheet metal part has an acute angle of
30 and a bend radius of 6 mm. Determine (a) the
bend allowance and (b) the length of the neutral
axis of the part after the bend. (Hint: the length of
the neutral axis before the bend ¼ 100.0 mm).
20.13.
Determine the bending force required in Problem
20.9 if the bend is to be performed in a V-die with a
die opening dimension of 40 mm. The material has
a tensile strength of 600 MPa and a shear strength
of 430 MPa.
20.14.
Solve Problem 20.13 except that the operation is
performed using a wiping die with die opening
dimension ¼ 28 mm.
20.15.
Determine the bending force required in Problem
20.11 if the bend is to be performed in a V-die with
a die opening width dimension ¼ 1.25 in. The
material has a tensile strength ¼ 70,000 lb/in2.
20.16.
Solve Problem 20.15 except that the operation is
performed using a wiping die with die opening
dimension ¼ 0.75 in.
20.17.
A sheet-metal part 3.0 mm thick and 20.0 mm long is
bent to an included angle ¼ 60 and a bend radius ¼
7.5 mm in a V-die. The metal has a yield strength ¼
220 MPa anda tensilestrength¼ 340 MPa.Compute
the requiredforcetobendthe part,giventhatthe die
opening dimension ¼ 15 mm.
Drawing Operations
20.18.
Derive an expression for the reduction r in drawing
as a function of drawing ratio DR.
20.19.
Acupistobedrawninadeepdrawingoperation.The
height of the cup is 75 mm and its inside diameter ¼
35
58
46.5
t = 5.00
R = 8.5
40°
FIGURE P20.9
Part in bending operation of Problem
20.9 (dimensions in mm).
480
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

100 mm. The sheet-metal thickness ¼ 2 mm. If the
blank diameter ¼ 225 mm, determine (a) drawing
ratio, (b) reduction, and (c) thickness-to-diameter
ratio. (d) Does the operation seem feasible?
20.20.
Solve Problem 20.19 except that the starting blank
size diameter ¼ 175 mm.
20.21.
A deep drawing operation is performed in which
the inside of the cylindrical cup has a diameter of
4.25 in and a height ¼ 2.65 in. The stock thickness ¼
3/16 in, and the starting blank diameter ¼ 7.7 in.
Punch and die radii ¼ 5/32 in. The metal has a
tensile strength ¼ 65,000 lb/in2, a yield strength ¼
32,000 lb/in2, and a shear strength of 40,000 lb/in2.
Determine
(a)
drawing
ratio,
(b)
reduction,
(c) drawing force, and (d) blankholder force.
20.22.
Solve Problem 20.21 except that the stock thick-
ness t ¼ 1/8 in.
20.23.
A cup-drawing operation is performed in which the
inside diameter ¼ 80 mm and the height ¼ 50 mm.
The stock thickness ¼ 3.0 mm, and the starting
blank diameter ¼ 150 mm. Punch and die radii ¼ 4
mm. Tensile strength ¼ 400 MPa and yield strength
¼ 180 MPa for this sheet metal. Determine
(a) drawing ratio, (b) reduction, (c) drawing force,
and (d) blankholder force.
20.24.
A deep drawing operation is to be performed on a
sheet-metal blank that is 1/8 in thick. The height
(inside dimension) of the cup ¼ 3.8 in and the
diameter (inside dimension) ¼ 5.0 in. Assuming the
punch radius ¼ 0, compute the starting diameter of
the blank to complete the operation with no
material left in the flange. Is the operation feasible
(ignoring the fact that the punch radius is too
small)?
20.25.
Solve Problem 20.24 except use a punch radius ¼
0.375 in.
20.26.
A drawing operation is performed on 3.0 mm stock.
The part is a cylindrical cup with height ¼ 50 mm
and inside diameter ¼ 70 mm. Assume the corner
radius on the punch is zero. (a) Find the required
starting blank size Db. (b) Is the drawing operation
feasible?
20.27.
Solve Problem 20.26 except that the height ¼
60 mm.
20.28.
Solve Problem 20.27 except that the corner radius
on the punch ¼ 10 mm.
20.29.
The foreman in the drawing section of the shop
brings to you several samples of parts that have
been drawn in the shop. The samples have various
defects. One has ears, another has wrinkles, and
still a third has torn sections at its base. What are
the causes of each of these defects and what reme-
dies would you propose?
20.30.
A cup-shaped part is to be drawn without a blank-
holder from sheet metal whose thickness ¼ 0.25 in.
The inside diameter of the cup ¼ 2.5 in, its height ¼
1.5 in, and the corner radius at the base ¼ 0.375 in.
(a) What is the minimum starting blank diameter
that can be used, according to Eq. (20.14)? (b)
Does this blank diameter provide sufficient mate-
rial to complete the cup?
Other Operations
20.31.
A 20-in-long sheet-metal workpiece is stretched in
a stretch forming operation to the dimensions
shown in Figure P20.31. The thickness of the be-
ginning stock is 3/16 in and the width is 8.5 in. The
metal has a flow curve defined by a strength co-
efficient of 75,000 lb/in2 and a strain hardening
exponent of 0.20. The yield strength of the material
is 30,000 lb/in2. (a) Find the stretching force F
required near the beginning of the operation
when yielding first occurs. Determine (b) true
strain experienced by the metal, (c) stretching
force F, and (d) die force Fdie at the very end
when the part is formed as indicated in Figure
P20.31(b).
20.32.
Determine the starting disk diameter required
to spin the part in Figure P20.32 using a conven-
tional spinning operation. The starting thickness ¼
2.4 mm.
Problems
481
FIGURE P20.31
Stretch forming operation: (a) before,
and (b) after (dimensions in inches).

20.33.
If the part illustrated in Figure P20.32 were made
by shear spinning, determine (a) the wall thickness
along the cone-shaped portion, and (b) the spin-
ning reduction r.
20.34.
Determine the shear strain that is experienced
by the material that is shear spun in Problem
20.33.
20.35.
A 75-mm diameter tube is bent into a rather
complex shape with a series of simple tube bending
operations. The wall thickness on the tube ¼ 4.75
mm. The tubes will be used to deliver fluids in a
chemical plant. In one of the bends where the bend
radius is 125 mm, the walls of the tube are flat-
tening badly. What can be done to correct the
condition?
30°
50
200
FIGURE P20.32
Part (cross section) in conventional
spinning (dimensions in mm).
482
Chapter 20/Sheet Metalworking

Part VI
Material Removal
Processes
21
THEORY OF METAL
MACHINING
Chapter Contents
21.1
Overview of Machining Technology
21.2
Theory of Chip Formation in Metal Machining
21.2.1
The Orthogonal Cutting Model
21.2.2
Actual Chip Formation
21.3
Force Relationships and the Merchant
Equation
21.3.1
Forces in Metal Cutting
21.3.2
The Merchant Equation
21.4
Power and Energy Relationships in Machining
21.5
Cutting Temperature
21.5.1
Analytical Methods to Compute
Cutting Temperatures
21.5.2
Measurement of Cutting Temperature
The material removal processes are a family of shaping
operations (Figure 1.4) in which excess material is removed
from a starting workpart so that what remains is the desired
final geometry. The ‘‘family tree’’ is shown in Figure 21.1.
The most important branch of the family is conventional
machining, in which a sharp cutting tool is used to me-
chanically cut the material to achieve the desired geometry.
The three principal machining processes are turning, dril-
ling, and milling. The ‘‘other machining operations’’ in
Figure 21.1 include shaping, planing, broaching, and saw-
ing. This chapter begins our coverage of machining, which
runs through Chapter 24.
Another group of material removal processes is the
abrasive processes, which mechanically remove material by
the action of hard, abrasive particles. This process group,
which includes grinding, is covered in Chapter 25. The
‘‘other abrasive processes’’ in Figure 21.1 include honing,
lapping, and superfinishing. Finally, there are the non-
traditional processes, which use various energy forms other
than a sharp cutting tool or abrasive particles to remove
material. The energy forms include mechanical, electro-
chemical, thermal, and chemical.1 The nontraditional pro-
cesses are discussed in Chapter 26.
Machining is a manufacturing process in which a
sharp cutting tool is used to cut away material to leave the
1Some of the mechanical energy forms in the nontraditional processes
involve the use of abrasive particles, and so they overlap with the
abrasive processes in Chapter 25.
483

desired part shape. The predominant cutting action in machining involves shear defor-
mation of the work material to form a chip; as the chip is removed, a new surface is
exposed. Machining is most frequently applied to shape metals. The process is illustrated
in the diagram of Figure 21.2.
Machining is one of the most important manufacturing processes. The Industrial
Revolution and the growth of the manufacturing-based economies of the world can be
traced largely to the development of the various machining operations (Historical Note
22.1). Machining is important commercially and technologically for several reasons:
FIGURE 21.1
Classiﬁcation of material
removal processes.
Conventional
machining
Abrasive
processes
Material removal
processes
Nontraditional
machining
Turning and
related operations
Drilling and
related operations
Other machining
operations
Milling
Other abrasive
processes
Mechanical energy
processes
Electrochemical
machining
Thermal energy
processes
Chemical
machining
Grinding
operations
FIGURE 21.2
(a) A cross-sectional view of the machining process. (b) Tool with negative rake angle; compare with
positive rake angle in (a).
484
Chapter 21/Theory of Metal Machining


Variety of work materials. Machining can be applied to a wide variety of work
materials. Virtually all solid metals can be machined. Plastics and plastic composites
can also be cut by machining. Ceramics pose difficulties because of their high
hardness and brittleness; however, most ceramics can be successfully cut by the
abrasive machining processes discussed in Chapter 25.

Variety of part shapes and geometric features. Machining can be used to create any
regular geometries, such as flat planes, round holes, and cylinders. By introducing
variations in tool shapes and tool paths, irregular geometries can be created, such as
screw threads and T-slots. By combining several machining operations in sequence,
shapes of almost unlimited complexity and variety can be produced.

Dimensional accuracy. Machining can produce dimensions to very close tolerances.
Some machining processes can achieve tolerances of 0.025 mm (0.001 in), much
more accurate than most other processes.

Good surface finishes. Machining is capable of creating very smooth surface finishes.
Roughness values less than 0.4 microns (16 m-in.) can be achieved in conventional
machining operations. Some abrasive processes can achieve even better finishes.
On the other hand, certain disadvantages are associated with machining and other
material removal processes:

Wasteful of material. Machining is inherently wasteful of material. The chips
generated in a machining operation are wasted material. Although these chips
can usually be recycled, they represent waste in terms of the unit operation.

Time consuming. A machining operation generally takes more time to shape a given
part than alternative shaping processes such as casting or forging.
Machining is generally performed after other manufacturing processes such as
casting or bulk deformation (e.g., forging, bar drawing). The other processes create the
general shape of the starting workpart, and machining provides the final geometry,
dimensions, and finish.
21.1
OVERVIEW OF MACHINING TECHNOLOGY
Machining is not just one process; it is a group of processes. The common feature is the
use of a cutting tool to form a chip that is removed from the workpart. To perform the
operation, relative motion is required between the tool and work. This relative motion is
achieved in most machining operations by means of a primary motion, called the cutting
speed, and a secondary motion, called the feed. The shape of the tool and its penetration
into the work surface, combined with these motions, produces the desired geometry of
the resulting work surface.
Types of Machining Operations
There are many kinds of machining operations, each
of which is capable of generating a certain part geometry and surface texture. We discuss
these operations in considerable detail in Chapter 22, but for now it is appropriate to
identify and define the three most common types: turning, drilling, and milling, illustrated
in Figure 21.3.
In turning, a cutting tool with a single cutting edge is used to remove material from a
rotating workpiece to generate a cylindrical shape, asinFigure21.3(a).Thespeedmotionin
turning is provided by the rotating workpart, and the feed motion is achieved by the cutting
tool moving slowly in a direction parallel to theaxis of rotation of theworkpiece. Drilling is
used to create a round hole. It is accomplished by a rotating tool that typically has two
Section 21.1/Overview of Machining Technology
485

cutting edges. The tool isfed in a directionparallelto its axis of rotation into the workpart to
form the round hole, as in Figure 21.3(b). In milling, a rotating tool with multiple cutting
edges is fed slowly across the work material to generate a plane or straight surface. The
directionofthe feedmotionisperpendiculartothetool’s axis ofrotation.Thespeedmotion
is provided by the rotating milling cutter. The two basic forms of milling are peripheral
milling and face milling, as in Figure 21.3(c) and (d).
Other conventional machining operations include shaping, planing, broaching, and
sawing (Section 22.6). Also, grinding and similar abrasive operations are often included
within the category of machining. These processes commonly follow the conventional
machining operations and are used to achieve a superior surface finish on the workpart.
The Cutting Tool
A cutting tool has one or more sharp cutting edges and is made of a
material that is harder than the work material. The cutting edge serves to separate a chip
from the parent work material, as in Figure 21.2. Connected to the cutting edge are two
surfaces of the tool: the rake face and the flank. The rake face, which directs the flow of the
newly formed chip, is oriented at a certain angle called the rake angle a. It is measured
relative to a plane perpendicular to the work surface. The rake angle can be positive, as in
Figure 21.2(a), or negative as in (b). The flank of the tool provides a clearance between the
tool and the newly generated work surface, thus protecting the surface from abrasion,which
would degrade the finish. This flank surface is oriented at an angle called the relief angle.
Most cutting tools in practice have more complex geometries than those in Figure 21.2.
There are two basic types, examples of which are illustrated in Figure 21.4: (a) single-point
toolsand(b)multiple-cutting-edgetools.A single-point toolhasonecuttingedgeandisused
for operations such as turning. In addition to the tool features shown in Figure 21.2, there is
one tool point from which the name of this cutting tool is derived. During machining, the
point of the tool penetrates below the original work surface of the part. The point is usually
rounded to a certain radius, called the nose radius. Multiple-cutting-edge tools have more
FIGURE 21.3
The three
most common types of
machining processes:
(a) turning, (b) drilling, and
two forms of milling:
(c) peripheral milling, and
(d) face milling.
Cutting tool
Feed motion
(tool)
New surface
Work
(a)
(b)
(d)
Drill
bit
Feed
motion
(tool)
Speed motion (tool)
Speed motion (work)
Speed motion
New surface
Work
Work
Feed motion
(work)
Milling cutter
(c)
Feed
motion
(work)
Work
Rotation
Milling cutter
New surface
486
Chapter 21/Theory of Metal Machining

than one cutting edge and usually achieve their motion relative to the workpart by rotating.
Drilling and milling use rotating multiple-cutting-edge tools. Figure 21.4(b) shows a helical
milling cutter used in peripheral milling. Although the shape is quite different from a single-
point tool, many elements of tool geometry are similar. Single-point and multiple-cutting-
edge tools and the materials used in them are discussed in more detail in Chapter 23.
Cutting Conditions
Relative motion is required between the tool and work to perform
a machining operation. The primary motion is accomplished at a certain cutting speed v.
In addition, the tool must be moved laterally across the work. This is a much slower
motion, called the feed f. The remaining dimension of the cut is the penetration of the
cutting tool below the original work surface, called the depth of cut d. Collectively, speed,
feed, and depth of cut are called the cutting conditions. They form the three dimensions
of the machining process, and for certain operations (e.g., most single-point tool
operations) they can be used to calculate the material removal rate for the process:
RMR ¼ vfd
ð21:1Þ
where RMR ¼ material removal rate, mm3/s (in3/min); v ¼ cutting speed, m/s (ft/min), which
must be converted to mm/s (in/min); f ¼ feed, mm (in); and d ¼ depth of cut, mm (in).
The cutting conditions for a turning operation are depicted in Figure 21.5. Typical
units used for cutting speed are m/s (ft/min). Feed in turning is expressed in mm/rev
FIGURE21.4
(a)Asingle-pointtoolshowingrakeface,ﬂank,andtoolpoint;and(b)ahelicalmillingcutter,representative
of tools with multiple cutting edges.
FIGURE 21.5
Cutting
speed, feed, and depth of
cut for a turning operation.
Section 21.1/Overview of Machining Technology
487

(in/rev), and depth of cut is expressed in mm (in). In other machining operations,
interpretations of the cutting conditions may differ. For example, in a drilling operation,
depth is interpreted as the depth of the drilled hole.
Machining operations usually divide into two categories, distinguished by purpose
and cutting conditions: roughing cuts and finishing cuts. Roughing cuts are used to
remove large amounts of material from the starting workpart as rapidly as possible, in
order to produce a shape close to the desired form, but leaving some material on the piece
for a subsequent finishing operation. Finishing cuts are used to complete the part and
achieve the final dimensions, tolerances, and surface finish. In production machining jobs,
one or more roughing cuts are usually performed on the work, followed by one or two
finishing cuts. Roughing operations are performed at high feeds and depths—feeds of 0.4
to 1.25 mm/rev (0.015–0.050 in/rev) and depths of 2.5 to 20 mm (0.100–0.750 in) are
typical. Finishing operations are carried out at low feeds and depths—feeds of 0.125 to 0.4
mm (0.005–0.015 in/rev) and depths of 0.75 to 2.0 mm (0.030–0.075 in) are typical. Cutting
speeds are lower in roughing than in finishing.
A cutting fluid is often applied to the machining operation to cool and lubricate the
cutting tool (cutting fluids are discussed in Section 23.4). Determining whether a cutting
fluid should be used, and, if so, choosing the proper cutting fluid, is usually included within
the scope of cutting conditions. Given the work material and tooling, the selection of these
conditions is very influential in determining the success of a machining operation.
Machine Tools
A machine tool is used to hold the workpart, position the tool relative
to the work, and provide power for the machining process at the speed, feed, and depth
that have been set. By controlling the tool, work, and cutting conditions, machine tools
permit parts to be made with great accuracy and repeatability, to tolerances of 0.025 mm
(0.001 in) and better. The term machine tool applies to any power-driven machine that
performs a machining operation, including grinding. The term is also applied to machines
that perform metal forming and pressworking operations (Chapters 19 and 20).
The traditional machine tools used to perform turning, drilling, and milling are
lathes, drill presses, and milling machines, respectively. Conventional machine tools are
usually tended by a human operator, who loads and unloads the workparts, changes
cutting tools, and sets the cutting conditions. Many modern machine tools are designed to
accomplish their operations with a form of automation called computer numerical
control (Section 38.3).
21.2
THEORY OF CHIP FORMATION IN METAL MACHINING
The geometry of most practical machining operations is somewhat complex. A simplified
model of machining is available that neglects many of the geometric complexities, yet
describes the mechanics of the process quite well. It is called the orthogonal cutting model,
Figure 21.6. Although an actual machining process is three-dimensional, the orthogonal
model has only two dimensions that play active roles in the analysis.
21.2.1 THE ORTHOGONAL CUTTING MODEL
By definition, orthogonal cutting uses a wedge-shaped tool in which the cutting edge is
perpendicular to the direction of cutting speed. As the tool is forced into the material, the
chip is formed by shear deformation along a plane called the shear plane, which is
oriented at an angle f with the surface of the work. Only at the sharp cutting edge of the
tool does failure of the material occur, resulting in separation of the chip from the parent
488
Chapter 21/Theory of Metal Machining

material. Along the shear plane, where the bulk of the mechanical energy is consumed in
machining, the material is plastically deformed.
The tool in orthogonal cutting has only two elements of geometry: (1) rake angle and
(2) clearanceangle. Asindicatedpreviously,therakeanglea determinesthedirectionthat
the chip flows as it is formed from the workpart; and the clearance angle provides a small
clearance between the tool flank and the newly generated work surface.
During cutting, the cutting edge of the tool is positioned a certain distance below
the original work surface. This corresponds to the thickness of the chip prior to chip
formation, to. As the chip is formed along the shear plane, its thickness increases to tc. The
ratio of to to tc is called the chip thickness ratio (or simply the chip ratio) r:
r ¼ to
tc
ð21:2Þ
Since the chip thickness after cutting is always greater than the corresponding thickness
before cutting, the chip ratio will always be less than 1.0.
Inadditiontoto,theorthogonalcuthasawidthdimensionw,asshowninFigure21.6(a),
even though this dimension does not contribute much to the analysis in orthogonal cutting.
The geometry of the orthogonal cutting model allows us to establish an important
relationship between the chip thickness ratio, the rake angle, and the shear plane angle. Let
ls be the length of the shear plane. We can make the substitutions: to ¼ ls sinf, and tc ¼ ls cos
(f  a). Thus,
r ¼
ls sin f
ls cos (f  a) ¼
sin f
cos (f  a)
This can be rearranged to determine f as follows:
tan f ¼
r cos a
1  r sin a
ð21:3Þ
The shear strain that occurs along the shear plane can be estimated by examining
Figure 21.7. Part (a) shows shear deformation approximated by a series of parallel plates
sliding against one another to form the chip. Consistent with our definition of shear strain
FIGURE 21.6
Orthogonal cutting: (a) as a three-dimensional process, and (b) how it reduces to two dimensions in
the side view.
Section 21.2/Theory of Chip Formation in Metal Machining
489

(Section 3.1.4), each plate experiences the shear strain shown in Figure 21.7(b). Referring to
part (c), this can be expressed as
g ¼ AC
BD ¼ AD þ DC
BD
which can be reduced to the following definition of shear strain in metal cutting:
g ¼ tan (f  a) þ cot f
ð21:4Þ
Example 21.1
Orthogonal
Cutting
In a machining operation that approximates orthogonal cutting, the cutting tool has a
rake angle ¼ 10. The chip thickness before the cut to ¼ 0.50 mm and the chip thickness
after the cut tc ¼ 1.125 in. Calculate the shear plane angle and the shear strain in the
operation.
Solution:
The chip thickness ratio can be determined from Eq. (21.2):
r ¼ 0:50
1:125 ¼ 0:444
The shear plane angle is given by Eq. (21.3):
tan f ¼
0:444 cos 10
1  0:444 sin 10 ¼ 0:4738
f ¼ 25:4
FIGURE 21.7
Shear strain during chip formation: (a) chip formation depicted as a series of parallel plates sliding
relative to each other; (b) one of the plates isolated to illustrate the deﬁnition of shear strain based on this parallel
plate model; and (c) shear strain triangle used to derive Eq. (21.4).
490
Chapter 21/Theory of Metal Machining

Finally, the shear strain is calculated from Eq. (21.4):
g ¼ tan (25:4  10) þ cot 25:4
g ¼ 0:275 þ 2:111 ¼ 2:386
n
21.2.2 ACTUAL CHIP FORMATION
We should note that there are differences between the orthogonal model and an actual
machining process. First, the shear deformation process does not occur along a plane, but
within a zone. If shearing were to take place across a plane of zero thickness, it would imply
that the shearing action must occur instantaneously as it passes through the plane, rather
than over some finite (although brief) time period. For the material to behave in a realistic
way,thesheardeformationmustoccurwithinathinshearzone.Thismorerealisticmodelof
the shear deformation process in machining is illustrated in Figure 21.8. Metal-cutting
experiments have indicated that thethickness of the shear zone is only a few thousandths of
an inch. Since the shear zone is so thin, there is not a great loss of accuracy in most cases by
referring to it as a plane.
Second, in addition to shear deformation that occurs in the shear zone, another
shearing action occurs in the chip after it has been formed. This additional shear is
referred to as secondary shear to distinguish it from primary shear. Secondary shear
results from friction between the chip and the tool as the chip slides along the rake face
of the tool. Its effect increases with increased friction between the tool and chip. The
primary and secondary shear zones can be seen in Figure 21.8.
Third, formation of the chip depends on the type of material being machined and
the cutting conditions of the operation. Four basic types of chip can be distinguished,
illustrated in Figure 21.9:

Discontinuous chip. When relatively brittle materials (e.g., cast irons) are machined
at low cutting speeds, the chips often form into separate segments (sometimes the
segments are loosely attached). This tends to impart an irregular texture to the
machined surface. High tool–chip friction and large feed and depth of cut promote
the formation of this chip type.

Continuous chip. When ductile work materials are cut at high speeds and relatively
small feeds and depths, long continuous chips are formed. A good surface finish
typically results when this chip type is formed. A sharp cutting edge on the tool and
FIGURE 21.8
More
realistic view of chip
formation, showing shear
zone rather than shear
plane. Also shown is the
secondary shear zone
resulting from tool–chip
friction.
Chip
Tool
Primary shear
zone
Secondary shear zone
Effective
Section 21.2/Theory of Chip Formation in Metal Machining
491

low tool–chip friction encourage the formation of continuous chips. Long, continuous
chips (as in turning) can cause problems with regard to chip disposal and/or tangling
about the tool. To solve these problems, turning tools are often equipped with chip
breakers (Section 23.3.1).

Continuous chip with built-up edge. When machining ductile materials at low-to-
medium cutting speeds, friction between tool and chip tends to cause portions of the
work material to adhere to the rake face of the tool near the cutting edge. This
formation is called a built-up edge (BUE). The formation of a BUE is cyclical; it
forms and grows, then becomes unstable and breaks off. Much of the detached BUE
is carried away with the chip, sometimes taking portions of the tool rake face with it,
which reduces the life of the cutting tool. Portions of the detached BUE that are not
carried off with the chip become imbedded in the newly created work surface,
causing the surface to become rough.
The preceding chip types were first classified by Ernst in the late 1930s [13]. Since
then, the available metals used in machining, cutting tool materials, and cutting speeds
have all increased, and a fourth chip type has been identified:

Serrated chips (the term shear-localized is also used for this fourth chip type). These
chips are semi-continuous in the sense that they possess a saw-tooth appearance that
is produced by a cyclical chip formation of alternating high shear strain followed by
low shear strain. This fourth type of chip is most closely associated with certain
difficult-to-machine metals such as titanium alloys, nickel-base superalloys, and
austenitic stainless steels when they are machined at higher cutting speeds. However,
the phenomenon is also found with more common work metals (e.g., steels) when
they are cut at high speeds [13].2
21.3
FORCE RELATIONSHIPS AND THE MERCHANT EQUATION
Several forces can be defined relative to the orthogonal cutting model. Based on these
forces, shear stress, coefficient of friction, and certain other relationships can be
defined.
Tool
Tool
Irregular surface due
to chip discontinuities
Good finish typical
(a)
(b)
Tool
Tool
Particle of BUE
on new surface
(c)
(d)
Built-up edge
High shear
strain zone
Low shear
strain zone
Discontinuous chip
Continuous chip
Continuous chip
FIGURE 21.9
Four types of chip formation in metal cutting: (a) discontinuous, (b) continuous, (c) continuous with
built-up edge, (d) serrated.
2A more complete description of the serrated chip type can be found in Trent & Wright [12], pp. 348–367.
492
Chapter 21/Theory of Metal Machining

21.3.1 FORCES IN METAL CUTTING
ConsidertheforcesactingonthechipduringorthogonalcuttinginFigure21.10(a). Theforces
applied against the chip by the tool can be separated into two mutually perpendicular
components: friction force and normal force to friction. The friction force F is the frictional
forceresistingtheflowofthechipalongtherakefaceofthetool.ThenormalforcetofrictionN
is perpendicular to the friction force. These two components can be used to define the
coefficient of friction between the tool and the chip:
m ¼ F
N
ð21:5Þ
The friction force and its normal force can be added vectorially to form a resultant
force R, which is oriented at an angle b, called the friction angle. The friction angle is
related to the coefficient of friction as
m ¼ tan b
ð21:6Þ
Inadditiontothetoolforcesactingonthechip,therearetwoforcecomponentsapplied
by the workpiece on the chip: shear force and normal force to shear. The shear force Fs is the
force that causes shear deformation to occur in the shear plane, and the normal force to shear
Fn is perpendicular to the shear force. Based on the shear force, wecan define the shear stress
that acts along the shear plane between the work and the chip:
t ¼ Fs
As
ð21:7Þ
where As ¼ area of the shear plane. This shear plane area can be calculated as
As ¼ tow
sin f
ð21:8Þ
The shear stress in Eq. (21.7) represents the level of stress required to perform the
machining operation. Therefore, this stress is equal to the shear strength of the work
material (t ¼ S) under the conditions at which cutting occurs.
Vector addition of the two force components Fs and Fn yields the resultant force R0.
In order for the forces acting on the chip to be in balance, this resultant R0 must be equal
in magnitude, opposite in direction, and collinear with the resultant R.
FIGURE 21.10
Forces in metal cutting: (a) forces acting on the chip in orthogonal cutting, and (b) forces acting on
the tool that can be measured.
Section 21.3/Force Relationships and the Merchant Equation
493

None of the four force components F, N, Fs, and Fn can be directly measured in a
machining operation, because the directions in which they are applied vary with different
tool geometries and cutting conditions. However, it is possible for the cutting tool to be
instrumented using a force measuring device called a dynamometer, so that two additional
force components acting against the tool can be directly measured: cutting force and thrust
force. The cutting force Fc is in the direction of cutting, the same direction as the cutting
speedv,andthethrustforceFtisperpendiculartothecuttingforceandisassociatedwiththe
chip thickness before the cut to. The cutting force and thrust force are shown in Figure 21.10
(b) together with their resultant force R00. The respective directions of these forces are
known, so the force transducers in the dynamometer can be aligned accordingly.
Equations can be derived to relate the four force components that cannot
be measured to the two forces that can be measured. Using the force diagram in
Figure 21.11, the following trigonometric relationships can be derived:
F ¼ Fc sin a þ Ft cos a
ð21:9Þ
N ¼ Fc cos a  Ft sin a
ð21:10Þ
Fs ¼ Fc cos f  Ft sin f
ð21:11Þ
Fn ¼ Fc sin f þ Ft cos f
ð21:12Þ
If cutting force and thrust force are known, these four equations can be used to calculate
estimates of shear force, friction force, and normal force to friction. Based on these force
estimates, shear stress and coefficient of friction can be determined.
Notethatinthespecialcaseoforthogonalcuttingwhentherakeanglea ¼ 0,Eqs.(21.9)
and (21.10) reduce to F ¼ Ft and N ¼ Fc, respectively. Thus, in this special case, friction force
and its normal force could be directly measured by the dynamometer.
Example 21.2
Shear Stress in
Machining
Suppose in Example 21.1 that cutting force and thrust force are measured during an
orthogonal cutting operation: Fc ¼ 1559 N and Ft ¼ 1271 N. The width of the orthogonal
cutting operation w ¼ 3.0 mm. Based on these data, determine the shear strength of the
work material.
Solution:
From Example 21.1, rake angle a ¼ 10, and shear plane angle f ¼ 25.4. Shear
force can be computed from Eq. (21.11):
Fs ¼ 1559 cos 25:4  1271 sin 25:4 ¼ 863 N
FIGURE 21.11
Force diagram showing
geometric relationships between F, N,
Fs, Fn, Fc, and Ft.
494
Chapter 21/Theory of Metal Machining

The shear plane area is given by Eq. (21.8):
As ¼ (0:5)(3:0)
sin 25:4 ¼ 3:497 mm2
Thus the shear stress, which equals the shear strength of the work material, is
t ¼ S ¼ 863
3:497 ¼ 247 N/mm2 ¼ 247 MPa
n
This example demonstrates that cutting force and thrust force arerelated to the shear
strength of the work material. The relationships can be established in a more direct way.
Recalling from Eq. (21.7) that the shear force Fs ¼ S As, the force diagram of Figure 21.11
can be used to derive the following equations:
Fc ¼
Sto w cos (b  a)
sin f cos(f þ b  a) ¼ Fs cos (b  a)
cos(f þ b  a)
ð21:13Þ
and
Ft ¼
Stw sin (b  a)
sin f cos(f þ b  a) ¼ Fs sin (b  a)
cos (f þ b  a)
ð21:14Þ
These equations allow one to estimate cutting force and thrust force in an orthogonal
cutting operation if the shear strength of the work material is known.
21.3.2 THE MERCHANT EQUATION
One of the important relationships in metal cutting was derived by Eugene Merchant
[10]. Its derivation was based on the assumption of orthogonal cutting, but its general
validity extends to three-dimensional machining operations. Merchant started with the
definition of shear stress expressed in the form of the following relationship derived by
combining Eqs. (21.7), (21.8), and (21.11):
t ¼ Fc cos f  Ft sin f
(tow=sin f)
ð21:15Þ
Merchant reasoned that, out of all the possible angles emanating from the cutting
edge of the tool at which shear deformation could occur, there is one angle f that
predominates. This is the angle at which shear stress is just equal to the shear strength of
the work material, and so shear deformation occurs at this angle. For all other possible
shear angles, the shear stress is less than the shear strength, so chip formation cannot
occur at these other angles. In effect, the work material will select a shear plane angle that
minimizes energy. This angle can be determined by taking the derivative of the shear
stress S in Eq. (21.15) with respect to f and setting the derivative to zero. Solving for f, we
get the relationship named after Merchant:
f ¼ 45 þ a
2  b
2
ð21:16Þ
Among the assumptions in the Merchant equation is that shear strength of the work
material is a constant, unaffected by strain rate, temperature, and other factors. Because
this assumption is violated in practical machining operations, Eq. (21.16) must be
Section 21.3/Force Relationships and the Merchant Equation
495

considered an approximate relationship rather than an accurate mathematical equation.
Let us nevertheless consider its application in the following example.
Example 21.3
Estimating
Friction Angle
Using the data and results from our previous examples, determine (a) the friction angle
and (b) the coefficient of friction.
Solution:
(a) From Example 21.1, a ¼ 10, and f ¼ 25.4. Rearranging Eq. (21.16),
the friction angle can be estimated:
b ¼ 2 (45) þ 10  2 (25:4) ¼ 49:2
(b) The coefficient of friction is given by Eq. (21.6):
m ¼ tan 49:2 ¼ 1:16
n
Lessons Based on the Merchant Equation
The real value of the Merchant equation is
that it defines the general relationship between rake angle, tool–chip friction, and shear
plane angle. The shear plane angle can be increased by (1) increasing the rake angle and
(2) decreasing the friction angle (and coefficient of friction) between the tool and the
chip. Rake angle can be increased by proper tool design, and friction angle can be
reduced by using a lubricant cutting fluid.
The importance of increasing the shear plane angle can be seen in Figure 21.12. If all
other factors remain the same, a higher shear plane angle results in a smaller shear plane
area. Since the shear strength is applied across this area, the shear force required to form
the chip will decrease when the shear plane area is reduced. A greater shear plane angle
results in lower cutting energy, lower power requirements, and lower cutting temperature.
These are good reasons to try to make the shear plane angle as large as possible during
machining.
Approximation of Turning by Orthogonal Cutting
The orthogonal model can be used
to approximate turning and certain other single-point machining operations so long as the
feed in these operations is small relative to depth of cut. Thus, most of the cutting will take
place in the direction of the feed, and cutting on the point of the tool will be negligible.
Figure 21.13 indicates the conversion from one cutting situation to the other.
FIGURE 21.12
Effect of shear plane angle f: (a) higher f with a resulting lower shear plane area;
(b) smaller f with a corresponding larger shear plane area. Note that the rake angle is larger in (a), which
tends to increase shear angle according to the Merchant equation.
496
Chapter 21/Theory of Metal Machining

The interpretation of cutting conditions is different in the two cases. The chip
thickness before the cut to in orthogonal cutting corresponds to the feed f in turning, and
the width of cut w in orthogonal cutting corresponds to the depth of cut d in turning. In
addition, the thrust force Ft in the orthogonal model corresponds to the feed force Ff in
turning. Cutting speed and cutting force have the same meanings in the two cases.
Table 21.1 summarizes the conversions.
21.4
POWER AND ENERGY RELATIONSHIPS IN MACHINING
A machining operation requires power. The cutting force in a production machining
operation might exceed 1000 N (several hundred pounds), as suggested by Example 21.2.
Typical cutting speeds are several hundred m/min. The product of cutting force and speed
gives the power (energy per unit time) required to perform a machining operation:
Pc ¼ Fcv
ð21:17Þ
where Pc ¼ cutting power, N-m/s or W (ft-lb/min); Fc ¼ cutting force, N (lb); and v ¼
cutting speed, m/s (ft/min). In U.S. customary units, power is traditionally expressed as
TABLE 21.1
Conversion key: turning operation
vs. orthogonal cutting.
Turning Operation
Orthogonal Cutting Model
Feed f ¼
Chip thickness before cut to
Depth d ¼
Width of cut w
Cutting speed v ¼
Cutting speed v
Cutting force Fc ¼
Cutting force Fc
Feed force Ff ¼
Thrust force Ft
FIGURE 21.13
Approximation of turning
by the orthogonal model:
(a) turning; and (b) the
corresponding orthogo-
nal cutting.
Section 21.4/Power and Energy Relationships in Machining
497

horsepower by dividing ft-lb/min by 33,000. Hence,
HPc ¼
Fcv
33; 000
ð21:18Þ
where HPc ¼ cutting horsepower, hp. The gross power required to operate the machine
tool is greater than the powerdelivered to thecutting process because of mechanical losses
in the motor and drive train in the machine. These losses can be accounted for by the
mechanical efficiency of the machine tool:
Pg ¼ Pc
E
or
HPg ¼ HPc
E
ð21:19Þ
where Pg ¼ gross power of the machine tool motor, W; HPg ¼ gross horsepower; and E ¼
mechanical efficiency of the machine tool. Typical values of E for machine tools are
around 90%.
It is often useful to convert power into power per unit volume rate of metal cut. This
is called the unit power, Pu (or unit horsepower, HPu), defined:
Pu ¼ Pc
RMR
or
HPu ¼ HPc
RMR
ð21:20Þ
where RMR ¼ material removal rate, mm3/s (in3/min). The material removal rate can be
calculated as the product of vtow. This is Eq. (21.1) using the conversions from Table 21.1.
Unit power is also known as the specific energy U.
U ¼ Pu ¼ Pc
RMR
¼ Fcv
vtow ¼ Fc
tow
ð21:21Þ
The units for specific energy are typically N-m/mm3 (in-lb/in3). However, the last
expression in Eq. (21.21) suggests that the units might be reduced to N/mm2 (lb/in2).
It is more meaningful to retain the units as N-m/mm3 or J/mm3 (in-lb/in3).
Example 21.4
Power
Relationships in
Machining
Continuing with our previous examples, let us determine cutting power and specific
energy in the machining operation if the cutting speed ¼ 100 m/min. Summarizing the
data and results from previous examples, to ¼ 0.50 mm, w ¼ 3.0 mm, Fc ¼ 1557 N.
Solution:
From Eq. (21.18), power in the operation is
Pc ¼ (1557 N)(100 m/min) ¼ 155; 700 N  m/min ¼ 155; 700 J/min ¼ 2595 J/s ¼ 2595 W
Specific energy is calculated from Eq. (21.21):
U ¼
155; 700
100(103)(3:0)(0:5)
¼ 155; 700
150; 000 ¼ 1:038 N-m/min3
n
Unit power and specific energy provide a useful measure of how much power (or
energy) is required to remove a unit volume of metal during machining. Using this
measure, different work materials can be compared in terms of their power and energy
requirements. Table 21.2 presents a listing of unit horsepower and specific energy values
for selected work materials.
The values in Table 21.2 are based on two assumptions: (1) the cutting tool is sharp,
and (2) the chip thickness before the cut to ¼ 0.25 mm (0.010 in). If these assumptions are
not met, some adjustments must be made. For worn tools, the power required to perform
the cut is greater, and this is reflected in higher specific energy and unit horsepower values.
As an approximate guide, the values in the table should be multiplied by a factor between
1.00 and 1.25 depending on the degree of dullness of the tool. For sharp tools, the factor is
498
Chapter 21/Theory of Metal Machining

1.00. For tools in a finishing operation that are nearly worn out, the factor is around 1.10,
and for tools in a roughing operation that are nearly worn out, the factor is 1.25.
Chip thickness before the cut to also affects the specific energy and unit horsepower
values. As to is reduced, unit power requirements increase. This relationship is referred to as
thesizeeffect.Forexample,grinding,inwhichthechipsareextremelysmallbycomparisonto
most other machining operations, requires very high specific energy values. The U and HPu
valuesinTable21.2canstillbeusedtoestimatehorsepowerandenergyforsituationsinwhich
to is not equal to 0.25 mm (0.010 in) by applying a correction factor to account for any
difference in chip thickness before the cut. Figure 21.14 provides values of this correction
TABLE 21.2
Values of unit horsepower and speciﬁc energy for selected work
materials using sharp cutting tools and chip thickness before the cut to = 0.25 mm
(0.010 in).
Specific Energy U or
Unit Power Pu
Material
Brinell
Hardness
N-m/mm3
in-lb/in3
Unit Horsepower
HPu hp/(in3/min)
Carbon steel
150–200
1.6
240,000
0.6
201–250
2.2
320,000
0.8
251–300
2.8
400,000
1.0
Alloy steels
200–250
2.2
320,000
0.8
251–300
2.8
400,000
1.0
301–350
3.6
520,000
1.3
351–400
4.4
640,000
1.6
Cast irons
125–175
1.1
160,000
0.4
175–250
1.6
240,000
0.6
Stainless steel
150–250
2.8
400,000
1.0
Aluminum
50–100
0.7
100,000
0.25
Aluminum alloys
100–150
0.8
120,000
0.3
Brass
100–150
2.2
320,000
0.8
Bronze
100–150
2.2
320,000
0.8
Magnesium alloys
50–100
0.4
60,000
0.15
Data compiled from [6], [8], [11], and other sources.
FIGURE 21.14
Correction
factor for unit horsepower
and speciﬁc energy when
values of chip thickness
before the cut to are
different from 0.25 mm
(0.010 in).
0.125
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.005
0.25
0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.030
0.040
0.050
0.38
0.50
0.63
Chip thickness before cut to (mm)
Chip thickness before cut to (in.)
0.75
0.88
0.1
1.25
Correction factor
Section 21.4/Power and Energy Relationships in Machining
499

factor as a function of to. The unit horsepower and specific energy values in Table 21.2 should
bemultipliedbytheappropriatecorrectionfactorwhentoisdifferentfrom0.25mm(0.010in).
In addition to tool sharpness and size effect, other factors also influence the values of
specific energy and unit horsepower for a given operation. These other factors include rake
angle, cuttingspeed, andcuttingfluid. Asrakeangleorcuttingspeedareincreased, orwhen
cutting fluid is added, the U and HPu values are reduced slightly. For our purposes in the
end-of-chapter exercises, the effects of these additional factors can be ignored.
21.5
CUTTING TEMPERATURE
Of the total energy consumed in machining, nearly all of it (98%) is converted into heat.
This heat can cause temperatures to be very high at the tool–chip interface—over 600C
(1100F) is not unusual. The remaining energy (2%) is retained as elastic energy in the chip.
Cutting temperatures are important because high temperatures (1) reduce tool life,
(2) produce hot chips that pose safety hazards to the machine operator, and (3) can cause
inaccuracies in workpart dimensions due to thermal expansion of the work material. In this
section, we discuss the methods of calculating and measuring temperatures in machining
operations.
21.5.1 ANALYTICAL METHODS TO COMPUTE CUTTING TEMPERATURES
There are several analytical methods to calculate estimates of cutting temperature.
References [3], [5], [9], and [15] present some of these approaches. We describe the
method by Cook [5], which was derived using experimental data for a variety of work
materials to establish parameter values for the resulting equation. The equation can be
used to predict the increase in temperature at the tool–chip interface during machining:
DT ¼ 0:4U
rC
vto
K

0:333
ð21:22Þ
where DT ¼ mean temperature rise at the tool–chip interface, C (F); U ¼ specific energy
in the operation, N-m/mm3 or J/mm3 (in-lb/in3); v ¼ cutting speed, m/s (in/sec); to ¼ chip
thickness before the cut, m (in); rC ¼ volumetric specific heat of the work material, J/mm3-
C (in-lb/in3-F); K ¼ thermal diffusivity of the work material, m2/s (in2/sec).
Example 21.5
Cutting
Temperature
For the specific energy obtained in Example 21.4, calculate the increase in temperature
above ambient temperature of 20C. Use the given data from the previous examples in this
chapter: v ¼ 100 m/min, to ¼ 0.50 mm. In addition, the volumetric specific heat for the work
material ¼ 3.0 (103) J/mm3-C, and thermal diffusivity ¼ 50 (106) m2/s (or 50 mm2/s).
Solution:
Cutting speed must be converted to mm/s: v ¼ (100 m/min)(103 mm/m)/(60 s/
min) ¼ 1667 mm/s. Eq. (21.22) can now be used to compute the mean temperature rise:
DT ¼ 0:4(1:038)
3:0(103)
C 1667(0:5)
50

0:333
¼ (138:4)(2:552) ¼ 353C
n
21.5.2 MEASUREMENT OF CUTTING TEMPERATURE
Experimental methods have been developed to measure temperatures in machining.
The most frequently used measuring technique is the tool–chip thermocouple. This
thermocouple consists of the tool and the chip as the two dissimilar metals forming the
500
Chapter 21/Theory of Metal Machining

thermocouple junction. By properly connecting electrical leads to the tool and work-
part (which is connected to the chip), the voltage generated at the tool–chip interface
during cutting can be monitored using a recording potentiometer or other appropriate
data-collection device. The voltage output of the tool–chip thermocouple (measured in
mV) can be converted into the corresponding temperature value by means of calibra-
tion equations for the particular tool–work combination.
The tool–chip thermocouple has been utilized by researchers to investigate the
relationship between temperature and cutting conditions such as speed and feed. Trigger
[14] determined the speed–temperature relationship to be of the following general form:
T ¼ K vm
ð21:23Þ
where T ¼ measured tool–chip interface temperature and v ¼ cutting speed. The
parameters K and m depend on cutting conditions (other than v) and work material.
Figure 21.15 plots temperature versus cutting speed for several work materials, with
equations of the form of Eq. (21.23) determined for each material. A similar relationship
exists between cutting temperature and feed; however, the effect of feed on temperature
is not as strong as cutting speed. These empirical results tend to support the general
validity of the Cook equation: Eq. (21.22).
REFERENCES
[1] ASM Handbook, Vol. 16, Machining. ASM Inter-
national, Materials Park, Ohio, 1989.
[2] Black, J, and Kohser, R. DeGarmo’s Materials and
Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
[3] Boothroyd, G., and Knight, W. A. Fundamentals of
Metal Machining and Machine Tools, 3rd ed. CRC
Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2006.
[4] Chao, B. T., and Trigger, K. J.‘‘Temperature Distri-
bution
at
the
Tool-Chip
Interface
in
Metal
FIGURE 21.15
Experimentally measured
cutting temperatures
plotted against speed
for three work materials,
indicating general
agreement with
Eq. (21.23). (Based on
data in [9].)3
200
1600
1200
800
400
400
600
Cutting speed (ft/min)
800
1000
Cutting temperature, °F
B1113 Free machining steel (T = 86.2v 0.348)
18-8 Stainless steel (T = 135v 0.361)
RC-130B Titanium (T = 479v 0.182)
3The units reported in the Loewen and Shaw ASME paper [9] were F for cutting temperature and ft/min
for cutting speed. We have retained those units in the plots and equations of our figure.
References
501

Cutting,’’ ASME Transactions, Vol. 77, October
1955, pp. 1107– 1121.
[5] Cook, N.‘‘Tool Wear and Tool Life,’’ ASME Trans-
actions,
Journal
of
Engineering
for
Industry,
Vol. 95, November 1973, pp. 931–938.
[6] Drozda, T. J., and Wick, C. (eds.). Tool and Manu-
facturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol. I,
Machining. Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
Dearborn, Michigan, 1983.
[7] Kalpakjian, S., and Schmid, R. Manufacturing Pro-
cesses for Engineering Materials, 4th ed. Prentice
Hall/Pearson, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2003.
[8] Lindberg, R. A. Processes and Materials of Manu-
facture, 4th ed. Allyn and Bacon, Inc., Boston, 1990.
[9] Loewen, E. G., and Shaw, M. C.‘‘On the Analysis of
Cutting Tool Temperatures,’’ ASME Transactions,
Vol. 76, No. 2, February 1954, pp. 217–225.
[10] Merchant, M. E., ‘‘Mechanics of the Metal Cutting
Process: II. Plasticity Conditions in Orthogonal Cut-
ting,’’ Journal of Applied Physics, Vol. 16, June 1945
pp. 318–324.
[11] Schey, J. A. Introduction to Manufacturing Pro-
cesses, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York, 1999.
[12] Shaw, M. C. Metal Cutting Principles, 2nd ed. Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford, UK, 2005.
[13] Trent, E. M., and Wright, P. K. Metal Cutting, 4th ed.
Butterworth Heinemann, Boston, 2000.
[14] Trigger, K. J.‘‘Progress Report No. 2 on Tool–Chip
Interface
Temperatures,’’
ASME
Transactions,
Vol. 71, No. 2, February 1949, pp. 163–174.
[15] Trigger, K. J., and Chao, B. T.‘‘An Analytical Eval-
uation of Metal Cutting Temperatures,’’ ASME
Transactions, Vol. 73, No. 1, January 1951, pp. 57–68.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
21.1.
What are the three basic categories of material
removal processes?
21.2.
What distinguishes machining from other manu-
facturing processes?
21.3.
Identify some of the reasons why machining is
commercially and technologically important.
21.4.
Name
the
three
most
common
machining
processes.
21.5.
What are the two basic categories of cutting tools in
machining? Give two examples of machining op-
erations that use each of the tooling types.
21.6.
What are the parameters of a machining operation
that are included within the scope of cutting
conditions?
21.7.
Explain the difference between roughing and fin-
ishing operations in machining.
21.8.
What is a machine tool?
21.9.
What is an orthogonal cutting operation?
21.10.
Why is the orthogonal cutting model useful in the
analysis of metal machining?
21.11.
Name and briefly describe the four types of chips
that occur in metal cutting.
21.12.
Identify the four forces that act upon the chip in the
orthogonal metal cutting model but cannot be
measured directly in an operation.
21.13.
Identify the two forces that can be measured in the
orthogonal metal cutting model.
21.14.
What is the relationship between the coefficient of
friction and the friction angle in the orthogonal
cutting model?
21.15.
DescribeinwordswhattheMerchantequationtellsus.
21.16.
How is the power required in a cutting operation
related to the cutting force?
21.17.
What is the specific energy in metal machining?
21.18.
What does the term size effect mean in metal cutting?
21.19.
What is a tool–chip thermocouple?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 17 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
21.1.
Which of the following manufacturing processes
are classified as material removal processes (two
correct answers): (a) casting, (b) drawing, (c) extru-
sion, (d) forging, (e) grinding, (f) machining,
(g) molding, (h) pressworking, and (i) spinning?
21.2.
A lathe is used to perform which one of the
following manufacturing operations: (a) broaching,
(b) drilling, (c) lapping, (d) milling, or (e) turning?
21.3.
With which one of the following geometric forms is
the drilling operation most closely associated:
502
Chapter 21/Theory of Metal Machining

(a) external cylinder, (b) flat plane, (c) round hole,
(d) screw threads, or (e) sphere?
21.4.
If the cutting conditions in a turning operation are
cutting speed ¼ 300 ft/min, feed ¼ 0.010 in/rev, and
depth of cut ¼ 0.100 in, which one of the following
is the material removal rate: (a) 0.025 in3/min,
(b) 0.3 in3/min, (c) 3.0 in3/min, or (d) 3.6 in3/min?
21.5.
A roughing operation generally involves which one
of the following combinations of cutting condi-
tions: (a) high v, f, and d; (b) high v, low f and d;
(c) low v, high fandd; or(d) low v, f, and d, where v ¼
cutting speed, f ¼ feed, and d ¼ depth?
21.6.
Which of the following are characteristics of the
orthogonal cutting model (three best answers):
(a) a circular cutting edge is used, (b) a multiple-
cutting-edge tool is used, (c) a single-point tool is
used, (d) only two dimensions play an active role in
the analysis, (e) the cutting edge is parallel to the
direction of cutting speed, (f) the cutting edge is
perpendicular to the direction of cutting speed, and
(g) the two elements of tool geometry are rake and
relief angle?
21.7.
The chip thickness ratio is which one of the following:
(a) tc/to, (b) to/tc, (c) f/d, or (d) to/w, where tc ¼ chip
thickness after the cut, to ¼ chip thickness before
the cut, f ¼ feed, d ¼ depth, and w ¼ width of cut?
21.8.
Which one of the four types of chip would be
expected in a turning operation conducted at low
cutting speed on a brittle work material: (a) con-
tinuous,
(b)
continuous
with
built-up
edge,
(c) discontinuous, or (d) serrated?
21.9.
According to the Merchant equation, an increase
in rake angle would have which of the following
results, all other factors remaining the same (two
best answers): (a) decrease in friction angle,
(b) decrease in power requirements, (c) decrease
in shear plane angle, (d) increase in cutting tem-
perature, and (e) increase in shear plane angle?
21.10.
In using the orthogonal cutting model to approxi-
mate a turning operation, the chip thickness before
the cut to corresponds to which one of the following
cutting conditions in turning: (a) depth of cut d,
(b) feed f, or (c) speed v?
21.11.
Which one of the following metals would usually
have the lowest unit horsepower in a machining
operation: (a) aluminum, (b) brass, (c) cast iron, or
(d) steel?
21.12.
For which one of the following values of chip thick-
ness before the cut to would you expect the specific
energy in machining to be the greatest:(a) 0.010 in,
(b) 0.025 in, (c) 0.12 mm, or (d) 0.50 mm?
21.13.
Which of the following cutting conditions has the
strongest effect on cutting temperature: (a) feed or
(b) speed?
PROBLEMS
Chip Formation and Forces in Machining
21.1.
In an orthogonal cutting operation, the tool has a
rakeangle ¼ 15. Thechipthickness beforethe cut ¼
0.30 mm and the cut yields a deformed chip thick-
ness ¼ 0.65 mm. Calculate (a) the shear plane angle
and (b) the shear strain for the operation.
21.2.
In Problem 21.1, suppose the rake angle were
changed to 0. Assuming that the friction angle
remains the same, determine (a) the shear plane
angle, (b) the chip thickness, and (c) the shear
strain for the operation.
21.3.
In an orthogonal cutting operation, the 0.25-in
wide tool has a rake angle of 5. The lathe is set
so the chip thickness before the cut is 0.010 in.
After the cut, the deformed chip thickness is meas-
ured to be 0.027 in. Calculate (a) the shear plane
angle and (b) the shear strain for the operation.
21.4.
Inaturningoperation,spindlespeedissettoprovide
a cutting speed of 1.8 m/s. The feed and depth of cut
ofcut are 0.30mmand 2.6 mm,respectively. Thetool
rake angle is 8. After the cut, the deformed chip
thickness is measured to be 0.49 mm. Determine (a)
shear plane angle, (b) shear strain, and (c) material
removal rate. Use the orthogonal cutting model as
an approximation of the turning process.
21.5.
The cutting force and thrust force in an orthogonal
cutting operation are 1470 N and 1589 N, respec-
tively. The rake angle ¼ 5, the width of the cut ¼
5.0 mm, the chip thickness before the cut ¼ 0.6, and
the chip thickness ratio ¼ 0.38. Determine (a) the
shear strength of the work material and (b) the
coefficient of friction in the operation.
21.6.
The cutting force and thrust force have been
measured in an orthogonal cutting operation
to be 300 lb and 291 lb, respectively. The rake
angle ¼ 10, width of cut ¼ 0.200 in, chip thickness
before the cut ¼ 0.015, and chip thickness ratio ¼
0.4. Determine (a) the shear strength of the work
material and (b) the coefficient of friction in the
operation.
Problems
503

21.7.
An orthogonal cutting operation is performed
using a rake angle of 15, chip thickness before
the cut ¼ 0.012 in and width of cut ¼ 0.100 in. The
chip thickness ratio is measured after the cut to be
0.55. Determine (a) the chip thickness after the cut,
(b) shear angle, (c) friction angle, (d) coefficient of
friction, and (e) shear strain.
21.8.
The orthogonal cutting operation described in previ-
ous Problem 21.7 involves a work material whose
shear strength is 40,000 lb/in2. Based on your answers
to the previous problem, compute(a) the shear force,
(b) cutting force, (c) thrust force, and (d) friction
force.
21.9.
In an orthogonal cutting operation, the rake angle ¼
5, chip thickness before the cut ¼ 0.2 mm and
width of cut ¼ 4.0 mm. The chip ratio ¼ 0.4. Deter-
mine (a) the chip thickness after the cut, (b) shear
angle, (c) friction angle, (d) coefficient of friction,
and (e) shear strain.
21.10.
The shear strength of a certain work material ¼
50,000 lb/in2. An orthogonal cutting operation is
performed using a tool with a rake angle ¼ 20 at
the following cutting conditions: cutting speed ¼
100 ft/min, chip thickness before the cut ¼ 0.015 in,
and width of cut ¼ 0.150 in. The resulting chip
thickness ratio ¼ 0.50. Determine (a) the shear
plane angle, (b) shear force, (c) cutting force and
thrust force, and (d) friction force.
21.11.
Consider the data in Problem 21.10 except that
rake angle is a variable, and its effect on the forces
in parts (b), (c), and (d) is to be evaluated.
(a) Using a spreadsheet calculator, compute the
values of shear force, cutting force, thrust force, and
friction force as a function of rake angle over a
range of rake angles between the high value of 20
in Problem 21.10 and a low value of 10. Use
intervals of 5 between these limits. The chip thick-
ness ratio decreases as rake angle is reduced and
can be approximated by the following relationship:
r ¼ 0.38 þ 0.006a, where r ¼ chip thickness and a ¼
rake angle. (b) What observations can be made
from the computed results?
21.12.
Solve previous Problem 21.10 except that the rake
angle has been changed to 5 and the resulting
chip thickness ratio ¼ 0.35.
21.13.
A carbon steel bar with 7.64 in diameter has a
tensile strength of 65,000 lb/in2 and a shear strength
of 45,000 lb/in2. The diameter is reduced using a
turning operation at a cutting speed of 400 ft/min.
The feed is 0.011 in/rev and the depth of cut is
0.120 in. The rake angle on the tool in the direction
of chip flow is 13. The cutting conditions result in a
chip ratio of 0.52. Using the orthogonal model as an
approximation of turning, determine (a) the shear
plane angle, (b) shear force, (c) cutting force and
feed force, and (d) coefficient of friction between
the tool and chip.
21.14.
Low carbon steel having a tensile strength of
300 MPa and a shear strength of 220 MPa is cut
in a turning operation with a cutting speed of 3.0 m/s.
The feed is 0.20 mm/rev and the depth of cut is
3.0 mm. The rake angle of the tool is 5 in the
direction of chip flow. The resulting chip ratio is
0.45. Using the orthogonal model as an approxima-
tion of turning, determine (a) the shear plane angle,
(b) shear force, (c) cutting force and feed force.
21.15.
A turning operation is made with a rake angle of
10, a feed of 0.010 in/rev and a depth of cut ¼ 0.100
in. The shear strength of the work material is
known to be 50,000 lb/in2, and the chip thickness
ratio is measured after the cut to be 0.40. Deter-
mine the cutting force and the feed force. Use the
orthogonal cutting model as an approximation of
the turning process.
21.16.
Show how Eq. (21.3) is derived from the definition
of chip ratio, Eq. (21.2), and Figure 21.5(b).
21.17.
Show how Eq. (21.4) is derived from Figure 21.6.
21.18.
Derive the force equations for F, N, Fs, and Fn
(Eqs. (21.9) through (21.12) in the text) using the
force diagram of Figure 21.11.
Power and Energy in Machining
21.19.
In a turning operation on stainless steel with hard-
ness ¼ 200 HB, the cutting speed ¼ 200 m/min,
feed ¼ 0.25 mm/rev, and depth of cut ¼ 7.5 mm.
How much power will the lathe draw in performing
this operation if its mechanical efficiency ¼ 90%.
Use Table 21.2 to obtain the appropriate specific
energy value.
21.20.
In Problem 21.18, compute the lathe power re-
quirements if feed ¼ 0.50 mm/rev.
21.21.
In a turning operation on aluminum, cutting
speed ¼ 900 ft/min, feed ¼ 0.020 in/rev, and depth
of cut ¼ 0.250 in. What horsepower is required of
the drive motor, if the lathe has a mechanical
efficiency ¼ 87%? Use Table 21.2 to obtain the
appropriate unit horsepower value.
21.22.
In a turning operation on plain carbon steel whose
Brinell hardness ¼ 275 HB, the cutting speed is
set at 200 m/min and depth of cut ¼ 6.0 mm. The
lathe motor is rated at 25 kW, and its mechanical
efficiency ¼ 90%. Using the appropriate specific
energy value from Table 21.2, determine the maxi-
mum feed that can be set for this operation. Use of
a spreadsheet calculator is recommended for the
iterative calculations required in this problem.
504
Chapter 21/Theory of Metal Machining

21.23.
A turning operation is to be performed on a 20 hp
lathe that has an 87% efficiency rating. The rough-
ing cut is made on alloy steel whose hardness is in
the range 325 to 335 HB. The cutting speed is 375 ft/
min, feed is 0.030 in/rev, and depth of cut is 0.150 in.
Based on these values, can the job be performed on
the 20 hp lathe? Use Table 21.2 to obtain the
appropriate unit horsepower value.
21.24.
Suppose the cutting speed in Problems 21.7 and
21.8 is 200 ft/min. From your answers to those
problems, find (a) the horsepower consumed in
the operation, (b) metal removal rate in in3/min,
(c) unit horsepower (hp-min/in3), and (d) the spe-
cific energy (in-lb/in3).
21.25.
For Problem 21.12, the lathe has a mechanical
efficiency ¼ 0.83. Determine (a) the horsepower
consumed by the turning operation; (b) horsepower
that must be generated by the lathe; (c) unit horse-
power and specific energy for the work material in
this operation.
21.26.
In a turning operation on low carbon steel (175
BHN), cutting speed ¼ 400 ft/min, feed ¼ 0.010 in/
rev, and depth of cut ¼ 0.075 in. The lathe has a
mechanical efficiency ¼ 0.85. Based on the unit
horsepower values in Table 21.2, determine (a) the
horsepower consumed by the turning operation
and (b) the horsepower that must be generated
by the lathe.
21.27.
Solve Problem 21.25 except that the feed ¼ 0.0075 in/
rev and the work material is stainless steel (Brinell
hardness ¼ 240 HB).
21.28.
A turning operation is carried out on aluminum (100
BHN). Cutting speed ¼ 5.6 m/s, feed ¼ 0.25 mm/
rev, and depth of cut ¼ 2.0 mm. The lathe has a
mechanical efficiency ¼ 0.85. Based on the specific
energy values in Table 21.2, determine (a) the cut-
ting power and (b) gross power in the turning
operation, in Watts.
21.29.
Solve Problem 21.27 but with the following changes:
cutting speed ¼ 1.3 m/s, feed ¼ 0.75 mm/rev, and
depth ¼ 4.0 mm. Note that although the power used
in this operation is only about 10% greater than in
the previous problem, the metal removal rate is
about 40% greater.
21.30.
A turning operation is performed on an engine
lathe using a tool with zero rake angle in the
direction of chip flow. The work material is an
alloy steel with hardness ¼ 325 Brinell hardness.
The feed is 0.015 in/rev, depth of cut is 0.125 in and
cutting speed is 300 ft/min. After the cut, the chip
thickness ratio is measured to be 0.45. (a) Using the
appropriate value of specific energy from Table
21.2, compute the horsepower at the drive motor, if
the lathe has an efficiency ¼ 85%. (b) Based on
horsepower, compute your best estimate of the
cutting force for this turning operation. Use the
orthogonal cutting model as an approximation of
the turning process.
21.31.
A lathe performs a turning operation on a work-
piece of 6.0 in diameter. The shear strength of the
work is 40,000 lb/in2 and the tensile strength is
60,000 lb/in2. The rake angle of the tool is 6. The
cutting speed ¼ 700 ft/min, feed ¼ 0.015 in/rev, and
depth ¼ 0.090 in. The chip thickness after the cut is
0.025 in. Determine (a) the horsepower required in
the operation, (b) unit horsepower for this material
under these conditions, and (c) unit horsepower as
it would be listed in Table 21.2 for a to of 0.010 in.
Use the orthogonal cutting model as an approxi-
mation of the turning process.
21.32.
In a turning operation on an aluminum alloy work-
piece, the feed ¼ 0.020 in/rev, and depth of cut ¼
0.250 in. The motor horsepower of the lathe is 20 hp
and it has a mechanical efficiency ¼ 92%. The unit
horsepower value ¼ 0.25 hp/(in3/min) for this alu-
minum grade. What is the maximum cutting speed
that can be used on this job?
Cutting Temperature
21.33.
Orthogonal cutting is performed on a metal whose
mass specific heat ¼ 1.0 J/g-C, density ¼ 2.9 g/cm3,
and thermal diffusivity ¼ 0.8 cm2/s. The cutting
speed is 4.5 m/s, uncut chip thickness is 0.25 mm,
and width of cut is 2.2 mm. The cutting force is
measured at 1170 N. Using Cook’s equation, deter-
mine the cutting temperature if the ambient tem-
perature ¼ 22C.
21.34.
Consider a turning operation performed on steel
whose hardness ¼ 225 HB at a speed ¼ 3.0 m/s,
feed ¼ 0.25 mm, and depth ¼ 4.0 mm. Using values
of thermal properties found in the tables and
definitions of Section 4.1 and the appropriate
specific energy value from Table 21.2, compute
an estimate of cutting temperature using the
Cook equation. Assume ambient temperature ¼
20C.
21.35.
An orthogonal cutting operation is performed on a
certain metal whose volumetric specific heat ¼ 110
in-lb/in3-F, and thermal diffusivity ¼ 0.140 in2/sec.
The cutting speed ¼ 350 ft/min, chip thickness be-
fore the cut ¼ 0.008 in, and width of cut ¼ 0.100 in.
The cutting force is measured at 200 lb. Using
Cook’s equation, determine the cutting tempera-
ture if the ambient temperature ¼ 70F.
Problems
505

21.36.
It is desired to estimate the cutting temperature for
a certain alloy steel whose hardness ¼ 240 Brinell.
Use the appropriate value of specific energy from
Table 21.2 and compute the cutting temperature by
means of the Cook equation for a turning opera-
tion in which the cutting speed is 500 ft/min, feed is
0.005 in/rev, and depth of cut is 0.070 in. The work
material has a volumetric specific heat of 210 in lb/
in3-F and a thermal diffusivity of 0.16 in2/sec.
Assume ambient temperature ¼ 88F.
21.37.
An
orthogonal
machining
operation
removes
metal at 1.8 in3/min. The cutting force in the
process ¼ 300 lb. The work material has a thermal
diffusivity ¼ 0.18 in2/sec and a volumetric specific
heat ¼ 124 in-lb/in3-F. If the feed f ¼ to ¼ 0.010 in
and width of cut ¼ 0.100 in, use the Cook formula
to compute the cutting temperature in the opera-
tion given that ambient temperature ¼ 70F.
21.38.
A turning operation uses a cutting speed ¼ 200 m/
min, feed ¼ 0.25 mm/rev, and depth of cut ¼ 4.00 mm.
Thethermaldiffusivityoftheworkmaterial¼20mm2/
s and the volumetric specific heat ¼ 3.5 (103) J/mm3-
C. If the temperature increase above ambient temper-
ature (20F) ismeasuredby atool–chipthermocouple
to be 700C, determine the specific energy for the
work material in this operation.
21.39.
During a turning operation, a tool–chip thermo-
couple was used to measure cutting temperature.
The following temperature data were collected
during the cuts at three different cutting speeds
(feed and depth were held constant): (1) v ¼ 100 m/
min, T ¼ 505C, (2) v ¼ 130 m/min, T ¼ 552C,
(3) v ¼ 160 m/min, T ¼ 592C. Determine an
equation for temperature as a function of cutting
speed that is in the form of the Trigger equation,
Eq. (21.23).
506
Chapter 21/Theory of Metal Machining

22
MACHINING
OPERATIONS AND
MACHINE TOOLS
Chapter Contents
22.1
Machining and Part Geometry
22.2
Turning and Related Operations
22.2.1
Cutting Conditions in Turning
22.2.2
Operations Related to Turning
22.2.3
The Engine Lathe
22.2.4
Other Lathes and Turning Machines
22.2.5
Boring Machines
22.3
Drilling and Related Operations
22.3.1
Cutting Conditions in Drilling
22.3.2
Operations Related to Drilling
22.3.3
Drill Presses
22.4
Milling
22.4.1
Types of Milling Operations
22.4.2
Cutting Conditions in Milling
22.4.3
Milling Machines
22.5
Machining Centers and Turning Centers
22.6
Other Machining Operations
22.6.1
Shaping and Planing
22.6.2
Broaching
22.6.3
Sawing
22.7
Machining Operations for Special Geometries
22.7.1
Screw Threads
22.7.2
Gears
22.8
High-Speed Machining
Machining is the most versatile and accurate of all man-
ufacturing processes in its capability to produce a diversity
of part geometries and geometric features. Casting can also
produce a variety of shapes, but it lacks the precision and
accuracy of machining. In this chapter, we describe the
important machining operations and the machine tools
used to perform them. Historical Note 22.1 provides a brief
narrative of the development of machine tool technology.
22.1
MACHINING AND PART
GEOMETRY
To introduce our topic in this chapter, let us provide an
overview of the creation of part geometry by machining.
Machined parts can be classified as rotational or nonrota-
tional(Figure22.1).Arotationalworkparthasacylindricalor
disk-like shape. The characteristic operation that produces
this geometry is one in which a cutting tool removes material
from a rotating workpart. Examples include turning and
boring. Drilling is closely related except that an internal
cylindrical shape is created and the tool rotates (rather
than the work) in most drilling operations. A nonrotational
(also called prismatic) workpart is block-like or plate-like, as
inFigure22.1(b).Thisgeometryisachievedbylinearmotions
of the workpart, combined with either rotating or linear tool
motions. Operations in this category include milling, shaping,
planing, and sawing.
Each machining operation produces a characteristic
geometry due to two factors: (1) the relative motions be-
tween the tool and the workpart and (2) the shape of the
cutting tool. We classify these operations by which part
shape is created as generating and forming. In generating,
the geometry of the workpart is determined by the feed
trajectory of the cutting tool. The path followed by the tool
during its feed motion is imparted to the work surface in
order to create shape. Examples of generating the work
507

shape in machining include straight turning, taper turning, contour turning, peripheral
milling, and profile milling, all illustrated in Figure 22.2. In each of these operations,
material removal is accomplished by the speed motion in the operation, but part shape is
determined by the feed motion. The feed trajectory may involve variations in depth or
width of cut during the operation. For example, in the contour turning and profile milling
operations shown in our figure, the feed motion results in changes in depth and width,
respectively, as cutting proceeds.
In forming, the shape of the part is created by the geometry of the cutting tool. In
effect, the cutting edge of the tool has the reverse of the shape to be produced on the part
surface. Form turning, drilling, and broaching are examples of this case. In these
operations, illustrated in Figure 22.3, the shape of the cutting tool is imparted to the
work in order to create part geometry. The cutting conditions in forming usually include
the primary speed motion combined with a feeding motion that is directed into the work.
FIGURE 22.1
Machined parts are classiﬁed as (a) rotational, or (b) nonrotational, shown here by block
and ﬂat parts.
Historical Note 22.1
Machine tool technology
Material removal as a means of making things dates
back to prehistoric times, when man learned to carve
wood and chip stones to make hunting and farming
implements. There is archaeological evidence that the
ancient Egyptians used a rotating bowstring mechanism
to drill holes.
Development of modern machine tools is closely
related to the Industrial Revolution. When James Watt
designed his steam engine in England around 1763, one
of the technical problems he faced was to make the bore
of the cylinder sufﬁciently accurate to prevent steam
from escaping around the piston. John Wilkinson built a
water-wheel powered boring machine around 1775,
which permitted Watt to build his steam engine.
This boring machine is often recognized as the ﬁrst
machine tool.
Another Englishman, Henry Maudsley, developed the
ﬁrst screw-cutting lathe around 1800. Although the
turning of wood had been accomplished for many
centuries, Maudsley’s machine added a mechanized tool
carriage with which feeding and threading operations
could be performed with much greater precision than
any means before.
Eli Whitney is credited with developing the ﬁrst
milling machine in the United States around 1818.
Development of the planer and shaper occurred in
England between 1800 and 1835, in response to the
need to make components for the steam engine, textile
equipment, and other machines associated with the
Industrial Revolution. The powered drill press was
developed by James Nasmyth around 1846, which
permitted drilling of accurate holes in metal.
Most of the conventional boring machines, lathes,
milling machines, planers, shapers, and drill presses used
today have the same basic designs as the early versions
developed during the last two centuries. Modern
machining centers—machine tools capable of
performing more than one type of cutting operation—
were introduced in the late 1950s, after numerical
control had been developed (Historical Note 38.1).
508
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

FIGURE 22.2
Generating shape in machining: (a) straight turning, (b) taper turning, (c) contour turning, (d) plain
milling, and (e) proﬁle milling.
FIGURE 22.3
Forming to create shape in machining: (a) form turning, (b) drilling, and (c) broaching.
Section 22.1/Machining and Part Geometry
509

Depth of cut in this category of machining usually refers to the final penetration into the
work after the feed motion has been completed.
Forming and generating are sometimes combined in one operation, as illustrated in
Figure 22.4 for thread cutting on a lathe and slotting on a milling machine. In thread
cutting, the pointed shape of the cutting tool determines the form of the threads, but the
large feed rate generates the threads. In slotting (also called slot milling), the width of the
cutter determines the width of the slot, but the feed motion creates the slot.
Machining is classified as a secondary process. In general, secondary processes
follow basic processes, whose purpose is to establish the initial shape of a workpiece.
Examples of basic processes include casting, forging, and bar rolling (to produce rod and
bar stock). The shapes produced by these processes usually require refinement by
secondary processes. Machining operations serve to transform the starting shapes into
the final geometries specified by the part designer. For example, bar stock is the initial
shape, but the final geometry after a series of machining operations is a shaft. We discuss
basic and secondary processes in more detail and provide additional examples in Section
40.1.1 on process planning.
22.2
TURNING AND RELATED OPERATIONS
Turning is a machining process in which a single-point tool removes material from the
surface of a rotating workpiece. The tool is fed linearly in a direction parallel to the axis of
rotation to generatea cylindrical geometry, as illustrated inFigures 22.2(a) and22.5.Single-
point tools used in turning and other machining operations are discussed in Section 23.3.1.
Turning is traditionally carried out on a machine tool called a lathe, which provides power
to turn the part at a given rotational speed and to feed the tool at a specified rate and depth
of cut. Included on the DVD that accompanies this text is a video clip on turning.
VIDEO CLIP
Turning and Lathe Basics. This clip contains four segments: (1) lathe types, (2) lathe
turrets, (3) lathe workholding, and (4) turning operations.
FIGURE 22.4
Combination of forming
and generating to create
shape: (a) thread cutting
on a lathe, and (b) slot
milling.
510
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

22.2.1 CUTTING CONDITIONS IN TURNING
The rotational speed in turning is related to the desired cutting speed at the surface of the
cylindrical workpiece by the equation
N ¼
v
pDo
ð22:1Þ
where N ¼ rotational speed, rev/min; v ¼ cutting speed, m/min (ft/min); and Do ¼
original diameter of the part, m (ft).
The turning operation reduces the diameter of the work from its original diameter
Do to a final diameter Df, as determined by the depth of cut d:
Df ¼ Do  2d
ð22:2Þ
The feed in turning is generally expressed in mm/rev (in/rev). This feed can be converted
to a linear travel rate in mm/min (in/min) by the formula
f r ¼ Nf
ð22:3Þ
where fr ¼ feed rate, mm/min (in/min); and f ¼ feed, mm/rev (in/rev).
The time to machine from one end of a cylindrical workpart to the other is given by
Tm ¼ L
f r
ð22:4Þ
where Tm ¼ machining time, min; and L ¼ length of the cylindrical workpart, mm (in). A
more direct computation of the machining time is provided by the following equation:
Tm ¼ pDoL
fv
ð22:5Þ
where Do ¼ work diameter, mm (in); L ¼ workpart length, mm (in); f ¼ feed, mm/rev (in/
rev); and v ¼ cutting speed, mm/min (in/min). As a practical matter, a small distance is
usually added to the workpart length at the beginning and end of the piece to allow for
approach and overtravel of the tool. Thus, the duration of the feed motion past the work
will be longer than Tm.
FIGURE 22.5
Turning
operation.
Section 22.2/Turning and Related Operations
511

The volumetric rate of material removal can be most conveniently determined by
the following equation:
RMR ¼ vfd
ð22:6Þ
where RMR ¼ material removal rate, mm3/min (in3/min). In using this equation, the units for f
are expressed simply as mm (in), ineffect neglecting the rotational character of turning. Also,
care must be exercised to ensure that the units for speed are consistent with those for f and d.
22.2.2 OPERATIONS RELATED TO TURNING
A variety of other machining operations can be performed on a lathe in addition to
turning; these include the following, illustrated in Figure 22.6:
FIGURE 22.6
Machining operations other than turning that are performed on a lathe: (a) facing, (b) taper turning,
(c) contour turning, (d) form turning, (e) chamfering, (f) cutoff, (g) threading, (h) boring, (i) drilling, and (j) knurling.
512
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

(a) Facing. The tool is fed radially into the rotating work on one end to create a flat
surface on the end.
(b) Taper turning. Instead of feeding the tool parallel to the axis of rotation of the work,
the tool is fed at an angle, thus creating a tapered cylinder or conical shape.
(c) Contour turning. Instead of feeding the tool along a straight line parallel to the axis of
rotation as in turning, the tool follows a contour that is other than straight, thus
creating a contoured form in the turned part.
(d) Form turning. In this operation, sometimes called forming, the tool has a shape that is
imparted to the work by plunging the tool radially into the work.
(e) Chamfering. The cutting edge of the tool is used to cut an angle on the corner of the
cylinder, forming what is called a ‘‘chamfer.’’
(f) Cutoff. The tool is fed radially into the rotating work at some location along its length
to cut off the end of the part. This operation is sometimes referred to as parting.
(g) Threading. A pointed tool is fed linearly across the outside surface of the rotating
workpart in a direction parallel to the axis of rotation at a large effective feed rate, thus
creating threads in the cylinder. Methods of machining screw threads are discussed in
greater detail in Section 22.7.1.
(h) Boring. A single-point tool is fed linearly, parallel to the axis of rotation, on the inside
diameter of an existing hole in the part.
(i) Drilling. Drilling can be performed on a lathe by feeding the drill into the rotating
work along its axis. Reaming can be performed in a similar way.
(j) Knurling. This is not a machining operation because it does not involve cutting of
material. Instead, it is a metal forming operation used to produce a regular cross-
hatched pattern in the work surface.
Most lathe operations use single-point tools, which we discuss in Section 23.3.1.
Turning, facing, taper turning, contour turning, chamfering, and boring are all performed
with single-point tools. A threading operation is accomplished using a single-point tool
designed with a geometry that shapes the thread. Certain operations require tools other
than single-point. Form turning is performed with a specially designed tool called a form
tool. The profile shape ground into the tool establishes the shape of the workpart. A
cutoff tool is basically a form tool. Drilling is accomplished by a drill bit (Section 23.3.2).
Knurling is performed by a knurling tool, consisting of two hardened forming rolls, each
mounted between centers. The forming rolls have the desired knurling pattern on their
surfaces. To perform knurling, the tool is pressed against the rotating workpart with
sufficient pressure to impress the pattern onto the work surface.
22.2.3 THE ENGINE LATHE
The basic lathe used for turning and related operations is an engine lathe. It is a versatile
machine tool, manually operated, andwidely used inlow andmedium production.The term
engine dates from the time when these machines were driven by steam engines.
Engine Lathe Technology
Figure 22.7 is a sketch of an engine lathe showing its
principal components. The headstock contains the drive unit to rotate the spindle, which
rotates the work. Opposite the headstock is the tailstock, in which a center is mounted to
support the other end of the workpiece.
Thecuttingtoolisheldinatoolpostfastenedtothecross-slide,whichisassembledtothe
carriage. The carriage is designed to slide along the ways of the lathe in order to feed the tool
paralleltotheaxisofrotation.Thewaysareliketracksalongwhichthecarriagerides,andthey
Section 22.2/Turning and Related Operations
513

aremadewithgreatprecisiontoachieveahighdegreeofparallelismrelativetothespindleaxis.
The ways are built into the bed of the lathe, providing a rigid frame for the machine tool.
The carriage is driven by a leadscrew that rotates at the proper speed to obtain the
desired feed rate. The cross-slide is designed to feed in a direction perpendicular to the
carriage movement. Thus, by moving the carriage, the tool can be fed parallel to the work
axis to perform straight turning; or by moving the cross-slide, the tool can be fed radially
into the work to perform facing, form turning, or cutoff operations.
The conventional engine lathe and most other machines described in this section are
horizontal turning machines; that is, the spindle axis is horizontal. This is appropriate for
the majority of turning jobs, in which the length is greater than the diameter. For jobs in
which the diameter is large relative to length and the work is heavy, it is more convenient to
orient the work so that it rotates about a vertical axis; these are vertical turning machines.
The size of a lathe is designated by swing and maximum distance between centers.
The swing is the maximum workpart diameter that can be rotated in the spindle, deter-
mined as twice the distance between the centerline of the spindle and the ways of the
machine. The actual maximum size of a cylindrical workpiece that can be accommodated
on the lathe is smaller than the swing because the carriage and cross-slide assembly are in
the way. The maximum distance between centers indicates the maximum length of a
workpiece that can be mounted between headstock and tailstock centers. For example, a
350 mm  1.2 m (14 in  48 in) lathe designates that the swing is 350 mm (14 in) and the
maximum distance between centers is 1.2 m (48 in).
Methods of Holding the Work in a Lathe
Thereare fourcommonmethodsusedtohold
workparts in turning. These workholding methods consist of various mechanisms to grasp
thework, center andsupportit inposition along the spindle axis, androtateit. The methods,
illustrated in Figure 22.8, are (a) mounting the work between centers, (b) chuck, (c) collet,
and (d) face plate. Our video clip on workholding illustrates the various aspects of
fixturing for turning and other machining operations.
VIDEO CLIP
Introduction to Workholding. This clip contains four segments: (1) workholding of parts,
(2) principles of workholding, (3) 3-2-1 locational workholding method, and (4) work-
piece reclamping.
FIGURE 22.7
Diagram
of an engine lathe,
indicating its principal
components.
514
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

Holding the work between centers refers to the use of two centers, one in the
headstock and the other in the tailstock, as in Figure 22.8(a). This method is appropriate
forparts with large length-to-diameter ratios. At theheadstock center, a devicecalled a dog
is attached to the outside of the work and is used to drive the rotation from the spindle. The
tailstock center has a cone-shaped point which is inserted into a tapered hole in the end of
the work. The tailstock center is either a ‘‘live’’ center or a ‘‘dead’’ center. A live center
rotates in a bearing in the tailstock, so that there is no relative rotation between the work
and the live center, hence, no friction between the center and the workpiece. In contrast, a
dead center is fixed to the tailstock, so that it does not rotate; instead, the workpiece rotates
about it. Because of friction and the heat buildup that results, this setup is normally used at
lower rotational speeds. The live center can be used at higher speeds.
The chuck, Figure 22.8(b), is available in several designs, with three or four jaws to
grasp the cylindrical workpart on its outside diameter. The jaws are often designed so they
canalsograsptheinsidediameter ofa tubularpart.Aself-centeringchuckhas a mechanism
to move the jaws in or out simultaneously, thus centering thework at the spindle axis. Other
chucks allow independent operation of each jaw. Chucks can be used with or without a
tailstock center. For parts with low length-to-diameter ratios, holding the part in the chuck
in a cantilever fashion is usually sufficient to withstand the cutting forces. For long
workbars, the tailstock center is needed for support.
A collet consists of a tubular bushing with longitudinal slits running over half its
length and equally spaced around its circumference, as in Figure 22.8(c). The inside
diameter of the collet is used to hold cylindrical work such as barstock. Owing to the slits,
one end of the collet can be squeezed to reduce its diameter and provide a secure grasping
pressure against the work. Because there is a limit to the reduction obtainable in a collet
FIGURE 22.8
Four workholding methods used in lathes: (a) mounting the work between centers using a dog,
(b) three-jaw chuck, (c) collet, and (d) faceplate for noncylindrical workparts.
Section 22.2/Turning and Related Operations
515

of any given diameter, these workholding devices must be made in various sizes to match
the particular workpart size in the operation.
A face plate, Figure 22.8(d), is a workholding device that fastens to the lathe spindle
and is used to grasp parts with irregular shapes. Because of their irregular shape, these parts
cannot be held by other workholding methods. The faceplate is therefore equipped with the
custom-designed clamps for the particular geometry of the part.
22.2.4 OTHER LATHES AND TURNING MACHINES
In addition to the engine lathe, other turning machines have been developed to satisfy
particular functions or to automate the turning process. Among these machines are
(1) toolroom lathe, (2) speed lathe, (3) turret lathe, (4) chucking machine, (5) automatic
screw machine, and (6) numerically controlled lathe.
The toolroom lathe and speed lathe are closely related to the engine lathe. The
toolroom lathe is smaller and has a wider available range of speeds and feeds. It is also
built for higher accuracy, consistent with its purpose of fabricating components for tools,
fixtures, and other high-precision devices.
The speed lathe is simpler in construction than theengine lathe. It hasno carriage and
cross-slide assembly, and therefore no leadscrew to drive the carriage. The cutting tool is
held by the operator using a rest attached to the lathe for support. The speeds are higher on
a speed lathe, but the number of speed settings is limited. Applications of this machine type
include wood turning, metal spinning, and polishing operations.
A turret lathe is a manually operated lathe in which the tailstock is replaced by a turret
thatholdsuptosixcuttingtools.Thesetoolscanberapidlybroughtintoactionagainstthework
one by one by indexing the turret. In addition, the conventional tool post used on an engine
latheisreplacedbyafour-sidedturretthatiscapableofindexinguptofourtoolsintoposition.
Hence, because of the capacity to quickly change from one cutting tool to the next, the turret
lathe is usedfor high-productionworkthat requiresa sequence of cuts tobe made on the part.
As the name suggests, a chucking machine (nicknamed chucker) uses a chuck in its
spindle to hold the workpart. The tailstock is absent on a chucker, so parts cannot be
mounted between centers. This restricts the use of a chucking machine to short, light-
weight parts. The setup and operation are similar to a turret lathe except that the feeding
actions of the cutting tools are controlled automatically rather than by a human operator.
The function of the operator is to load and unload the parts.
A bar machine is similar to a chucking machine except that a collet is used (instead of
a chuck), which permits long bar stock to be fed through the headstock into position. At the
end of each machiningcycle, a cutoff operationseparates thenew part.Thebarstockisthen
indexedforward to present stock forthenext part.Feeding thestock as well asindexing and
feeding thecutting tools is accomplished automatically. Owing to its high levelof automatic
operation, it is often called an automatic bar machine. One of its important applications is
in the production of screws and similar small hardware items; the name automatic screw
machine is frequently used for machines used in these applications.
Bar machines can be classified as single spindle or multiple spindle. A single spindle
bar machine has one spindle that normally allows only one cutting tool to be used at a time
on the single workpart being machined. Thus, while each tool is cutting the work, the other
tools are idle. (Turret lathes and chucking machines are also limited by this sequential,
rather than simultaneous, tool operation). To increase cutting tool utilization and produc-
tion rate, multiple spindle bar machines are available. These machines have more than one
spindle,somultiplepartsaremachinedsimultaneouslybymultipletools.Forexample,asix-
spindle automatic bar machine works on six parts at a time, as in Figure 22.9. At the end of
eachmachiningcycle,thespindles(includingcolletsandworkbars)areindexed(rotated)to
thenextposition. Inour illustration,each part iscutsequentiallybyfive sets ofcuttingtools,
516
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

which takes six cycles (position 1 is for advancing the bar stock to a ‘‘stop’’). With this
arrangement, a part is completed at the end of each cycle. As a result, a six-spindle
automatic screw machine has a very high production rate.
The sequencing and actuation of the motions on screw machines and chucking
machines have traditionally been controlled by cams and other mechanical devices. The
modern form of control is computer numerical control (CNC), in which the machine tool
operations are controlled by a ‘‘program of instructions’’ consisting of alphanumeric code
(Section 38.3). CNC provides a more sophisticated and versatile means of control than
mechanical devices. This has led to the development of machine tools capable of more
complex machining cycles and part geometries, and a higher level of automated operation
than conventional screw machines and chucking machines. The CNC lathe is an example of
these machines in turning. It is especially useful for contour turning operations and close
tolerance work. Today, automatic chuckers and bar machines are implemented by CNC.
22.2.5 BORING MACHINES
Boring is similar to turning. It uses a single-point tool against a rotating workpart. The
difference is that boring is performed on the inside diameter of an existing hole rather than
the outside diameter of an existing cylinder. In effect, boring is an internal turning operation.
Machine tools used to perform boring operations are called boring machines (also boring
mills). One might expect that boring machines would have features in common with turning
machines; indeed, as previously indicated, lathes are sometimes used to accomplish boring.
Boring mills can be horizontal or vertical. The designation refers to the orientation of
the axis of rotation of the machine spindle or workpart. In a horizontal boring operation,
the setup can be arranged in either of two ways. The first setup is one in which the work is
fixtured to a rotating spindle, and the tool is attached to a cantilevered boring bar that feeds
FIGURE22.9
(a)Typeofpartproducedonasix-spindleautomaticbarmachine;and(b)sequenceofoperations
toproducethepart:(1)feedstocktostop,(2)turnmaindiameter,(3)formseconddiameterandspotface,(4)drill,
(5) chamfer, and (6) cutoff.
Section 22.2/Turning and Related Operations
517

into thework, as illustrated in Figure 22.10(a). The boring bar in this setup must be very stiff
to avoid deflection and vibration during cutting. To achieve high stiffness, boring bars are
often made of cemented carbide, whose modulus of elasticity approaches 620  103 MPa
(90  106 lb/in2). Figure 22.11 shows a carbide boring bar.
The second possible setup is one in which the tool is mounted to a boring bar, and
the boring bar is supported and rotated between centers. The work is fastened to a
feeding mechanism that feeds it past the tool. This setup, Figure 22.10(b), can be used to
perform a boring operation on a conventional engine lathe.
A vertical boring machine is used for large, heavy workparts with large diameters;
usually the workpart diameter is greater than its length. As in Figure 22.12, the part is
clamped to a worktable that rotates relative to the machine base. Worktables up to 40 ft in
diameter are available. The typical boring machine can position and feed several cutting
FIGURE 22.10
Two forms of horizontal boring: (a) boring bar is fed into a rotating workpart, and (b) work is fed past a
rotating boring bar.
FIGURE 22.11
Boring
bar made of cemented
carbide (WC–Co) that
uses indexable cemented
carbide inserts. (Courtesy
of Kennametal Inc.,
Latrobe, Pennsylvania.)
518
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

tools simultaneously. The tools are mounted on tool heads that can be fed horizontally and
verticallyrelativetotheworktable.Oneortwoheadsaremountedonahorizontalcross-rail
assembled to the machine tool housing above the worktable. The cutting tools mounted
above the work can be used for facing and boring. In addition to the tools on the cross-rail,
one or two additional tool heads can be mounted on the side columns of the housing to
enable turning on the outside diameter of the work.
The tool heads used on a vertical boring machine often include turrets to
accommodate several cutting tools. This results in a loss of distinction between this
machine and a vertical turret lathe. Some machine tool builders make the distinction that
the vertical turret lathe is used for work diameters up to 2.5 m (100 in), while the vertical
boring machine is used for larger diameters [7]. Also, vertical boring mills are often
applied to one-of-a-kind jobs, while vertical turret lathes are used for batch production.
22.3
DRILLING AND RELATED OPERATIONS
Drilling, Figure 22.3(b), is a machining operation used to create a round hole in a
workpart. This contrasts with boring, which can only be used to enlarge an existing hole.
Drilling is usually performed with a rotating cylindrical tool that has two cutting edges
on its working end. The tool is called a drill or drill bit (described in Section 23.3.2). The
most common drill bit is the twist drill, described in Section 23.3.2. The rotating drill
feeds into the stationary workpart to form a hole whose diameter is equal to the drill
diameter. Drilling is customarily performed on a drill press, although other machine
tools also perform this operation. The video clip on hole making illustrates the drilling
operation.
VIDEO CLIP
Basic Hole Making: Two segments are included in this clip: (1) the drill and (2) hole-
making machines.
FIGURE 22.12
A vertical boring mill.
Section 22.3/Drilling and Related Operations
519

22.3.1 CUTTING CONDITIONS IN DRILLING
The cutting speed in a drilling operation is the surface speed at the outside diameter of
the drill. It is specified in this way for convenience, even though nearly all of the cutting is
actually performed at lower speeds closer to the axis of rotation. To set the desired cutting
speed in drilling, it is necessary to determine the rotational speed of the drill. Letting N
represent the spindle rev/min,
N ¼ v
pD
ð22:7Þ
where v ¼ cutting speed, mm/min (in/min); and D ¼ the drill diameter, mm (in). In some
drilling operations, the workpiece is rotated about a stationary tool, but the same formula
applies.
Feed f in drilling is specified in mm/rev (in/rev). Recommended feeds are roughly
proportional to drill diameter; higher feeds are used with larger diameter drills. Since
there are (usually) two cutting edges at the drill point, the uncut chip thickness (chip
load) taken by each cutting edge is half the feed. Feed can be converted to feed rate using
the same equation as for turning:
f r ¼ Nf
ð22:8Þ
where fr ¼ feed rate, mm/min (in/min).
Drilled holes are either through holes or blind holes, Figure 22.13. In through holes,
the drill exits the opposite side of the work; in blind holes, it does not. The machining
time required to drill a through hole can be determined by the following formula:
Tm ¼ t þ A
f r
ð22:9Þ
where Tm ¼ machining (drilling) time, min; t ¼ work thickness, mm (in); fr ¼ feed rate,
mm/min (in/min); and A ¼ an approach allowance that accounts for the drill point angle,
representing the distance the drill must feed into the work before reaching full diameter,
Figure 22.10(a). This allowance is given by
A ¼ 0:5 D tan 90  u
2


ð22:10Þ
where A ¼ approach allowance, mm (in); and u ¼ drill point angle. In drilling a through
hole, the feed motion usually proceeds slightly beyond the opposite side of the work,
FIGURE 22.13
Two
hole types: (a) through
hole and (b) blind hole.
520
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

thus making the actual duration of the cut greater than Tm in Eq. (22.9) by a small
amount.
In a blind-hole, hole depth d is defined as the distance from the work surface to the
depthofthefulldiameter, Figure 22.13(b).Thus, fora blind hole, machiningtime isgivenby
Tm ¼ d þ A
f r
ð22:11Þ
where A ¼ the approach allowance by Eq. (22.10).
The rate of metal removal in drilling is determined as the product of the drill cross-
sectional area and the feed rate:
RMR ¼ pD2 f r
4
ð22:12Þ
This equation is valid only after the drill reaches full diameter and excludes the initial
approach of the drill into the work.
22.3.2 OPERATIONS RELATED TO DRILLING
Severaloperationsarerelatedtodrilling.TheseareillustratedinFigure22.14anddescribed
in this section. Most of the operations follow drilling; a hole must be made first by drilling,
and then the hole is modified by one of the other operations. Centering and spot facing are
exceptions to this rule. All of the operations use rotating tools.
(a) Reaming. Reaming is used to slightly enlarge a hole, to provide a better tolerance on
its diameter, and to improve its surface finish. The tool is called a reamer, and it usually
has straight flutes.
(b) Tapping. This operation is performed by a tap and is used to provide internal screw
threads on an existing hole. Tapping is discussed in more detail in Section 22.7.1.
FIGURE 22.14
Machining operations
related to drilling:
(a) reaming, (b) tapping,
(c) counterboring,
(d) countersinking,
(e) center drilling, and
(f) spot facing.
Section 22.3/Drilling and Related Operations
521

(c) Counterboring. Counterboring provides a stepped hole, in which a larger diameter
follows a smaller diameter partially into the hole. A counterbored hole is used to seat
bolt heads into a hole so the heads do not protrude above the surface.
(d) Countersinking. This is similar to counterboring, except that the step in the hole is
cone-shaped for flat head screws and bolts.
(e) Centering. Also called center drilling, this operation drills a starting hole to accurately
establish its location for subsequent drilling. The tool is called a center drill.
(f) Spot facing. Spot facing is similar to milling. It is used to provide a flat machined
surface on the workpart in a localized area.
22.3.3 DRILL PRESSES
The standard machine tool for drilling is the drill press. There are various types of drill press,
the most basic of which is the upright drill, Figure 22.15. The upright drill stands on the floor
and consists of a table for holding the workpart, a drilling head with powered spindle for the
drill bit, and a base and column for support. A similar drill press, but smaller, is the bench
drill, which is mounted on a table or bench rather than the floor.
The radial drill, Figure 22.16, is a large drill press designed to cut holes in large
parts. It has a radial arm along which the drilling head can be moved and clamped. The
head therefore can be positioned along the arm at locations that are a significant distance
from the column to accommodate large work. The radial arm can also be swiveled about
the column to drill parts on either side of the worktable.
The gang drill is a drill press consisting basically of two to six upright drills connected
together in an in-line arrangement. Each spindle is powered and operated independently,
and they share a common worktable, so that a series of drilling and related operations can
be accomplished in sequence (e.g., centering, drilling, reaming, tapping) simply by sliding
the workpart along the worktable from one spindle to the next. A related machine is the
multiple-spindle drill, in which several drill spindles are connected together to drill
multiple holes simultaneously into the workpart.
In addition, CNC drill presses are available to control the positioning of the holes in
theworkparts. These drillpresses areoften equipped with turrets to hold multiple tools that
can be indexed under control of the CNC program. The term CNC turret drill is used for
these machine tools.
Workholding on a drill press is accomplished by clamping the part in a vise, fixture,
or jig. A vise is a general-purpose workholding device possessing two jaws that grasp the
FIGURE 22.15
Upr ight
drill press.
522
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

work in position. A fixture is a workholding device that is usually custom-designed for the
particular workpart. The fixture can be designed to achieve higher accuracy in position-
ing the part relative to the machining operation, faster production rates, and greater
operator convenience in use. A jig is a workholding device that is also specially designed
for the workpart. The distinguishing feature between a jig and a fixture is that the jig
provides a means of guiding the tool during the drilling operation. A fixture does not
provide this tool guidance feature. A jig used for drilling is called a drill jig.
22.4
MILLING
Milling is a machining operation in which a workpart is fed past a rotating cylindrical tool
with multiple cutting edges, as illustrated in Figure 22.2(d) and (e). (In rare cases, a tool
with one cutting edge, called a fly-cutter, is used). The axis of rotation of the cutting tool is
perpendicular to the direction of feed. This orientation between the tool axis and the feed
direction is one of the features that distinguishes milling from drilling. In drilling, the
cutting tool is fed in a direction parallel to its axis of rotation. The cutting tool in milling is
called a milling cutter and the cutting edges are called teeth. Aspects of milling cutter
FIGURE 22.16
Radial
drill press. (Courtesy of
Willis Machinery and
Tools Co., Toledo, Ohio.)
Section 22.4/Milling
523

geometry are discussed in Section 23.3.2. The conventional machine tool that performs
this operation is a milling machine. The reader can view milling operations and the
various milling machines in our video clip on milling and machining centers.
VIDEO CLIP
Milling and Machining Center Basics. View the segment titled Milling Cutters and
Operations.
The geometric form created by milling is a plane surface. Other work geometries
can be created either by means of the cutter path or the cutter shape. Owing to the variety
of shapes possible and its high production rates, milling is one of the most versatile and
widely used machining operations.
Milling is an interrupted cutting operation; the teeth of the milling cutter enter and
exit the work during each revolution. This interrupted cutting action subjects the teeth to
a cycle of impact force and thermal shock on every rotation. The tool material and cutter
geometry must be designed to withstand these conditions.
22.4.1 TYPES OF MILLING OPERATIONS
There are two basic types of milling operations, shown in Figure 22.17: (a) peripheral
milling and (b) face milling. Most milling operations create geometry by generating the
shape (Section 22.1).
Peripheral Milling
In peripheral milling, also called plain milling, the axis of the tool is
parallel to the surface being machined, and the operation is performed by cutting edges
on the outside periphery of the cutter. Several types of peripheral milling are shown in
Figure 22.18: (a) slab milling, the basic form of peripheral milling in which the cutter
width extends beyond the workpiece on both sides; (b) slotting, also called slot milling,
in which the width of the cutter is less than the workpiece width, creating a slot in the
work—when the cutter is very thin, this operation can be used to mill narrow slots or cut a
workpart in two, called saw milling; (c) side milling, in which the cutter machines the
side of the workpiece; (d) straddle milling, the same as side milling, only cutting takes
place on both sides of the work; and form milling, in which the milling teeth have a
FIGURE 22.17
Two
basic types of milling
operations: (a) peripheral
orplainmillingand(b)face
milling.
524
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

special profile that determines the shape of the slot that is cut in the work. Form milling is
therefore classified as a forming operation (Section 22.1).
In peripheral milling, the direction of cutter rotation distinguishes two forms of
milling: up milling and down milling, illustrated in Figure 22.19. In up milling, also called
conventional milling, the direction of motion of the cutter teeth is opposite the feed
direction when the teeth cut into the work. It is milling ‘‘against the feed.’’ In down
milling, also called climb milling, the direction of cutter motion is the same as the feed
direction when the teeth cut the work. It is milling ‘‘with the feed.’’
The relative geometries of these two forms of milling result in differences in their
cutting actions. In up milling, the chip formed by each cutter tooth starts out very thin and
increases in thickness during the sweep of the cutter. In down milling, each chip starts out
thick and reduces in thickness throughout the cut. The length of a chip in down milling is
less than in up milling (the difference is exaggerated in our figure). This means that the
cutter is engaged in the work for less time per volume of material cut, and this tends to
increase tool life in down milling.
The cutting force direction is tangential to the periphery of the cutter for the teeth
that are engaged in the work. In up milling, this has a tendency to lift the workpart as the
cutter teeth exit the material. In down milling, this cutter force direction is downward,
tending to hold the work against the milling machine table.
Face Milling
In face milling, the axis of the cutter is perpendicular to the surface being
milled,andmachiningisperformedbycuttingedgesonboththeendandoutsideperipheryof
FIGURE 22.18
Peripheral milling: (a)
slabmilling,(b)slotting,(c)
side milling, (d) straddle
milling, and (e) form mill-
ing.
(e)
FIGURE 22.19
Two
forms of peripheral
milling operation with a
20-teeth cutter: (a) up
milling, and (b) down
milling.
Section 22.4/Milling
525

the cutter. As in peripheral milling, various forms of face milling exist, several of which are
shown in Figure 22.20: (a) conventional face milling, in which the diameter of the cutter is
greaterthantheworkpartwidth,sothecutteroverhangstheworkonbothsides;(b)partial
face milling, where the cutter overhangs the work on only one side; (c) end milling, in
whichthecutterdiameterislessthantheworkwidth,soaslotiscutintothepart;(d) profile
milling, a form of end milling in which the outside periphery of a flat part is cut; (e) pocket
milling, another form of end milling used to mill shallow pockets into flat parts; and
(f) surface contouring, in which a ball-nose cutter (rather than square-end cutter) is fed
back and forth across the work along a curvilinear path at close intervals to create a three-
dimensional surface form. The same basic cutter control is required to machine the
contours of mold and die cavities, in which case the operation is called die sinking.
22.4.2 CUTTING CONDITIONS IN MILLING
The cutting speed is determined at the outside diameter of a milling cutter. This can be
converted to spindle rotation speed using a formula that should now be familiar:
N ¼ v
pD
ð22:13Þ
Thefeedfinmillingisusuallygivenasafeedpercuttertooth;calledthechipload,itrepresentsthe
size of the chip formed by each cutting edge. This can be converted to feed rate by taking into
account the spindle speed and the number of teeth on the cutter as follows:
f r ¼ Nnt f
ð22:14Þ
wherefr¼feed rate,mm/min(in/min); N¼ spindlespeed, rev/min;nt ¼numberof teethon
the cutter; and f ¼ chip load in mm/tooth (in/tooth).
Material removal rate in milling is determined using the product of the cross-
sectional area of the cut and the feed rate. Accordingly, if a slab-milling operation is
FIGURE 22.20
Face
milling: (a) conventional
facemilling,(b)partialface
milling, (c) end milling,
(d) proﬁle milling,
(e) pocket milling, and
(f) surface contouring.
526
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

cutting a workpiece with width w at a depth d, the material removal rate is
RMR ¼ wd f r
ð22:15Þ
This neglects the initial entry of the cutter before full engagement. Eq. (22.15) can be
applied to end milling, side milling, face milling, and other milling operations, making the
proper adjustments in the computation of cross-sectional area of cut.
ThetimerequiredtomillaworkpieceoflengthLmustaccountfortheapproachdistance
required to fully engage the cutter. First, consider the case of slab milling, Figure 22.21. To
determine the time to perform a slab milling operation, the approach distance A to reach full
cutter depth is given by
A ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
d D  d
ð
Þ
p
ð22:16Þ
where d ¼ depth of cut, mm (in); and D ¼ diameter of the milling cutter, mm (in). The time
Tm in which the cutter is engaged milling the workpiece is therefore
Tm ¼ L þ A
f r
ð22:17Þ
Forfacemilling, letusconsiderthe two possible casespictured inFigure 22.22. Thefirstcase
is when the cutter is centered over a rectangular workpiece as in Figure 22.22(a). The cutter
feeds from rightto left across theworkpiece. In orderforthe cutter to reach thefull widthof
the work, it must travel an approach distance given by the following:
A ¼ 0:5 D 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
D2  w2
p


ð22:18Þ
FIGURE 22.21
Slab
(peripheral) milling
showing entry of cutter
into the workpiece.
FIGURE 22.22
Face
milling showing approach
and overtravel distances
for two cases: (a) when
cutteriscenteredoverthe
workpiece, and (b) when
cutter is offset to one side
over the work.
Section 22.4/Milling
527

where D¼ cutterdiameter, mm (in) andw ¼ widthofthe workpiece, mm(in).If D ¼ w, then
Eq. (22.18) reduces to A ¼ 0.5D. And if D < w, then a slot is cut into the work and A ¼ 0.5D.
Thesecondcaseiswhenthecutterisoffsettoonesideofthework,asinFigure22.22(b).
In this case, the approach distance is given by
A ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
w D  w
ð
Þ
p
ð22:19Þ
where w ¼ width of the cut, mm (in). In either case, the machining time is given by
Tm ¼ L þ A
f r
ð22:20Þ
It should be emphasized in all of these milling scenarios that Tm represents the time the
cutter teeth are engaged in the work, making chips. Approach and overtravel distances are
usuallyaddedatthebeginningandendofeachcuttoallowaccesstotheworkforloadingand
unloading. Thus the actual duration of the cutter feed motion is likely to be greater than Tm.
22.4.3 MILLING MACHINES
Milling machines must provide a rotating spindle for the cutter and a table for fastening,
positioning, and feeding the workpart. Various machine tool designs satisfy these require-
ments. To begin with, milling machines can be classified as horizontal or vertical. A
horizontal milling machine has a horizontal spindle, and this design is well suited for
performing peripheral milling (e.g., slab milling, slotting, side and straddle milling) on
workparts that are roughly cube shaped. A vertical milling machine has a vertical spindle,
and this orientation is appropriate for face milling, end milling, surface contouring, and die-
sinking on relatively flat workparts.
Other than spindle orientation, milling machines can be classified into the following
types: (1) knee-and-column, (2) bed type, (3) planer type, (4) tracer mills, and (5) CNC
milling machines.
The knee-and-column milling machine is the basic machine tool for milling. It
derives its name from the fact that its two main components are a column that supports
the spindle, and a knee (roughly resembling a human knee) that supports the worktable.
It is available as either a horizontal or a vertical machine, as illustrated in Figure 22.23. In
the horizontal version, an arbor usually supports the cutter. The arbor is basically a shaft
that holds the milling cutter and is driven by the spindle. An overarm is provided on
FIGURE 22.23
Two basic types of knee-and-column milling machine: (a) horizontal and (b) vertical.
528
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

horizontal machines to support the arbor. On vertical knee-and-column machines,
milling cutters can be mounted directly in the spindle without an arbor.
One of the features of the knee-and-column milling machine that makes it so
versatile is its capability for worktable feed movement in any of the x–y–z axes. The
worktable can be moved in the x-direction, the saddle can be moved in the y-direction,
and the knee can be moved vertically to achieve the z-movement.
Two special knee-and-column machines should be identified. One is the uni-
versal milling machine, Figure 22.24(a), which has a table that can be swiveled in a
horizontal plane (about a vertical axis) to any specified angle. This facilitates the
cutting of angular shapes and helixes on workparts. Another special machine is the
ram mill, Figure 22.24(b), in which the toolhead containing the spindle is located on
the end of a horizontal ram; the ram can be adjusted in and out over the worktable to
locate the cutter relative to the work. The toolhead can also be swiveled to achieve an
angular orientation of the cutter with respect to the work. These features provide
considerable versatility in machining a variety of work shapes.
Bed-type milling machines are designed for high production. They are con-
structed with greater rigidity than knee-and-column machines, thus permitting them to
achieve heavier feed rates and depths of cut needed for high material removal rates. The
characteristic construction of the bed-type milling machine is shown in Figure 22.25.
FIGURE 22.24
Special types of knee-and-column milling machine: (a) universal—overarm, arbor, and cutter omitted
for clarity: and (b) ram type.
FIGURE 22.25
Simplex bed-
type milling machine horizontal
spindle.
Section 22.4/Milling
529

The worktable is mounted directly to the bed of the machine tool, rather than using the
less rigid knee-type design. This construction limits the possible motion of the table to
longitudinal feeding of the work past the milling cutter. The cutter is mounted in a
spindle head that can be adjusted vertically along the machine column. Single spindle
bed machines are called simplex mills, as in Figure 22.25, and are available in either
horizontal or vertical models. Duplex mills use two spindle heads. The heads are usually
positioned horizontally on opposite sides of the bed to perform simultaneous opera-
tions during one feeding pass of the work. Triplex mills add a third spindle mounted
vertically over the bed to further increase machining capability.
Planer type mills are the largest milling machines. Their general appearance and
construction are those of a large planer (see Figure 22.31); the difference is that milling is
performedinsteadofplaning.Accordingly,oneormoremillingheadsaresubstitutedforthe
single-point cutting tools used on planers, and the motion of the work past the tool is a feed
rate motion rather than a cutting speed motion. Planer mills are built to machine very large
parts. Theworktable and bed of the machine are heavy and relatively low tothe ground,and
the milling heads are supported by a bridge structure that spans across the table.
A tracer mill, also called a profiling mill, is designed to reproduce an irregular part
geometry that has been created on a template. Using either manual feed by a human
operator or automatic feed by the machine tool, a tracing probe is controlled to follow the
template while a milling head duplicates the path taken by the probe to machine the desired
shape. Tracer mills are of two types: (1) xy tracing, in which the contour of a flat template
is profile milled using two-axis control; and (2) x–y–z tracing, in which the probe follows a
three-dimensional pattern using three-axis control.
Tracer mills have been used for
creating shapes that cannot easily be generated by a simple feeding action of the work
against the milling cutter. Applications include molds and dies. In recent years, many of
these applications have been taken over by CNC milling machines.
Computer numerical control milling machines are milling machines in which the
cutter path is controlled by alphanumerical data rather than a physical template. They are
especially suited to profile milling, pocket milling, surface contouring, and die sinking
operations, in which two or three axes of the worktable must be simultaneously controlled
to achieve the required cutter path. An operator is normally required to change cutters as
well as load and unload workparts.
22.5
MACHINING CENTERS AND TURNING CENTERS
A machining center, illustrated in Figure 22.26, is a highly automated machine tool capable of
performing multiple machining operations under computer numerical control in one setup
with minimal human attention. Workers are needed to load and unload parts, which usually
takes considerable less time than the machine cycle time, so one worker may be able to tend
more than one machine. Typical operations performed on a machining center are milling and
drilling, which use rotating cutting tools.
The typical features that distinguish a machining center from conventional machine
tools and make it so productive include:

Multiple operations in one setup. Most workparts require more than one operation
to completely machine the specified geometry. Complex parts may require dozens of
distinct machining operations, each requiring its own machine tool, setup, and cutting
tool. Machining centers are capable of performing most or all of the operations at one
location, thus minimizing setup time and production lead time.

Automatic tool changing. To change from one machining operation to the next, the
cutting tools must be changed. This is done on a machining center under CNC
530
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

program control by an automatic tool-changer designed to exchange cutters between
the machine tool spindle and a tool storage carousels. Capacities of these carousels
commonly range from 16 to 80 cutting tools. The machine in Figure 22.26 has two
storage carousels on the left side of the column.

Pallet shuttles. Some machining centers are equipped with pallet shuttles, which are
automatically transferred between the spindle position and the loading station, as
shown in Figure 22.26. Parts are fixtured on pallets that are attached to the shuttles. In
this arrangement, the operator can be unloading the previous part and loading the
next part while the machine tool is engaged in machining the current part. Non-
productive time on the machine is thereby reduced.

Automatic workpart positioning. Many machining centers have more than three
axes. One of theadditional axes isoften designed as a rotarytable to position the part at
some specified angle relative to the spindle. The rotary table permits the cutter to
perform machining on four sides of the part in a single setup.
Machining centers are classified as horizontal, vertical, or universal. The designa-
tion refers to spindle orientation. Horizontal machining centers normally machine cube-
shaped parts, in which the four vertical sides of the cube can be accessed by the cutter.
Vertical machining centers are suited to flat parts on which the tool can machine the top
surface. Universal machining centers have workheads that swivel their spindle axes to
any angle between horizontal and vertical, as in Figure 22.26. Our video clip on
machining centers shows several of these machines.
VIDEO CLIP
Milling and Machining Center Basics. The relevant segments are: (1) vertical machining
centers, (2) horizontal machining centers, and (3) machining center workholding.
FIGURE 22.26
A universal machining
center. Capability to
orient the workhead
makes this a ﬁve-axis
machine. (Courtesy of
Cincinnati Milacron,
Batavia, Ohio.)
Section 22.5/Machining Centers and Turning Centers
531

FIGURE 22.27
Computer numerical
control, four-axis turning
center. (Courtesy of
Cincinnati Milacron,
Batavia, Ohio.).
FIGURE 22.28
Operation of a mill-turn center: (a) example part with turned, milled, and drilled surfaces;
and (b) sequence of operations on a mill-turn center: (1) turn second diameter, (2) mill ﬂat with part in
programmed angular position, (3) drill hole with part in same programmed position, and (4) cutoff.
532
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

Success of CNC machining centers led to the development of CNC turning centers. A
modern CNC turning center, Figure 22.27, is capable of performing various turning and
related operations, contour turning, and automatic tool indexing, all under computer control.
In addition, the most sophisticated turning centers can accomplish (1) workpart gaging
(checking key dimensions after machining), (2) tool monitoring (sensors to indicate when
the tools are worn), (3) automatic tool changing when tools become worn, and even
(4) automatic workpart changing at the completion of the work cycle [14].
Another type of machine tool related to machining centers and turning centers is the
CNC mill-turn center. This machine has the general configuration of a turning center; in
addition, it can position a cylindrical workpart at a specified angle so that a rotating cutting
tool (e.g., milling cutter) can machine features into the outside surface of the part, as
illustrated in Figure 22.28. An ordinary turning center does not have the capability to
stoptheworkpartatadefinedangularposition,anditdoesnotpossessrotatingtoolspindles.
Further progress in machine tool technology has taken the mill-turn center one step
further by integrating additional capabilities into a single machine. The additional capa-
bilities include (1) combining milling, drilling, and turning with grinding, welding, and
inspection operations, all in one machine tool; (2) using multiple spindles simultaneously,
either on a single workpiece or two different workpieces; and (3) automating the part
handling function by adding industrial robots to the machine [2], [20]. The terms
multitasking machine and multifunction machine are sometimes used for these products.
22.6
OTHER MACHINING OPERATIONS
In addition to turning, drilling, and milling, several other machining operations should be
included in our survey: (1) shaping and planing, (2) broaching, and (3) sawing.
22.6.1 SHAPING AND PLANING
Shaping and planing are similar operations, both involving the use of a single-point cutting
tool moved linearly relative to the workpart. In conventional shaping and planing, a
straight, flat surface is created by this action. The difference between the two operations is
illustrated in Figure 22.29. In shaping, the speed motion is accomplished by moving the
cutting tool; while in planing, the speed motion is accomplished by moving the workpart.
Cutting tools used in shaping and planing are single-point tools (Section 23.3.1).
Unlike turning, interrupted cutting occurs in shaping and planing, subjecting the tool to
(a) Shaping
Workpart
New surface
Speed motion
(linear, tool)
Feed motion
(intermittent, tool)
Feed motion
(intermittent, work)
(b) Planing
Workpart
New surface
Speed motion
(linear, work)
FIGURE 22.29
(a) Shaping, and (b) planing.
Section 22.6/Other Machining Operations
533

an impact loading upon entry into the work. In addition, these machine tools are limited
to low speeds due to their start-and-stop motion. The conditions normally dictate use of
high-speed steel cutting tools.
Shaping
Shaping is performed on a machine tool called a shaper, Figure 22.30. The
components of the shaper include a ram, which moves relative to a column to provide
the cutting motion, and a worktable that holds the part and accomplishes the feed motion.
The motion of the ram consists of a forward stroke to achieve the cut, and a return stroke
during which the tool is lifted slightly to clear the work and then reset for the next pass. On
completion of each return stroke, the worktable is advanced laterally relative to the ram
motion in order to feed the part. Feed is specified in mm/stroke (in/stroke). The drive
mechanism for the ram can be either hydraulic or mechanical. Hydraulic drive has greater
flexibility in adjusting the stroke length and a more uniform speed during the forward
stroke, but itismoreexpensivethanamechanicaldrive unit. Bothmechanicalandhydraulic
drives are designed to achieve higher speeds on the return (noncutting) stroke than on the
forward (cutting) stroke, thereby increasing the proportion of time spent cutting.
Planing
The machine tool for planing is a planer. Cutting speed is achieved by a
reciprocating worktable that moves the part past the single-point cutting tool. The
construction and motion capability of a planer permit much larger parts to be machined
than on a shaper. Planers can be classified as open side planers or double-column planers.
The open-side planer, also known as a single-column planer, Figure 22.31, has a single
FIGURE 22.30
Components of a shaper.
FIGURE 22.31
Open-side planer.
534
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

column supporting the cross-rail on which a toolhead is mounted. Another toolhead can
also be mounted and fed along the vertical column. Multiple toolheads permit more than
one cut to be taken on each pass. At the completion of each stroke, each toolhead is moved
relative to the cross-rail (or column) to achieve the intermittent feed motion. The
configuration of the open-side planer permits very wide workparts to be machined.
Adouble-columnplanerhastwocolumns,oneoneithersideofthebaseandworktable.
The columns support the cross-rail, on which one or more toolheads are mounted. The two
columns provide a more rigid structure for the operation; however, the two columns limit the
width of the work that can be handled on this machine.
Shaping and planing can be used to machine shapes other than flat surfaces. The
restriction is that the cut surface must be straight. This allows the cutting of grooves, slots,
gear teeth, and other shapes as illustrated in Figure 22.32. Special machines and tool
geometries must be specified to cut some of these shapes. An important example is the gear
shaper, a vertical shaper with a specially designed rotary feed table and synchronized tool
head used to generate teeth on spur gears. Gear shaping and other methods of producing
gears are discussed in Section 22.7.2.
22.6.2 BROACHING
Broaching is performed using a multiple-teeth cutting tool by moving the tool linearly
relative to the work in the direction of the tool axis, as in Figure 22.33. The machine tool is
called a broaching machine, and the cutting tool is called a broach. Aspects of broach
geometry are discussed in Section 23.3.2. In certain jobs for which broaching can be used, it
is a highly productive method of machining. Advantages include good surface finish, close
tolerances, and a variety of work shapes. Owing to the complicated and often custom-
shaped geometry of the broach, tooling is expensive.
There are two principal types of broaching: external (also called surface broaching)
and internal.Externalbroachingisperformedontheoutsidesurfaceofthe worktocreate a
certain cross-sectional shape on the surface. Figure 22.34(a) shows some possible cross
sections that can be formed by external broaching. Internal broaching is accomplished on
the internal surface of a hole in the part. Accordingly, a starting hole must be present in the
FIGURE 22.32
Types of
shapes that can cut by
shaping and planing: (a) V-
groove,(b)squaregroove,
(c) T-slot, (d) dovetail slot,
and (e) gear teeth.
FIGURE 22.33
The
broaching operation.
Section 22.6/Other Machining Operations
535

part so as to insert the broach at the beginning of the broaching stroke. Figure 22.34(b)
indicates some of the shapes that can be produced by internal broaching.
The basic function of a broaching machine is to provide a precise linear motion of the
tool past a stationary work position, but there are various ways in which this can be done.
Most broaching machines can be classified as either vertical or horizontal machines. The
vertical broaching machine is designed to move the broach along a vertical path, while the
horizontalbroachingmachinehasahorizontaltooltrajectory.Mostbroachingmachinespull
the broach past the work. However, there are exceptions to this pull action. One exception is
arelativelysimpletypecalledabroachingpress,usedonlyforinternalbroaching,thatpushes
the tool through the workpart. Another exception is the continuous broaching machine, in
which the workparts are fixtured to an endless belt loop and moved past a stationary broach.
Because of its continuous operation, this machine can be used only for surface broaching.
22.6.3 SAWING
Sawing is a process in which a narrow slit is cut into the work by a tool consisting of a series
of narrowly spaced teeth.Sawing isnormallyused to separate a workpart into two pieces, or
to cut off an unwanted portion of a part. These operations are often referred to as cutoff
operations. Since many factories require cutoff operations at some point in the production
sequence, sawing is an important manufacturing process.
In most sawing operations, the work is held stationary and the saw blade is moved
relative to it. Saw blade tooth geometry is discussed in Section 23.3.2. There are three
basic types of sawing, as in Figure 22.35, according to the type of blade motion involved:
(a) hacksawing, (b) bandsawing, and (c) circular sawing.
Hacksawing, Figure 22.35(a), involves a linear reciprocating motion of the saw
against the work. This method of sawing is often used in cutoff operations. Cutting is
accomplished only on the forward stroke of the saw blade. Because of this intermittent
cutting action, hacksawing is inherently less efficient than the other sawing methods, both
of which are continuous. The hacksaw blade is a thin straight tool with cutting teeth on one
edge. Hacksawing can be done either manually or with a power hacksaw. A power hacksaw
provides a drive mechanism to operate the saw blade at a desired speed; it also applies a
given feed rate or sawing pressure.
Bandsawing involvesa linear continuous motion, using a bandsaw blade made in the
form of an endless flexible loop with teeth on one edge. The sawing machine is a bandsaw,
FIGURE 22.34
Work shapes that can be cut by: (a) external broaching, and (b) internal broaching. Cross-hatching
indicates the surfaces broached.
536
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

which provides a pulley-like drivemechanism to continuouslymoveandguide thebandsaw
blade past the work. Bandsaws are classified as vertical or horizontal. The designation
refers to the direction of saw blade motion during cutting. Vertical bandsaws are used for
cutoff as well as other operations such as contouring and slotting. Contouringon a bandsaw
involves cutting a part profile from flat stock. Slotting is the cutting of a thin slot into a part,
an operation for which bandsawing is well suited. Contour sawing and slotting are
operations in which the work is fed into the saw blade.
Vertical bandsaw machines can be operated either manually, in which the operator
guides and feeds the work past the bandsaw blade, or automatically, in which the work is
power fed past the blade. Recent innovations in bandsaw design have permitted the use of
CNC to perform contouring of complex outlines. Some of the details of the vertical
bandsawing operation are illustrated in Figure 22.35(b). Horizontal bandsaws are normally
used for cutoff operations as alternatives to power hacksaws.
Circular sawing, Figure 22.35(c), uses a rotating saw blade to provide a continuous
motion of the tool past the work. Circular sawing is often used to cut long bars, tubes, and
similar shapes to specified length. The cutting action is similar to a slot milling operation,
except that the saw blade is thinner and contains many more cutting teeth than a slot milling
cutter. Circular sawing machines have powered spindles to rotate the saw blade and a
feeding mechanism to drive the rotating blade into the work.
Two operations related to circular sawing are abrasive cutoff and friction sawing. In
abrasive cutoff, an abrasive disk is used to perform cutoff operations on hard materials
that would be difficult to saw with a conventional saw blade. In friction sawing, a steel
disk is rotated against the work at very high speeds, resulting in friction heat that causes
the material to soften sufficiently to permit penetration of the disk through the work. The
cutting speeds in both of these operations are much faster than in circular sawing.
22.7
MACHINING OPERATIONS FOR SPECIAL GEOMETRIES
One of the reasons for the technological importance of machining is its capability to
produce unique geometric features such as screw threads and gear teeth. In this section we
discuss the cutting processes that are used to accomplish these shapes, most of which are
adaptations of machining operations discussed earlier in the chapter.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Worktable
Worktable
Worktable
Work
Work
Work
Feed
Feed
Feed
Return stroke
Cutting stroke
Blade frame
Power
drive
Saw blade
Saw blade
Saw blade
Speed motion
Blade direction
FIGURE 22.35
Three types of sawing operations: (a) power hacksaw, (b) bandsaw (vertical), and (c) circular saw.
Section 22.7/Machining Operations for Special Geometries
537

22.7.1 SCREW THREADS
Threaded hardware components are widely used as fasteners in assembly (screws, bolts,
and nuts, Section 32.1) and for transmission of motion in machinery (e.g., lead screws in
positioning systems, Section 38.3.2). We can define threads as grooves that form a spiral
around the outside of a cylinder (external threads) or the inside of a round hole (internal
threads). We have previously considered the manufacture of threaded components in our
coverage of thread rolling in Section 19.2. Thread rolling is by far the most common
method for producing external threads, but the process is not economical for low
production quantities and the work metal must be ductile. Metallic threaded components
can also be made by casting, especially investment casting and die casting (Sections 11.2.4
and 11.3.3), and plastic parts with threads can be injection molded (Section 13.6). Finally,
threaded components can be machined, and this is the topic we address here. The
discussion is organized into external and internal thread machining.
External Threads
The simplest and most versatile method of cutting an external thread
on a cylindrical workpart is single-point threading, which employs a single-point cutting
tool on a lathe. This process is illustrated in Figure 22.6(g). The starting diameter of the
workpiece isequal tothe majordiameter ofthe screwthread. Thetoolmusthave the profile
of the thread groove, and the lathe must be capable of maintaining the same relationship
between the tool and the workpiece on successive passes in order to cut a consistent spiral.
This relationship isachieved bymeans of the lathe’s lead screw(seeFigure 22.7).More than
one turning pass is usually required. The first pass takes a light cut; the tool is then retracted
andrapidlytraversedbacktothestartingpoint;andeachensuingpasstracesthesamespiral
using ever greater depths of cut until the desired form of the thread groove has been
established. Single-point threading is suitable for low or even medium production quantit-
ies, but less time-consuming methods are more economical for high production.
An alternative to using a single-point tool is a threading die, shown in Figure 22.36. To
cut an external thread, the die is rotated around the starting cylindrical stock of the proper
diameter, beginning at one end and proceeding to the other end. The cutting teeth at the
opening of the die are tapered so that the starting depth of cut is less at the beginning of
the operation, finally reaching full thread depth at the trailing side of the die. The pitch
of the threading die teeth determines the pitch of the screw that is being cut. The die in
Figure 22.36 has a slit that allows the size of the opening to be adjusted to compensate for
tool wear on the teeth or to provide for minor differences in screw size. Threading dies cut
the threads in a single pass rather than multiple passes as in single-point threading.
FIGURE 22.36
Threading die.
Cutting teeth
Clearance
for chips
Adjusting screw
Slit
538
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

Threading dies are typically used in manual operations, in which the die is fixed in a
holder that can be rotated by hand. If the workpiece has a head or other obstacle at the other
end,thediemustbeunwoundfromthescrewjustcreatedinordertoremoveit.Thisisnotonly
time consuming, but it also risks possible damage to the thread surfaces. In mechanized
threading operations, cycle times can be reduced by using self-opening threading dies, which
are designed with an automatic device that opens the cutting teeth at the end of each cut. This
eliminates the need to unwind the die from the work and avoids possible damage to the
threads.Self-openingdiesareequippedwithfoursetsofcuttingteeth,similartothethreading
die in Figure 22.36, except that the teeth can be adjusted and removed for resharpening, and
the toolholder mechanism possesses the self-opening feature. Different sets of cutting teeth
are required for different thread sizes.
The term thread chasing is often applied to production operations that utilize self-
opening dies. Two types of thread chasing equipment are available: (1) stationary self-
opening dies, in which the workpiece rotates and the die does not, like a turning operation;
and (2) revolving self-opening dies, in which the die rotates and the workpiece does not,
like a drilling operation.
Two additional external threading operations should be mentioned: thread milling
and threadgrinding. Threadmillinginvolves theuseof a milling cutter to shape thethreads
of a screw. One possible setup is illustrated in Figure 22.37. In this operation a form-milling
cutter, whose profile is that of the thread groove, is oriented at an angle equal to the helix
angle of the thread and fed longitudinally as the workpiece is slowly rotated. In a variation
of this operation, a multiple-form cutter is used, so that multiple screw threads can be cut
simultaneously to increase production rates. Possible reasons for preferring thread milling
over thread chasing include (1) the size of the thread is too large to be readily cut with a die
and (2) thread milling is generally noted to produce more accurate and smoother threads.
Thread grinding is similar to thread milling except the cutter is a grinding wheel with
the shape of the thread groove, and the rotational speed of the grinding wheel is much
greater than in milling. The process can be used to completely form the threads or to finish
FIGURE 22.37
Thread
milling using a form-
milling cutter.
Center
Helix angle
Cutting edges
Feed direction
Form-milling
cutter
Workpiece
Work
rotation
(slow)
Cutter
rotation
Helix angle
Section 22.7/Machining Operations for Special Geometries
539

threads that have been formed by one of the previously discussed processes. Thread
grinding is especially applicable for threads that have been hardened by heat treatment.
Internal Threads
The most common process for cutting internal threads is tapping, in
which a cylindrical tool with cutting teeth arranged in a spiral whose pitch is equal to that of
the screw threads, is simultaneously rotated and fed into a pre-existing hole. The operation is
illustrated in Figure 22.14(b), and the cutting tool is called a tap. The end of the tool is slightly
conical to facilitate entry into the hole. The initial hole size is approximately equal to the
minor diameter of the screw thread. In the simplest version of the process, the tap is a solid
piece and the tapping operation is performed on a drill press equipped with a tapping head,
whichallowspenetrationintotheholeataratethatcorrespondstothescrew pitch.Attheend
of the operation, the spindle rotation is reversed so the tap can be unscrewed from the hole.
In addition to solid taps, collapsible taps are available, just as self-opening dies are
available for external threading. Collapsible taps have cutting teeth that automatically
retract into the tool when the thread has been cut, allowing it to be quickly removed from
the tapped hole without reversing spindle direction. Thus, shorter cycle times are possible.
Although production tapping can be accomplished on drill presses and other
conventional machine tools (e.g., lathes, turret lathes), several types of specialized ma-
chines have been developed for higher production rates. Single-spindle tapping machines
perform tapping one workpiece at a time, with manual or automatic loading and unloading
of the starting blanks. Multiple-spindle tapping machines operate on multiple work parts
simultaneously and provide for different hole sizes and screw pitches to be accomplished
together. Finally gang drills (Section 22.3.3) can be set up to perform drilling, reaming, and
tapping in rapid sequence on the same part.
22.7.2 GEARS
Gears are machinery components used to transmit motion and power between rotating
shafts. As illustrated in Figure 22.38, the transmission of rotational motion is achieved
FIGURE 22.38
Two meshing spur gears.
540
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

between meshing gears by teeth located around their respective circumferences. The
teeth have a special curved shape called an involute, which minimizes friction and wear
between contacting teeth of meshing gears. Depending on the relative numbers of teeth
of the two gears, the speed of rotation can be increased or decreased from one gear to the
next, with a corresponding decrease or increase in torque. We examine these speed
effects in our discussion of numerical control positioning systems in Section 38.3.2.
There are various gear types, the most basic and least complicated to produce is the
spur gear represented in Figure 22.38. It has teeth that are parallel to the axis of the gear’s
rotation. A gear with teeth that form an angle relative to the axis of rotation is called a
helical gear. The helical tooth design allows more than one tooth to be in contact for
smoother operation. Spur and helical gears provide rotation between shafts whose axes
are parallel. Other types, such as bevel gears, provide motion between shafts that are at
an angle with each other, usually 90. A rack is a straight gear (a gear of infinite radius),
which allows rotational motion to be converted into linear motion (e.g., rack-and-pinion
steering on automobiles). The variety of gear types is far too great for us to discuss them
all, and the interested reader is referred to texts on machine design for coverage of gear
design and mechanics. Our interest here is on the manufacture of gears.
Several of the shape processing operations discussed in previous chapters can be
used to produce gears. These include investment casting, die casting, plastic injection
molding, powder metallurgy, forging, and other bulk deformation operations (e.g., gear
rolling, Section 19.2). The advantage of these operations over machining is material
savings because no chips are produced. Sheet-metal stamping operations (Section 20.1)
are used to produce thin gears used in watches and clocks. The gears produced by all of
the preceding operations can often be used without further processing. In other cases, a
basic shape processing operation such as casting or forging is used to produce a starting
metal blank, and these parts are then machined to form the gear teeth. Finishing
operations are often required to achieve the specified accuracies of the teeth dimensions.
The principal machining operations used to cut gear teeth are form milling, gear
hobbing, gear shaping, andgear broaching. Form milling and gear broachingare considered
to be forming operations in the sense of Section 22.1, while gear hobbing and gear shaping
are classified as generating operations. Finishing processes for gear teeth include gear
shaving, gear grinding, and burnishing. The video clip on gears and gear manufacturing
illustrates the various aspects of gear technology. Many of the processes used to make gears
are also used to produce splines, sprockets, and other special machinery components.
VIDEO CLIP
Gears and Gear Manufacturing. This clip contains two segments: (1) gear functions and
(2) gear machining methods.
Form Milling
In this process, illustrated in Figure 22.39, the teeth on a gear blank are
machinedindividuallybyaform-millingcutterwhosecuttingedgeshavetheshapeofthespaces
between the teeth on the gear. The machining operation is classified as forming (Section 22.1)
becausetheshapeofthecutterdeterminesthegeometryofthegearteeth.Thedisadvantageof
formmillingisthatproductionratesareslowbecauseeachtoothspaceiscreatedoneatatime
and the gear blank must be indexed between each pass to establish the correct size of the gear
tooth,whichalsotakestime.Theadvantageofformmillingovergearhobbing(discussednext)
is that the milling cutter is much less expensive. The slow production rates and relatively low-
cost tooling make form milling appropriate for low-production quantities.
Gear Hobbing
Gear hobbing is also a milling operation, but the cutter, called a hob, is
much more complex and therefore much more expensive than a form milling cutter. In
Section 22.7/Machining Operations for Special Geometries
541

addition, special milling machines (called hobbing machines) are required to accomplish
the relative speed and feed motions between the cutter and the gear blank. Gear hobbing
is illustrated in Figure 22.40. As shown in the figure, the hob has a slight helix and its
rotation must be coordinated with the much slower rotation of the gear blank in order for
the hob’s cutting teeth to mesh with the blank’s teeth as they are being cut. This is
accomplished for a spur gear by offsetting the axis of rotation of the hob by an amount
equal to 90 less the helix angle relative to the axis of the gear blank. In addition to these
rotary motions of the hob and the workpiece, a straight-line motion is also required to
feed the hob relative to the gear blank throughout its thickness. Several teeth are cut
simultaneously in hobbing, which allows for higher production rates than form milling.
Accordingly, it is a widely used gear making process for medium and high production
quantities.
Gear Shaping
In gear shaping, a reciprocating cutting tool motion is used rather than a
rotational motion as in form milling and gear hobbing. Two quite different forms of
shaping operation (Section 22.6.1) are used to produce gears. In the first type, a single-
point tool takes multiple passes to gradually shape each tooth profile using computerized
controls or a template. The gear blank is slowly rotated or indexed, with the same profile
being imparted to each tooth. The procedure is slow and applied only in the fabrication of
very large gears.
In the second type of gear shaping operation, the cutter has the general shape of a
gear, with cutting teeth on one side. The axes of the cutter and the gear blank are parallel,
as illustrated in Figure 22.41, and the action is similar to a pair of conjugate gears except
FIGURE 22.39
Form
milling of gear teeth on a
starting blank.
Cutting edges
Gear blank
Indexing
of blank
Form - milling
cutter
Cutter
rotation
542
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

FIGURE 22.40
Gear
hobbing.
Cutting edges
Gear blank
Work feed
Cutter rotation
Workpiece
rotation
Hob
FIGURE 22.41
Gear
shaping.
Cutter
indexing
motion
Cutter
Primary
cutting
motion
Cutting
edges
Workpiece
indexing
motion
Gear blank
Section 22.7/Machining Operations for Special Geometries
543

that the reciprocation of the cutter is gradually creating the form of the matching teeth in
its mating component. At the beginning of the operation for a given gear blank, the cutter
is fed into the blank after each stroke until the required depth has been reached. Then,
after each successive pass of the tool, both the cutter and the blank are rotated a small
amount (indexed) so as to maintain the same tooth spacing on each. Gear shaping by this
second method is widely used in industry, and specialized machines (called gear shapers)
are available to accomplish the process.
Gear Broaching
Broaching (Section 22.6.2) as a gear making process is noted for short
production cycle times and high tooling cost. It is therefore economical only for high
volumes. Good dimensional accuracy and fine surface finish are also features of gear
broaching. The process can be applied for both external gears (the conventional gear)
and internal gears (teeth on the inside of the gear). For making internal gears, the
operation is similar to that shown in Figure 22.3(c), except the cross section of the tool
consists of a series of gear-shaped cutting teeth of increasing size to form the gear teeth in
successive steps as the broach is drawn through the work blank. To produce external
gears, the broach is tubular with inward-facing teeth. As mentioned, the cost of tooling in
both cases is high due to the complex geometry.
Finishing Operations
Some metal gears can be used without heat treatment, while
those used in more demanding applications are usually heat treated to harden the teeth
for maximum wear resistance. Unfortunately, heat treatment (Chapter 27) often results
in warpage of the workpiece, and the proper gear-tooth shape must be restored. Whether
heat treated or not, some type of finishing operation is generally required to improve
dimensional accuracy and surface finish of the gear after machining. Finishing processes
applied to gears that have not been heat treated include shaving and burnishing.
Finishing processes applied to hardened gears include grinding, lapping, and honing
(Chapter 25).
Gear shaving involves the use of a gear-shaped cutter that is meshed and rotated
with the gear. Cutting action results from reciprocation of the cutter during rotation.
Each tooth of the gear-shaped cutter has multiple cutting edges along its width, producing
very small chips and removing very little metal from the surface of each gear tooth. Gear
shaping is probably the most common industrial process for finishing gears. It is often
applied to a gear prior to heat treatment, and then followed by grinding and/or lapping
after heat treatment.
Gear burnishing is a plastic deformation process in which one or more hardened
gear-shaped dies are rolled in contact with the gear, and pressure is applied by the dies to
effect cold working of the gear teeth. Thus, the teeth are strengthened through strain
hardening, and surface finish is improved.
Grinding, honing, and lapping are three finishing processes that can be used on
hardened gears. Gear grinding can be based on either of two methods. The first is form
grinding, in which the grinding wheel has the exact shape of the tooth spacing (similar to
form milling), and a grinding pass or series of passes are made to finish form each tooth in
the gear. The other method involves generating the tooth profile using a conventional
straight-sided grinding wheel. Both of these grinding methods are very time consuming
and expensive.
Honing and lapping, discussed in Section 25.2.1 and 25.2.2, respectively, are two
finishing processes that can be adapted to gear finishing using very fine abrasives. The tools
in both processes usually possess the geometry of a gear that meshes with the gear to be
processed. Gear honing uses a tool that ismade of either plasticimpregnatedwith abrasives
or steel coated with carbide. Gear lapping uses a cast iron tool (other metals are sometimes
substituted), and the cutting action is accomplished by the lapping compound containing
abrasives.
544
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

22.8
HIGH-SPEED MACHINING
One persistent trend throughout the history of metal machining has been the use of higher
andhighercuttingspeeds.Inrecentyears,there hasbeenrenewedinterest inthisareadueto
its potential for faster production rates, shorter lead times, reduced costs, and improved part
quality. In its simplest definition, high-speed machining (HSM) means using cutting speeds
that are significantly higher than those used in conventional machining operations. Some
examples of cutting speed values for conventional and HSM are presented in Table 22.1,
according to data compiled by Kennametal Inc.1
Other definitions of HSM have been developed to deal with the wide variety of
work materials and tool materials used in machining. One popular HSM definition is the
DN ratio—the bearing bore diameter (mm) multiplied by the maximum spindle speed
(rev/min). For high-speed machining, the typical DN ratio is between 500,000 and
1,000,000. This definition allows larger diameter bearings to fall within the HSM range,
even though they operate at lower rotational speeds than smaller bearings. Typical HSM
spindle velocities range between 8000 and 35,000 rpm, although some spindles today are
designed to rotate at 100,000 rpm.
Another HSM definition is based on the ratio of horsepower to maximum spindle
speed, or hp/rpm ratio. Conventional machine tools usually have a higher hp/rpm ratio
than machines equipped for high-speed machining. By this metric, the dividing line
between conventional machining and HSM is around 0.005 hp/rpm. Thus, high-speed
machining includes 50 hp spindles capable of 10,000 rpm (0.005 hp/rpm) and 15 hp
spindles that can rotate at 30,000 rpm (0.0005 hp/rpm).
Other definitions emphasize higher production rates and shorter lead times, rather
than functions of spindle speed. In this case, important noncutting factors come into play,
such as high rapid traverse speeds and quick automatic tool changes (‘‘chip-to-chip’’ times
of 7 sec and less).
Requirements for high-speed machining include the following: (1) high-speed spin-
dles using special bearings designed for high rpm operation; (2) high feed rate capability,
typically around 50 m/min (2000 in/min); (3) CNC motion controls with ‘‘look-ahead’’
1Kennametal Inc., Latrobe, Pennsylvania, is a leading cutting tool producer.
TABLE 22.1
Comparison of cutting speeds used in conventional versus high-speed machining for selected
work materials.
Solid Tools (end mills, drills)a
Indexable Tools (face mills)a
Conventional Speed
High Cutting Speed
Conventional Speed
High Cutting Speed
Work Material
m/min
ft/min
m/min
ft/min
m/min
ft/min
m/min
ft/min
Aluminum
300+
1000+
3000+
10,000+
600+
2000+
3600+
12,000+
Cast iron, soft
150
500
360
1200
360
1200
1200
4000
Cast iron, ductile
105
350
250
800
250
800
900
3000
Steel, free machining
105
350
360
1200
360
1200
600
2000
Steel, alloy
75
250
250
800
210
700
360
1200
Titanium
40
125
60
200
45
150
90
300
aSolid tools are made of one solid piece, indexable tools use indexable inserts. Appropriate tool materials include cemented carbide and
coated carbide of various grades for all materials, ceramics for all materials, polycrystalline diamond tools for aluminum, and cubic boron
nitride for steels (see Section 23.2 for discussion of these tool materials).
Source: Kennametal Inc., Latrobe, Pennsylvania [3].
Section 22.8/High-Speed Machining
545

features that allow the controller to see upcoming directional changes and to make
adjustments to avoid undershooting or overshooting the desired tool path; (4) balanced
cutting tools, toolholders, and spindles to minimize vibration effects; (5) coolant delivery
systems that provide pressures an order of magnitude greater than in conventional
machining; and (6) chip control and removal systems to cope with the much larger metal
removalratesinHSM.Alsoimportantarethecuttingtoolmaterials.AslistedinTable22.1,
varioustoolmaterialsareusedforhigh-speedmachining,andthesematerialsarediscussed
in the following chapter.
Applications of HSM seem to divide into three categories [3]. One is in the aircraft
industry, by companies such as Boeing, in which long airframe structural components are
machined from large aluminum blocks. Much metal removal is required, mostly by
milling. The resulting pieces are characterized by thin walls and large surface-to-volume
ratios, but they can be produced more quickly and are more reliable than assemblies
involving multiple components and riveted joints. A second category involves the
machining of aluminum by multiple operations to produce a variety of components
for industries such as automotive, computer, and medical. Multiple cutting operations
mean many tool changes as well as many accelerations and decelerations of the tooling.
Thus, quick tool changes and tool path control are important in these applications. The
third application category for HSM is in the die and mold industry, which fabricates
complex geometries from hard materials. In this case, high-speed machining involves
much metal removal to create the mold or die cavity and finishing operations to achieve
fine surface finishes.
REFERENCES
[1] Aronson, R. B.‘‘Spindles are the Key to HSM,’’ Man-
ufacturing Engineering, October 2004, pp. 67–80.
[2] Aronson, R. B.‘‘Multitalented Machine Tools,’’ Man-
ufacturing Engineering, January 2005, pp. 65–75.
[3] Ashley, S.‘‘High-speed Machining Goes Mainstream,’’
Mechanical Engineering, May 1995, pp. 56–61.
[4] ASM Handbook, Vol. 16, Machining. ASM Inter-
national, Materials Park, Ohio, 1989.
[5] Black, J, and Kohser, R. DeGarmo’s Materials and
Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
[6] Boston, O. W. Metal Processing, 2nd ed. John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., New York, 1951.
[7] Drozda, T. J., and Wick, C. (eds.) Tool and Manu-
facturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed. Vol. I,
Machining. Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
Dearborn, Michigan, 1983.
[8] Eary, D. F., and Johnson, G. E. Process Engineering:
for Manufacturing. Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood
Cliffs, New Jersey, 1962.
[9] Kalpakjian, S., and Schmid, S. R. Manufacturing
Engineering and Technology, 4th ed. Prentice
Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2003.
[10] Kalpakjian, S., and Schmid S. R. Manufacturing Pro-
cesses for Engineering Materials, 6th ed. Pearson
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2010.
[11] Krar, S. F., and Ratterman, E. Superabrasives:
Grinding and Machining with CBN and Diamond.
McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, 1990.
[12] Lindberg, R. A. Processes and Materials of Man-
ufacture, 4th ed. Allyn and Bacon, Inc., Boston,
1990.
[13] Marinac, D.‘‘Smart Tool Paths for HSM,’’ Manufac-
turing Engineering, November 2000, pp. 44–50.
[14] Mason, F., and Freeman, N. B.‘‘Turning Centers
Come of Age,’’ Special Report 773, American Ma-
chinist, February 1985, pp. 97–116.
[15] Modern Metal Cutting. AB Sandvik Coromant,
Sandvik, Sweden, 1994.
[16] Ostwald, P. F., and J. Munoz, Manufacturing Pro-
cesses and Systems, 9th ed. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York, 1997.
[17] Rolt, L. T. C. A Short History of Machine Tools. The
MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1965.
[18] Steeds, W. A History of Machine Tools—1700–
1910. Oxford University Press, London, 1969.
[19] Trent, E. M., and Wright, P. K. Metal Cutting, 4th ed.
Butterworth Heinemann, Boston, 2000.
[20] Witkorski, M., and Bingeman, A.‘‘The Case for
Multiple Spindle HMCs,’’ Manufacturing Engineer-
ing, March 2004, pp. 139–148.
546
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

REVIEW QUESTIONS
22.1.
What are the differences between rotational parts
and prismatic parts in machining?
22.2.
Distinguish between generating and forming when
machining workpart geometries.
22.3.
Give two examples of machining operations in
which generating and forming are combined to
create workpart geometry.
22.4.
Describe the turning process.
22.5.
What is the difference between threading and
tapping?
22.6.
How does a boring operation differ from a turning
operation?
22.7.
What is meant by the designation 12 in  36 in
lathe?
22.8.
Name the various ways in which a workpart can be
held in a lathe.
22.9.
What is the difference between a live center and a
dead center, when these terms are used in the
context of workholding in a lathe?
22.10.
How does a turret lathe differ from an engine
lathe?
22.11.
What is a blind hole?
22.12.
What is the distinguishing feature of a radial drill
press?
22.13.
What is the difference between peripheral milling
and face milling?
22.14.
Describe profile milling.
22.15.
What is pocket milling?
22.16.
Describe the difference between up milling and
down milling.
22.17.
How does a universal milling machine differ from a
conventional knee-and-column machine?
22.18.
What is a machining center?
22.19.
What is the difference between a machining center
and a turning center?
22.20.
What can a mill-turn center do that a conventional
turning center cannot do?
22.21.
How do shaping and planing differ?
22.22.
What is the difference between internal broaching
and external broaching?
22.23.
Identify the three basic forms of sawing operation.
22.24.
(Video) For what types of parts are vertical turret
lathes used?
22.25.
(Video) List the four axes for a vertical machining
center with a rotational axis on the table.
22.26.
(Video) What is the purpose of a tombstone that is
used with a horizontal machining center?
22.27.
(Video) List the three parts of a common twist
drill.
22.28.
(Video) What is a gang-drilling machine?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
There are 23 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
22.1.
Which of the following are examples of generating
the workpart geometry in machining, as opposed
to forming the geometry (two best answers):
(a) broaching, (b) contour turning, (c) drilling,
(d) profile milling, and (e) thread cutting?
22.2.
In a turning operation, the change in diameter of
the workpart is equal to which one of the following:
(a) 1  depth of cut, (b) 2  depth of cut, (c) 1 
feed, or (d) 2  feed?
22.3.
A lathe can be used to perform which of the
following machining operations (three correct
answers): (a) boring, (b) broaching, (c) drilling,
(d) milling, (e) planing, and (f) turning?
22.4.
A facing operation is normally performed on which
one of the following machine tools: (a) drill press,
(b) lathe, (c) milling machine, (d) planer, or
(e) shaper?
22.5.
Knurling is performed on a lathe, but it is not a
metal cutting operation: (a) true or (b) false?
22.6.
Which one of the following cutting tools cannot be
used on a turret lathe: (a) broach, (b) cutoff tool,
(c) drill bit, (d) single-point turning tool, or
(e) threading tool?
22.7.
Which one of the following turning machines per-
mits very long bar stock to be used: (a) chucking
machine, (b) engine lathe, (c) screw machine,
(d) speed lathe, or (e) turret lathe?
22.8.
The twist drill is the most common type of drill bit:
(a) true or (b) false?
22.9.
A tap is a cutting tool used to create which one of
the following geometries: (a) external threads,
(b) flat planar surfaces, (c) holes used in beer
kegs, (d) internal threads, or (e) square holes?
Multiple Choice Questions
547

22.10.
Reaming is used for which of the following functions
(three correct answers): (a) accurately locate a hole
position, (b) enlarge a drilled hole, (c) improve
surface finish on a hole, (d) improve tolerance on
hole diameter, and (e) provide an internal thread?
22.11.
End milling is most similar to which one of the
following: (a) face milling, (b) peripheral milling,
(c) plain milling, or (d) slab milling?
22.12.
The basic milling machine is which one of the
following: (a) bed type, (b) knee-and-column,
(c) profiling mill, (d) ram mill, or (e) universal
milling machine?
22.13.
A planing operation is best described by which one
of the following: (a) a single-point tool moves
linearly past a stationary workpart, (b) a tool
with multiple teeth moves linearly past a stationary
workpart, (c) a workpart is fed linearly past a
rotating cutting tool, or (d) a workpart moves
linearly past a single-point tool?
22.14.
A broaching operation is best described by which
one of the following: (a) a rotating tool moves past
a stationary workpart, (b) a tool with multiple teeth
moves linearly past a stationary workpart, (c) a
workpart is fed past a rotating cutting tool, or (d) a
workpart moves linearly past a stationary single-
point tool?
22.15.
The three basic types of sawing, according to type
of blade motion involved, are (a) abrasive cutoff,
(b) bandsawing, (c) circular sawing, (d) contouring,
(e) friction sawing, (f) hacksawing, and (g) slotting?
22.16.
Gear hobbing is a special form of which one of the
following
machining
operations:
(a)
grinding,
(b) milling, (c) planing, (d) shaping, or (e) turning?
PROBLEMS
Turning and Related Operations
22.1.
A cylindrical workpart 200 mm in diameter and
700 mm long is to be turned in an engine lathe.
Cutting speed ¼ 2.30 m/s, feed ¼ 0.32 mm/rev, and
depth of cut ¼ 1.80 mm. Determine (a) cutting
time, and (b) metal removal rate.
22.2.
In a production turning operation, the foreman has
decreed that a single pass must be completed on
the cylindrical workpiece in 5.0 min. The piece is
400 mm long and 150 mm in diameter. Using a
feed ¼ 0.30 mm/rev and a depth of cut ¼ 4.0 mm,
what cutting speed must be used to meet this
machining time requirement?
22.3.
A facing operation is performed on an engine lathe.
The diameter of the cylindrical part is 6 in and the
length is 15 in. The spindle rotates at a speed of 180
rev/min. Depth of cut ¼ 0.110 in,and feed ¼ 0.008in/
rev. Assume the cutting tool moves from the outer
diameter of the workpiece to exactly the center at a
constant velocity. Determine (a) the velocity of the
tool as it moves from the outer diameter towards
the center and (b) the cutting time.
22.4.
A tapered surface is to be turned on an automatic
lathe. The workpiece is 750 mm long with minimum
and maximum diameters of 100 mm and 200 mm at
opposite ends. The automatic controls on the lathe
permit the surface speed to be maintained at a
constant value of 200 m/min by adjusting the rota-
tional speed as a function of workpiece diameter.
Feed ¼ 0.25 mm/rev and depth of cut ¼ 3.0 mm.
The rough geometry of the piece has already been
formed, and this operation will be the final cut.
Determine (a) the time required to turn the taper
and (b) the rotational speeds at the beginning and
end of the cut.
22.5.
In the taper turning job of Problem 22.4, suppose
that the automatic lathe with surface speed control
is not available and a conventional lathe must be
used. Determine the rotational speed that would be
required to complete the job in exactly the same
time as your answer to part (a) of that problem.
22.6.
A cylindrical work bar with 4.5 in diameter and 52 in
lengthischuckedinanenginelatheandsupportedat
the opposite end using a live center. A 46.0-in
portion of the length is to be turned to a diameter
of 4.25 in one pass at a speed of 450 ft/min.Themetal
removal rate should be 6.75 in3/min. Determine
(a) the required depth of cut, (b) the required
feed, and (c) the cutting time.
22.7.
A 4.00-in-diameter workpiece that is 25 in long is to
be turned down to a diameter of 3.50 in, using two
passes on an engine lathe using a cutting speed ¼
300 ft/min, feed ¼ 0.015 in/rev, and depth of cut ¼
0.125 in. The bar will be held in a chuck and
supported on the opposite end in a live center.
With this workholding setup, one end must be
turned to diameter; then the bar must be reversed
to turn the other end. Using an overhead crane
available at the lathe, the time required to load and
unload the bar is 5 min, and the time to reverse the
bar is 3 min. For each turning cut an allowance
must be added to the cut length for approach and
overtravel. The total allowance (approach plus
548
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

overtravel) ¼ 0.50 in. Determine the total cycle
time to complete this turning operation.
22.8.
The end of a large tubular workpart is to be faced
on a CNC vertical boring mill. The part has an
outside diameter of 38.0 in and an inside diameter
of 24.0 in. If the facing operation is performed at a
rotational speed of 40.0 rev/min, feed of 0.015 in/
rev, and depth of cut of 0.180 in, determine (a) the
cutting time to complete the facing operation and
the cutting speeds and metal removal rates at the
beginning and end of the cut.
22.9.
Solve Problem 22.8 except that the machine tool
controls operate at a constant cutting speed by
continuously adjusting rotational speed for the
position of the tool relative to the axis of rotation.
The rotational speed at the beginning of the cut ¼
40 rev/min, and is continuously increased there-
after to maintain a constant cutting speed.
Drilling
22.10.
A drilling operation is to be performed with a
12.7-mm diameter twist drill in a steel workpart.
The hole is a blind hole at a depth of 60 mm and the
point angle is 118. The cutting speed is 25 m/min
and the feed is 0.30 mm/rev. Determine (a) the
cutting time to complete the drilling operation, and
(b) metal removal rate during the operation, after
the drill bit reaches full diameter.
22.11.
A two-spindle drill simultaneously drills a 1/2 in
hole and a 3/4 in hole through a workpiece that is
1.0 in thick. Both drills are twist drills with point
angles of 118. Cutting speed for the material is 230
ft/min. The rotational speed of each spindle can be
set individually. The feed rate for both holes must
be set to the same value because the two spindles
lower at the same rate. The feed rate is set so the
total metal removal rate does not exceed 1.50 in3/
min. Determine (a) the maximum feed rate (in/
min) that can be used, (b) the individual feeds (in/
rev) that result for each hole, and (c) the time
required to drill the holes.
22.12.
A CNC drill press is to perform a series of through-
hole drilling operations on a 1.75-in thick alumi-
num plate that is a component in a heat exchanger.
Each hole is 3/4 in diameter. There are 100 holes in
all, arranged in a 10  10 matrix pattern, and the
distance between adjacent hole centers (along the
square) ¼ 1.5 in. The cutting speed ¼ 300 ft/min,
the penetration feed (z-direction) ¼ 0.015 in/rev,
and the traverse rate between holes (x-y plane) ¼
15.0 in/min. Assume that x-y moves are made at a
distance of 0.50 in above the work surface, and that
this distance must be included in the penetration
feed rate for each hole. Also, the rate at which the
drill is retracted from each hole is twice the pene-
tration feed rate. The drill has a point angle ¼ 100.
Determine the time required from the beginning of
the first hole to the completion of the last hole,
assuming the most efficient drilling sequence will
be used to accomplish the job.
22.13.
A gun-drilling operation is used to drill a 9/64-
in diameter hole to a certain depth. It takes
4.5 minutes to perform the drilling operation using
high pressure fluid delivery of coolant to the drill
point. The current spindle speed ¼ 4000 rev/min,
and feed ¼ 0.0017 in/rev. In order to improve the
surface finish in the hole, it has been decided to
increase the speed by 20% and decrease the feed
by 25%. How long will it take to perform the
operation at the new cutting conditions?
Milling
22.14.
A peripheral milling operation is performed on the
top surface of a rectangular workpart which is
400 mm long  60 mm wide. The milling cutter,
which is 80 mm in diameter and has five teeth,
overhangs the width of the part on both sides.
Cutting speed ¼ 70 m/min, chip load ¼ 0.25 mm/
tooth, and depth of cut ¼ 5.0 mm. Determine
(a) the actual machining time to make one pass
across the surface and (b) the maximum material
removal rate during the cut.
22.15.
A face milling operation is used to machine 6.0 mm
from the top surface of a rectangular piece of
aluminum 300 mm long by 125 mm wide in a single
pass. The cutter follows a path that is centered over
the workpiece. It has four teeth and is 150 mm in
diameter. Cutting speed ¼ 2.8 m/s, and chip load ¼
0.27 mm/tooth. Determine (a) the actual machin-
ing time to make the pass across the surface and
(b) the maximum metal removal rate during
cutting.
22.16.
A slab milling operation is performed on the top
surface of a steel rectangular workpiece 12.0 in
long by 2.5 in wide. The helical milling cutter, which
has a 3.0 in diameter and ten teeth, is set up to
overhang the width of the part on both sides.
Cutting speed is 125 ft/min, feed is 0.006 in/tooth,
and depth of cut ¼ 0.300 in. Determine (a) the
actual machining time to make one pass across the
surface and (b) the maximum metal removal rate
during the cut. (c) If an additional approach dis-
tance of 0.5 in is provided at the beginning of the
pass (before cutting begins), and an overtravel
Problems
549

distance is provided at the end of the pass equal to
the cutter radius plus 0.5 in, what is the duration of
the feed motion.
22.17.
A face milling operation is performed on the top
surface of a steel rectangular workpiece 12.0 in
long by 2.5 in wide. The milling cutter follows a
path that is centered over the workpiece. It has five
teeth and a 3.0 in diameter. Cutting speed ¼ 250 ft/
min, feed ¼ 0.006 in/tooth, and depth of cut ¼ 0.150
in. Determine (a) the actual cutting time to make
one pass across the surface and (b) the maximum
metal removal rate during the cut. (c) If an addi-
tional approach distance of 0.5 in is provided at the
beginning of the pass (before cutting begins), and
an overtravel distance is provided at the end of the
pass equal to the cutter radius plus 0.5 in, what is
the duration of the feed motion.
22.18.
Solve Problem 22.17 except that the workpiece is
5.0 in wide and the cutter is offset to one side so
that the swath cut by the cutter ¼ 1.0 in wide. This is
called partial face milling, Figure 22.20(b).
22.19.
A face milling operation removes 0.32 in depth of
cut from the end of a cylinder that has a diameter of
3.90 in. The cutter has a 4-in diameter with 4 teeth,
and its feed trajectory is centered over the circular
face of the work. The cutting speed is 375 ft/min
and the chip load is 0.006 in/tooth. Determine
(a) the time to machine, (b) the average metal
removal rate (considering the entire machining
time), and (c) the maximum metal removal rate.
22.20.
The top surface of a rectangular workpart is ma-
chined using a peripheral milling operation. The
workpart is 735 mm long by 50 mm wide by 95 mm
thick. The milling cutter, which is 60 mm in diame-
ter and has five teeth, overhangs the width of the
part equally on both sides. Cutting speed ¼ 80 m/
min, chip load ¼ 0.30 mm/tooth, and depth of cut ¼
7.5 mm. (a) Determine the time required to make
one pass across the surface, given that the setup and
machine settings provide an approach distance of
5 mm before actual cutting begins and an over-
travel distance of 25 mm after actual cutting has
finished. (b) What is the maximum material re-
moval rate during the cut?
Machining and Turning Centers
22.21.
A three-axis CNC machining center is tended by a
worker who loads and unloads parts between
machining cycles. The machining cycle takes
5.75 min, and the worker takes 2.80 min using a
hoist to unload the part just completed and load
and fixture the next part onto the machine work-
table. A proposal has been made to install a two-
position pallet shuttle at the machine so that the
worker and the machine tool can perform their
respective tasks simultaneously rather than se-
quentially. The pallet shuttle would transfer the
parts between the machine worktable and the load/
unload station in 15 sec. Determine (a) the current
cycle time for the operation and (b) the cycle time
if the proposal is implemented. What is the per-
centage increase in hourly production rate that
would result from using the pallet shuttle?
22.22.
A part is produced using six conventional machine
tools consisting of three milling machines and three
drill presses. The machine cycle times on these
machines are 4.7 min, 2.3 min, 0.8 min, 0.9 min,
3.4 min, and 0.5 min. The average load/unload time
for each of these operations is 1.25 min. The
corresponding setup times for the six machines
are 1.55 hr, 2.82 hr, 57 min, 45 min, 3.15 hr, and
36 min, respectively. The total material handling
time to carry one part between the machines is
20 min (consisting of five moves between six ma-
chines). A CNC machining center has been
installed, and all six operations will be performed
on it to produce the part. The setup time for the
machining center for this job is 1.0 hr. In addition,
the machine must be programmed for this part
(called ‘‘part programming’’), which takes 3.0 hr.
The machine cycle time is the sum of the machine
cycle times for the six machines. Load/unload time
is 1.25 min. (a) What is the total time to produce
one of these parts using the six conventional ma-
chines if the total consists of all setups, machine
cycle times, load/unload times, and part transfer
times between machines? (b) What is the total time
to produce one of these parts using the CNC
machining center if the total consists of the setup
time, programming time, machine cycle time, and
load/unload time, and what are the percent savings
in total time compared to your answer in (a)? (c) If
the same part is produced in a batch of 20 pieces,
what is the total time to produce them under the
same conditions as in (a) except that the total
material handling time to carry the 20 parts in
one unit load between the machines is 40 min?
(d) If the part is produced in a batch of 20 pieces on
the CNC machining center, what is the total time to
produce them under the same conditions as in part
(b), and what are the percent savings in total time
compared to your answer in (c)? (e) In future
orders of 20 pieces of the same part, the program-
ming time will not be included in the total time
550
Chapter 22/Machining Operations and Machine Tools

because the part program has already been pre-
pared and saved. In this case, how long does it take
to produce the 20 parts using the machining center,
and what are the percent savings in total time
compared to your answer in (c)?
Other Operations
22.23.
A shaper is used to reduce the thickness of a 50 mm
part to 45 mm. The part is made of cast iron and has
a tensile strength of 270 MPa and a Brinell hard-
ness of 165 HB. The starting dimensions of the part
are 750 mm  450 mm  50 mm. The cutting speed
is 0.125 m/sec and the feed is 0.40 mm/pass. The
shaper ram is hydraulically driven and has a return
stroke time that is 50% of the cutting stroke time.
An extra 150 mm must be added before and after
the part for acceleration and deceleration to take
place. Assuming the ram moves parallel to the long
dimension of the part, how long will it take to
machine?
22.24.
An open side planer is to be used to plane the top
surface of a rectangular workpart, 20.0 in  45.0 in.
The cutting speed is 30 ft/min, the feed is 0.015 in/
pass, and the depth of cut is 0.250 in. The length of
the stroke across the work must be set up so that
10 in are allowed at both the beginning and end of
the stroke for approach and overtravel. The return
stroke, including an allowance for acceleration and
deceleration, takes 60% of the time for the forward
stroke. The workpart is made of carbon steel with a
tensile strength of 50,000 lb/in2 and a Brinell hard-
ness of 110 HB. How long will it take to complete
the job, assuming that the part is oriented in such a
way as to minimize the time?
22.25.
High-speed machining is being considered to pro-
duce the aluminum part in Problem 22.15. All
cutting conditions remain the same except for
the cutting speed and the type of insert used in
the cutter. Assume the cutting speed will be at the
limit given in Table 22.1. Determine (a) the new
time to machine the part and (b) the new metal
removal rate. (c) Is this part a good candidate for
high-speed machining? Explain.
Problems
551

23
CUTTING-TOOL
TECHNOLOGY
Chapter Contents
23.1
Tool Life
23.1.1
Tool Wear
23.1.2
Tool Life and the Taylor Tool Life
Equation
23.2
Tool Materials
23.2.1
High-Speed Steel and Its Predecessors
23.2.2
Cast Cobalt Alloys
23.2.3
Cemented Carbides, Cermets, and
Coated Carbides
23.2.4
Ceramics
23.2.5
Synthetic Diamonds and Cubic Boron
Nitride
23.3
Tool Geometry
23.3.1
Single-Point Tool Geometry
23.3.2
Multiple-Cutting-Edge Tools
23.4
Cutting Fluids
23.4.1
Types of Cutting Fluids
23.4.2
Application of Cutting Fluids
Machining operations are accomplished using cutting tools.
The high forces and temperatures during machining create
a very harsh environment for the tool. If cutting force
becomes too high, the tool fractures. If cutting temperature
becomes too high, the tool material softens and fails. If
neither of these conditions causes the tool to fail, continual
wear of the cutting edge ultimately leads to failure.
Cutting tool technology has two principal aspects: tool
material and tool geometry. The first is concerned with devel-
oping materials that can withstand the forces, temperatures,
andwearingactioninthemachiningprocess.Theseconddeals
with optimizing the geometry of the cutting tool for the tool
material and for a given operation. These are the issues we
address in the present chapter. It is appropriate to begin by
considering tool life, because this is a prerequisite for much of
our subsequent discussion on tool materials. It also seems
appropriate to include a section on cutting fluids at the end of
this chapter; cutting fluids are often used in machining opera-
tions to prolong the life of a cutting tool. In the DVD included
with this book is a video clip on Cutting-Tool Materials.
VIDEO CLIP
Cutting-Tool Materials. This clip has three segments:
(1) cutting-tool materials, which includes an overview of
the different cutting-tool categories; (2) tool material qual-
ity trade-offs; and (3) tool failure modes.
23.1
TOOL LIFE
As suggested by our opening paragraph, there are three
possible modes by which a cutting tool can fail in machining:
1. Fracture failure. This mode of failure occurs when the
cutting force at the tool point becomes excessive, caus-
ing it to fail suddenly by brittle fracture.
552

2. Temperature failure. This failure occurs when the cutting temperature is too high for
the tool material, causing the material at the tool point to soften, which leads to plastic
deformation and loss of the sharp edge.
3. Gradual wear. Gradual wearing of the cutting edge causes loss of tool shape,
reduction in cutting efficiency, an acceleration of wearing as the tool becomes heavily
worn, and finally tool failure in a manner similar to a temperature failure.
Fracture and temperature failures result in premature loss of the cutting tool. These
two modes of failure are therefore undesirable. Of the three possible tool failures,
gradual wear is preferred because it leads to the longest possible use of the tool, with the
associated economic advantage of that longer use.
Product quality must also be considered when attempting to control the mode of
tool failure. When the tool point fails suddenly during a cut, it often causes damage to the
work surface. This damage requires either rework of the surface or possible scrapping of
the part. The damage can be avoided by selecting cutting conditions that favor gradual
wearing of the tool rather than fracture or temperature failure, and by changing the tool
before the final catastrophic loss of the cutting edge occurs.
23.1.1 TOOL WEAR
Gradual wear occurs at two principal locations on a cutting tool: the top rake face and the
flank. Accordingly, two main types of tool wear can be distinguished: crater wear and
flank wear, illustrated in Figures 23.1 and 23.2. We will use a single-point tool to explain
tool wear and the mechanisms that cause it. Crater wear, Figure 23.2(a), consists of a
cavity in the rake face of the tool that forms and grows from the action of the chip sliding
against the surface. High stresses and temperatures characterize the tool–chip contact
interface, contributing to the wearing action. The crater can be measured either by its
depth or its area. Flank wear, Figure 23.2(b), occurs on the flank, or relief face, of the
tool. It results from rubbing between the newly generated work surface and the flank face
adjacent to the cutting edge. Flank wear is measured by the width of the wear band, FW.
This wear band is sometimes called the flank wear land.
Certain features of flank wear can be identified. First, an extreme condition of flank
wear often appears on the cutting edge at the location corresponding to the original surface
of the workpart. This is called notch wear. It occurs because the original work surface is
harder and/or more abrasive than the internal material, which could be caused by work
FIGURE 23.1
Diagram
of worn cutting tool,
showing the principal
locations and types of
wear that occur.
Section 23.1/Tool Life
553

hardening from cold drawing or previous machining, sand particles in the surface from
casting, or other reasons. As a consequence of the harder surface, wear is accelerated at this
location. A second region of flank wear that can be identified is nose radius wear; this
occurs on the nose radius leading into the end cutting edge.
The mechanisms that cause wear at the tool–chip and tool–work interfaces in
machining can be summarized as follows:

Abrasion. This is a mechanical wearing action caused by hard particles in the work
material gouging and removing small portions of the tool. This abrasive action
occurs in both flank wear and crater wear; it is a significant cause of flank wear.

Adhesion. When two metals are forced into contact under high pressure and tempera-
ture, adhesion or welding occur betweenthem. These conditions are present between the
FIGURE 23.2
(a) Crater
wear and (b) ﬂank wear
on a cemented carbide
tool, as seen through a
toolmaker’s microscope.
(Courtesy of Manufactur-
ing Technology Labora-
tory, Lehigh University,
photos by J. C. Keefe.)
(a)
(b)
554
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

chip and the rake face of the tool. As the chip flows across the tool, small particles of the
tool are broken away from the surface, resulting in attrition of the surface.

Diffusion. This is a process in which an exchange of atoms takes place across a close
contact boundary between two materials (Section 4.3). In the case of tool wear,
diffusion occurs at the tool–chip boundary, causing the tool surface to become
depleted of the atoms responsible for its hardness. As this process continues, the
tool surface becomes more susceptible to abrasion and adhesion. Diffusion is
believed to be a principal mechanism of crater wear.

Chemical reactions. The high temperatures and clean surfaces at the tool–chip
interface in machining at high speeds can result in chemical reactions, in particular,
oxidation, on the rake face of the tool. The oxidized layer, being softer than the
parent tool material, is sheared away, exposing new material to sustain the reaction
process.

Plastic deformation. Another mechanism that contributes to tool wear is plastic
deformation of the cutting edge. The cutting forces acting on the cutting edge at
high temperature cause the edge to deform plastically, making it more vulnerable to
abrasion of the tool surface. Plastic deformation contributes mainly to flank wear.
Most of these tool-wear mechanisms are accelerated at higher cutting speeds and
temperatures. Diffusion and chemical reaction are especially sensitive to elevated
temperature.
23.1.2 TOOL LIFE AND THE TAYLOR TOOL LIFE EQUATION
As cutting proceeds, the various wear mechanisms result in increasing levels of wear on
the cutting tool. The general relationship of tool wear versus cutting time is shown in
Figure 23.3. Although the relationship shown is for flank wear, a similar relationship occurs
for crater wear. Threeregions can usually be identified inthe typical wear growth curve. The
first is the break-in period, in which the sharp cutting edge wears rapidly at the beginning of
its use. This first region occurs within the first few minutes of cutting. The break-in period is
followed by wear that occurs at a fairly uniform rate. This is called the steady-state wear
region. In our figure, this region is pictured as a linear function of time, although there are
deviations from the straight line in actual machining. Finally, wear reaches a level at which
the wear rate begins to accelerate. This marks the beginning of the failure region, in which
cutting temperatures are higher, and the general efficiency of the machining process is
reduced. If allowed to continue, the tool finally fails by temperature failure.
FIGURE 23.3
Tool wear
as a function of cutting
time. Flank wear (FW) is
used here as the measure
of tool wear. Crater wear
follows a similar growth
curve.
Section 23.1/Tool Life
555

The slope of the tool wear curve in the steady-state region is affected by work
material and cutting conditions. Harder work materials cause the wear rate (slope of the
tool wear curve) to increase. Increased speed, feed, and depth of cut have a similar effect,
with speed being the most important of the three. If the tool wear curves are plotted for
several different cutting speeds, the results appear as in Figure 23.4. As cutting speed is
increased, wear rate increases so the same level of wear is reached in less time.
Tool life is defined as the length of cutting time that the tool can be used. Operating
the tool until final catastrophic failure is one way of defining tool life. This is indicated in
Figure 23.4 by the end of each tool wear curve. However, in production, it is often a
disadvantage to use the tool until this failure occurs because of difficulties in resharpening
the tool and problems with work surface quality. As an alternative, a level of tool wear can
beselectedas a criterionoftoollife, and thetoolisreplaced whenwearreaches thatlevel. A
convenient tool life criterion is a certain flank wear value, such as 0.5 mm (0.020 in),
illustratedasthehorizontallineonthe graph. Wheneachofthethreewear curves intersects
that line, the life of the corresponding tool is defined as ended. If the intersection points are
projected down to the time axis, the values of tool life can be identified, as we have done.
Taylor Tool Life Equation
If the tool life values for the three wear curves in Figure 23.4
are plotted on a natural log–log graph of cutting speed versus tool life, the resulting
relationship is a straight line as shown in Figure 23.5.1
The discovery of this relationship around 1900 is credited to F. W. Taylor. It can be
expressed in equation form and is called the Taylor tool life equation:
vTn ¼ C
ð23:1Þ
where v ¼ cutting speed, m/min (ft/min); T ¼ tool life, min; and n and C are
parameters whose values depend on feed, depth of cut, work material, tooling
(material in particular), and the tool life criterion used.
The value of n is relative constant for a given tool material, whereas the value of C
depends on tool material, work material, and cutting conditions. We will elaborate on
these relationships when we discuss the various tool materials in Section 23.2.
FIGURE 23.4
Effect of
cutting speed on tool
ﬂank wear (FW) for three
cutting speeds.
Hypothetical values of
speed and tool life are
shown for a tool life
criterion of 0.50-mm ﬂank
wear.
(1)
(2)
(3)
T = 5
T = 12
T = 41
v = 130
v = 100 m/mm
v = 160
Tool life criterion given
as flank wear level
0.50 mm
Tool flank wear (FW)
10
20
30
Time of cutting (min)
40
1The reader may have noted in Figure 23.5 that we have plotted the dependent variable (tool life) on the
horizontal axis and the independent variable (cutting speed) on the vertical axis. Although this is a reversal
of the normal plotting convention, it nevertheless is the way the Taylor tool life relationship is usually
presented.
556
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

Basically, Eq. (23.1) states that higher cutting speeds result in shorter tool lives.
Relating the parameters n and C to Figure 23.5, n is the slope of the plot (expressed in
linear terms rather than in the scale of the axes), and C is the intercept on the speed axis.
C represents the cutting speed that results in a 1-min tool life.
The problem with Eq. (23.1) is that the units on the right-hand side of the equation
are not consistent with the units on the left-hand side. To make the units consistent, the
equation should be expressed in the form
vTn ¼ C T
n
ref


ð23:2Þ
where Tref ¼ a reference value for C. Tref is simply 1 min when m/min (ft/min) and
minutes are used for v and T, respectively.
The advantage of Eq. (23.2) is seen when it is desired to use the Taylor equation
with units other than m/min (ft/min) and minutes—for example, if cutting speed were
expressed as m/sec and tool life as sec. In this case, Tref would be 60 sec and C would
therefore be the same speed value as in Eq. (23.1), although converted to units of m/sec.
The slope n would have the same numerical value as in Eq. (23.1).
Example 23.1
Taylor Tool Life
Equation
Determine the values of C and n in the plot of Figure 23.5, using two of the three points on
the curve and solving simultaneous equations of the form of Eq. (23.1).
Solution:
Choosingthetwoextremepoints:v¼160m/min,T¼5min;andv¼100m/min,
T ¼ 41 min; we have
160 5
ð Þn ¼ C
100 41
ð
Þn ¼ C
Setting the left-hand sides of each equation equal,
160 5
ð Þn ¼ 100 41
ð
Þn
Taking the natural logarithms of each term,
ln 160
ð
Þ þ n ln 5
ð Þ ¼ ln 100
ð
Þ þ n ln 41
ð
Þ
5:0752 þ 1:6094 n ¼ 4:6052 þ 3:7136 n
0:4700 ¼ 2:1042 n
n ¼ 0:4700
2:1042 ¼ 0:223
FIGURE 23.5
Natural
log–log plot of cutting
speed vs. tool life.
400
200
160
130
100
1.0
2
3
5
10
Tool life (min)
20
30
50
100
Cutting speed (ft/min)
(1) v = 160, T = 5
(2) v = 130, T = 12
(3) v = 100, T = 41
Section 23.1/Tool Life
557

Substituting this value of n into either starting equation, we obtain the value of C:
C ¼ 160 5
ð Þ0:223 ¼ 229
or
C ¼ 100 41
ð
Þ0:223 ¼ 229
The Taylor tool life equation for the data of Figure 23.5 is therefore
vT0:223 ¼ 229
n
An expanded version of Eq. (23.2) can be formulated to include the effects of feed,
depth of cut, and even work material hardness:
vTnf mdpHp ¼ KT
n
ref f
m
ref d
p
ref H
q
ref
ð23:3Þ
where f ¼ feed, mm (in); d ¼ depth of cut, mm (in); H ¼ hardness, expressed in an
appropriate hardness scale; m, p, andq areexponents whose values are experimentally
determined for the conditions of the operation; K ¼ a constant analogous to C in Eq.
(23.2); and fref, dref, and Href are reference values for feed, depth of cut, and hardness.
The values of m and p, the exponents for feed and depth, are less than 1.0. This
indicates the greater effect of cutting speed on tool life, because the exponent of v is 1.0.
After speed, feed is next in importance, so m has a value greater than p. The exponent for
work hardness, q, is also less than 1.0.
Perhaps the greatest difficulty in applying Eq. (23.3) in a practical machining
operation is the tremendous amount of machining data that would be required to
determine the parameters of the equation. Variations in work materials and testing
conditions also cause difficulties by introducing statistical variations in the data. Equa-
tion (23.3) is valid in indicating general trends among its variables, but not in its ability to
accurately predict tool life performance. To reduce these problems and make the scope of
the equation more manageable, some of the terms are usually eliminated. For example,
omitting depth and hardness reduces Eq. (23.3) to the following:
vTnf m ¼ KT
n
ref f
m
ref
ð23:4Þ
where the terms have the same meaning as before, except that the constant K will
have a slightly different interpretation.
Tool Life Criteria in Production
Although flank wear is the tool life criterion in our
previous discussion of the Taylor equation, this criterion is not very practical in a factory
environment because of the difficulties and time required to measure flank wear.
Following are nine alternative tool life criteria that are more convenient to use in a
production machining operation, some of which are admittedly subjective:
1. Complete failure of the cutting edge (fracture failure, temperature failure, or wearing
until complete breakdown of the tool has occurred). This criterion has disadvantages,
as discussed earlier.
2. Visual inspection of flank wear (or crater wear) by the machine operator (without a
toolmaker’s microscope). This criterion is limited by the operator’s judgment and
ability to observe tool wear with the naked eye.
3. Fingernail test across the cutting edge by the operator to test for irregularities.
4. Changes in the sound emitting from the operation, as judged by the operator.
5. Chips become ribbony, stringy, and difficult to dispose of.
558
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

6. Degradation of the surface finish on the work.
7. Increased power consumption in the operation, as measured by a wattmeter con-
nected to the machine tool.
8. Workpiece count. The operator is instructed to change the tool after a certain specified
number of parts have been machined.
9. Cumulative cutting time. This is similar to the previous workpiece count, except that
the length of time the tool has been cutting is monitored. This is possible on machine
tools controlled by computer; the computer is programmed to keep data on the total
cutting time for each tool.
23.2
TOOL MATERIALS
The three modes of tool failure allow us to identify three important properties required in
a tool material:

Toughness. To avoid fracture failure, the tool material must possess high toughness.
Toughness is the capacity of a material to absorb energy without failing. It is usually
characterized by a combination of strength and ductility in the material.

Hot hardness. Hot hardness is the ability of a material to retain its hardness at high
temperatures. This is required because of the high-temperature environment in
which the tool operates.

Wear resistance. Hardness is the single most important property needed to resist
abrasive wear. All cutting-tool materials must be hard. However, wear resistance in
metal cutting depends on more than just tool hardness, because of the other tool-wear
mechanisms. Other characteristics affecting wear resistance include surface finish on
the tool (a smoother surface means a lower coefficient of friction), chemistry of tool
and work materials, and whether a cutting fluid is used.
Cutting-tool materials achieve this combination of properties in varying de-
grees. In this section, the following cutting-tool materials are discussed: (1) high-speed
steel and its predecessors, plain carbon and low alloy steels; (2) cast cobalt alloys;
(3) cemented carbides, cermets, and coated carbides; (4) ceramics; (5) synthetic diamond
and cubic boron nitride. Before examining these individual materials, a brief overview
and technical comparison will be helpful. The historical development of these materials
is described in Historical Note 23.1. Commercially, the most important tool materials
are high-speed steel and cemented carbides, cermets, and coated carbides. These two
categories account for more than 90% of the cutting tools used in machining operations.
Table 23.1 and Figure 23.6 present data on properties of various tool materials. The
properties are those related to the requirements of a cutting tool: hardness, toughness, and
hothardness.Table23.1listsroomtemperaturehardnessandtransverserupturestrengthfor
selected materials. Transverse rupture strength (Section 3.1.3) is a property used to indicate
toughness for hard materials. Figure 23.6 shows hardness as a function of temperature for
several of the tool materials discussed in this section.
In addition to these property comparisons, it is useful to compare the materials in
terms of the parameters n and C in the Taylor tool life equation. In general, the
development of new cutting-tool materials has resulted in increases in the values of
these two parameters. Table 23.2 provides a listing of representative values of n and C in
the Taylor tool life equation for selected cutting-tool materials.
The chronological development of tool materials has generally followed a path in
which new materials have permitted higher and higher cutting speeds to be achieved.
Section 23.2/Tool Materials
559

TABLE 23.1
Typical hardness values (at room temperature) and transverse rupture
strengths for various tool materials.a
Transverse Rupture Strength
Material
Hardness
MPa
lb/in2
Plain carbon steel
60 HRC
5200
750,000
High-speed steel
65 HRC
4100
600,000
Cast cobalt alloy
65 HRC
2250
325,000
Cemented carbide (WC)
Low Co content
93 HRA, 1800 HK
1400
200,000
High Co content
90 HRA, 1700 HK
2400
350,000
Cermet (TiC)
2400 HK
1700
250,000
Alumina (Al2O3)
2100 HK
400
60,000
Cubic boron nitride
5000 HK
700
100,000
Polycrystalline diamond
6000 HK
1000
150,000
Natural diamond
8000 HK
1500
215,000
Compiled from [4], [9], [17], and other sources.
aNote: The values of hardness and TRS are intended to be comparative and typical. Variations in
properties result from differences in composition and processing.
Historical Note 23.1
Cutting-tool materials
In 1800, England was leading the Industrial Revolution,
and iron was the leading metal in the revolution. The
best tools for cutting iron were made of cast steel by the
crucible process, invented in 1742 by B. Huntsman. Cast
steel, whose carbon content lies between wrought iron
and cast iron, could be hardened by heat treatment to
machine the other metals. In 1868, R. Mushet discovered
that by alloying about 7% tungsten in crucible steel, a
hardened tool steel was obtained by air quenching after
heat treatment. Mushet’s tool steel was far superior to its
predecessor in machining.
Frederick W. Taylor stands as an important ﬁgure in the
history of cutting tools. Starting around 1880 at Midvale
Steel in Philadelphia and later at Bethlehem Steel in
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, he began a series of experiments
that lasted a quarter century, yielding a much improved
understanding of the metal-cutting process. Among the
developments resulting from the work of Taylor and
colleague Maunsel White at Bethlehem was high-speed
steel (HSS), a class of highly alloyed tool steels that
permitted substantially higher cutting speeds than previous
cutting tools. The superiority of HSS resulted not only from
greater alloying, but also from reﬁnements in heat
treatment. Tools of the new steel allowed cutting speeds
more than twice those of Mushet’s steel and almost four
times those of plain carbon cast steels.
Tungsten carbide (WC) was ﬁrst synthesized in the
late 1890s. It took nearly three decades before a useful
cutting tool material was developed by sintering the WC
with a metallic binder to form cemented carbides. These
were ﬁrst used in metal cutting in the mid-1920s in
Germany, and in the late 1920s in the United States
(Historical Note 7.2). Cermet cutting tools based on
titanium carbide were ﬁrst introduced in the 1950s, but
their commercial importance dates from the 1970s. The
ﬁrst coated carbides, consisting of one coating on a WC–
Co substrate, were ﬁrst used around 1970. Coating
materials included TiC, TiN, and Al2O3. Modern coated
carbides have three or more coatings of these and other
hard materials.
Attempts to use alumina ceramics in machining
date from the early 1900s in Europe. Their brittleness
inhibited success in these early applications.
Processing reﬁnements over many decades have
resulted in property improvements in these materials.
U.S. commercial use of ceramic cutting tools dates
from the mid-1950s.
The ﬁrst industrial diamonds were produced by the
General Electric Company in 1954. They were single
crystal diamonds that were applied with some success in
grinding operations starting around 1957. Greater
acceptance of diamond cutting tools has resulted from
the use of sintered polycrystalline diamond (SPD), dating
from the early 1970s. A similar tool material, sintered
cubic boron nitride, was ﬁrst introduced in 1969 by GE
under the trade name Borazon.
560
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

Table 23.3 identifies the cutting-tool materials, together with their approximate year of
introduction and typical maximum allowable cutting speeds at which they can be used.
Dramatic increases in machining productivity have been made possible because of advances
in tool material technology, as indicated in our table. Machine tool practice has not always
kept pace with cutting-tool technology. Limitations on horsepower, machine tool rigidity,
spindle bearings, and the widespread use of older equipment in industry have acted to
underutilize the possible upper speeds permitted by available cutting tools.
23.2.1 HIGH-SPEED STEEL AND ITS PREDECESSORS
Before the development of high-speed steel, plain carbon steel and Mushet’s steel were
the principal tool materials for metal cutting. Today, these steels are rarely used in
FIGURE 23.6
Typical hot
hardness relationships for
selected tool materials. Plain
carbon steel shows a
rapid loss of hardness as
temperature increases. High-
speed steel is substantially
better, whereas cemented
carbides and ceramics are
signiﬁcantly harder at
elevated temperatures.
TABLE 23.2
Representative values of n and C in the Taylor tool life equation,
Eq. (23.1), for selected tool materials.
C
Nonsteel Cutting
Steel Cutting
Tool Material
n
m/min
(ft/min)
m/min
ft/min
Plain carbon tool steel
0.1
70
(200)
20
60
High-speed steel
0.125
120
(350)
70
200
Cemented carbide
0.25
900
(2700)
500
1500
Cermet
0.25
600
2000
Coated carbide
0.25
700
2200
Ceramic
0.6
3000
10,000
Compiled from [4], [9], and other sources.
The parameter values are approximated for turning at feed ¼ 0.25 mm/rev (0.010 in/rev) and depth ¼
2.5 mm (0.100 in). Nonsteel cutting refers to easy-to-machine metals such as aluminum, brass, and cast
iron. Steel cutting refers to the machining of mild (unhardened) steel. It should be noted that significant
variations in these values can be expected in practice.
Section 23.2/Tool Materials
561

industrial machining applications. The plain carbon steels used as cutting tools could be
heat-treated to achieve relatively high hardness (Rockwell C 60), because of their fairly
high carbon content. However, because of low alloying levels, they possess poor hot
hardness (Figure 23.6), which renders them unusable in metal cutting except at speeds
too low to be practical by today’s standards. Mushet’s steel has been displaced by
advances in tool steel metallurgy.
High-speed steel (HSS) is a highly alloyed tool steel capable of maintaining hardness
at elevated temperatures better than high carbon and low alloy steels. Itsgood hot hardness
permits tools made of HSS to be used at higher cutting speeds. Compared with the other
tool materials at the time of its development, it was truly deserving of its name ‘‘high
speed.’’ Awide variety of high-speed steels are available, but they can be divided into two
basic types: (1) tungsten-type, designated T-grades by the American Iron and Steel
Institute (AISI); and (2) molybdenum-type, designated M-grades by AISI.
Tungsten-type HSS contains tungsten (W) as its principal alloying ingredient.
Additional alloying elements are chromium (Cr), and vanadium (V). One of the original
and best knownHSS grades isT1,or18-4-1 high-speedsteel, containing 18% W, 4%Cr, and
1% V. Molybdenum HSS grades contain combinations of tungsten and molybdenum (Mo),
plus the same additional alloying elements as in the T-grades. Cobalt (Co) is sometimes
added to HSS to enhance hot hardness. Of course, high-speed steel contains carbon, the
element common to all steels. Typical alloying contents and functions of each alloying
element in HSS are listed in Table 23.4.
Commercially, high-speed steel is one of the most important cutting-tool materials
in use today, despite the fact that it was introduced more than a century ago. HSS is
especially suited to applications involving complicated tool geometries, such as drills,
taps, milling cutters, and broaches. These complex shapes are generally easier and less
expensive to produce from unhardened HSS than other tool materials. They can then be
heat-treated so that cutting-edge hardness is very good (Rockwell C 65), whereas
toughness of the internal portions of the tool is also good. HSS cutters possess better
toughness than any of the harder nonsteel tool materials used for machining, such as
cemented carbides and ceramics. Even for single-point tools, HSS is popular among
machinists because of the ease with which desired tool geometry can be ground into the
tool point. Over the years, improvements have been made in the metallurgical formu-
lation and processing of HSS so that this class of tool material remains competitive in
many applications. Also, HSS tools, drills in particular, are often coated with a thin film
TABLE 23.3
Cutting-tool materials with their approximate dates of initial use and
allowable cutting speeds.
Allowable Cutting Speeda
Nonsteel Cutting
Steel Cutting
Tool Material
Year of
Initial Use
m/min
ft/min
m/min
ft/min
Plain carbon tool steel
1800s
Below 10
Below 30
Below 5
Below 15
High-speed steel
1900
25–65
75–200
17–33
50–100
Cast cobalt alloys
1915
50–200
150–600
33–100
100–300
Cemented carbides (WC)
1930
330–650
1000–2000
100–300
300–900
Cermets (TiC)
1950s
165–400
500–1200
Ceramics (Al2O3)
1955
330–650
1000–2000
Synthetic diamonds
1954, 1973
390–1300
1200–4000
Cubic boron nitride
1969
500–800
1500–2500
Coated carbides
1970
165–400
500–1200
aCompiled from [9], [12], [16], [19], and other sources.
562
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

of titanium nitride (TiN) to provide significant increases in cutting performance.
Physical vapor deposition processes (Section 28.5.1) are commonly used to coat these
HSS tools.
23.2.2 CAST COBALT ALLOYS
Castcobaltalloycuttingtoolsconsistofcobalt,around40%to50%;chromium,about25%to
35%;andtungsten,usually15%to20%;withtraceamountsofotherelements.Thesetoolsare
made into the desired shape by casting in graphite molds and then grinding to final size and
cutting-edge sharpness. High hardness is achieved as cast, an advantage over HSS, which
requiresheattreatmenttoachieveitshardness.Wearresistanceofthecastcobaltsisbetterthan
high-speed steel, but not as good as cemented carbide. Toughness of cast cobalt tools is better
than carbides but not as good as HSS. Hot hardness also lies between these two materials.
As might be expected from their properties, applications of cast cobalt tools are
generally between those of high-speed steel and cemented carbides. They are capable of
heavy roughing cuts at speeds greater than HSS and feeds greater than carbides. Work
materials include both steels and nonsteels, as well as nonmetallic materials such as plastics
and graphite. Today, cast cobalt alloy tools are not nearly as important commercially as
either high-speed steel or cemented carbides. They were introduced around 1915 as a tool
material that would allow higher cutting speeds than HSS. The carbides were subsequently
developed and proved to be superior to the cast Co alloys in most cutting situations.
23.2.3 CEMENTED CARBIDES, CERMETS, AND COATED CARBIDES
Cermets are defined as composites of ceramic and metallic materials (Section 9.2.1).
Technically speaking, cemented carbides are included within this definition; however,
cermets based on WC–Co, including WC–TiC–TaC–Co, are known as carbides (cemented
carbides) in common usage. In cutting-tool terminology, the term cermet is applied to
TABLE 23.4
Typical contents and functions of alloying elements in high-speed steel.
Alloying
Element
Typical Content in
HSS, % by Weight
Functions in High-Speed Steel
Tungsten
T-type HSS: 12–20
Increases hot hardness
M-type HSS: 1.5–6
Improves abrasion resistance through
formation of hard carbides in HSS
Molybdenum
T-type HSS: none
Increases hot hardness
M-type HSS: 5–10
Improves abrasion resistance through
formation of hard carbides in HSS
Chromium
3.75–4.5
Depth hardenability during heat treatment
Improves abrasion resistance through
formation of hard carbides in HSS
Corrosion resistance (minor effect)
Vanadium
1–5
Combines with carbon for wear resistance
Retards grain growth for better toughness
Cobalt
0–12
Increases hot hardness
Carbon
0.75–1.5
Principal hardening element in steel
Provides available carbon to form carbides
with other alloying elements for wear
resistance
Section 23.2/Tool Materials
563

ceramic-metal composites containing TiC, TiN, and certain other ceramics not including
WC. One of the advances in cutting-tool materials involves the application of a very thin
coating to a WC–Co substrate. These tools are called coated carbides. Thus, we have three
important and closely related tool materials to discuss: (1) cemented carbides, (2) cermets,
and (3) coated carbides.
Cemented Carbides
Cemented carbides (also called sintered carbides) are a class of
hard tool material formulated from tungsten carbide (WC) using powder metallurgy
techniques (Chapter 16) with cobalt (Co) as the binder (Sections 7.3.2, 9.2.1, and 17.3.1).
There may be other carbide compounds in the mixture, such as titanium carbide (TiC)
and/or tantalum carbide (TaC), in addition to WC.
ThefirstcementedcarbidecuttingtoolsweremadeofWC–Co(HistoricalNote7.2)and
could be used to machine cast irons and nonsteel materials at cutting speeds faster than those
possiblewithhigh-speedsteelandcastcobaltalloys.However,whenthestraightWC–Cotools
were used to cut steel, crater wear occurred rapidly, leading to early failure of the tools. A
strong chemical affinity exists between steel and the carbon in WC, resulting in accelerated
wear by diffusion and chemical reaction at the tool–chip interface for this work-tool
combination. Consequently, straight WC–Co tools cannot be used effectively to machine
steel. It was subsequently discovered that additions of titanium carbide and tantalum carbide
totheWC–Comixsignificantlyretardedtherateof crater wearwhencuttingsteel.Thesenew
WC–TiC–TaC–Co tools could be used for steel machining. The result is that cemented
carbidesaredividedintotwobasictypes:(1)nonsteel-cuttinggrades,consistingofonlyWC–
Co; and (2) steel-cutting grades, with combinations of TiC and TaC added to the WC–Co.
The general properties of the two types of cemented carbides are similar: (1) high
compressive strength but low-to-moderate tensile strength; (2) high hardness (90 to 95
HRA); (3) good hot hardness; (4) good wear resistance; (5) high thermal conductivity; (6)
high modulus of elasticity—E values up to around 600  103 MPa (90  106lb/in2); and (7)
toughness lower than high-speed steel.
Nonsteel-cutting grades refer to those cemented carbides that are suitable for
machining aluminum, brass, copper, magnesium, titanium, and other nonferrous metals;
anomalously, gray cast iron is included in this group of work materials. In the nonsteel-
cutting grades, grain size and cobalt content are the factors that influence properties of the
cemented carbide material. The typical grain size found in conventional cemented carbides
ranges between 0.5 and 5 mm (20 and 200 m-in). As grain size is increased, hardness and hot
hardness decrease, but transverse rupture strength increases.2 The typical cobalt content in
cemented carbides used for cutting tools is 3% to 12%. The effect of cobalt content on
hardness and transverse rupture strength is shown in Figure 9.9. As cobalt content
increases, TRS improves at the expense of hardness and wear resistance. Cemented
carbides with low percentages of cobalt content (3% to 6%) have high hardness and
low TRS, whereas carbides with high Co (6% to 12%) have high TRS but lower hardness
(Table 23.1). Accordingly, cemented carbides with higher cobalt are used for roughing
operations and interrupted cuts (such as milling), while carbides with lower cobalt
(therefore, higher hardness and wear resistance) are used in finishing cuts.
Steel-cutting grades are used for low carbon, stainless, and other alloy steels. For
these carbide grades, titanium carbide and/or tantalum carbide is substituted for some of
the tungsten carbide. TiC is the more popular additive in most applications. Typically, from
10% to 25% of the WC might be replaced by combinations of TiC and TaC. This
composition increases the crater wear resistance for steel cutting, but tends to adversely
2The effect of grain size (GS) on transverse rupture strength (TRS) is more complicated than we are
reporting. Published data indicate that the effect of GS on TRS is influenced by cobalt content. At lower
Co contents (less than 10%), TRS does indeed increase as GS increases, but at higher Co contents (greater
than 10%) TRS decreases as GS increases [4], [16].
564
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

affect flank wear resistance for nonsteel-cutting applications. That is why two basic
categories of cemented carbide are needed.
One of the important developments incemented carbide technology inrecent years is
theuseofveryfinegrainsizes(submicronsizes)ofthevariouscarbideingredients(WC,TiC,
and TaC). Although small grain size is usually associated with higher hardness but lower
transverse rupture strength, the decrease in TRS is reduced or reversed at the submicron
particle sizes. Therefore, these ultrafine grain carbides possess high hardness combined with
good toughness.
Sincethe two basic types of cemented carbide were introduced inthe 1920s and 1930s,
the increasing number and variety of engineering materials have complicated the selection
of the most appropriate cemented carbide for a given machining application. To address the
problem of grade selection, two classification systems have been developed: (1) the ANSI
(American National Standards Institute) C-grade system, developed in the United States
starting around 1942; and (2) the ISO R513-1975(E) system, introduced by the Interna-
tional Organization for Standardization (ISO) around 1964. In the C-grade system,
summarized in Table 23.5, machining grades of cemented carbide are divided into two
basic groups, corresponding to nonsteel-cutting and steel-cutting categories. Within each
group there are four levels, corresponding to roughing, general purpose, finishing, and
precision finishing.
TheISOR513-1975(E)system,titled‘‘ApplicationofCarbidesforMachiningbyChip
Removal,’’classifiesallmachininggradesofcementedcarbidesintothreebasicgroups,each
with its own letter and color code, as summarized in Table 23.6. Within each group, the
grades are numbered on a scale that ranges from maximum hardness to maximum
toughness. Harder grades are used for finishing operations (high speeds, low feeds and
depths), whereas tougher grades are used for roughing operations. The ISO classification
system can also be used to recommend applications for cermets and coated carbides.
TABLE 23.5
The ANSI C-grade classiﬁcation system for cemented carbides.
Machining Application
Nonsteel-cutting Grades
Steel-cutting Grades
Cobalt and Properties
Roughing
C1
C5
High Co for max. toughness
General purpose
C2
C6
Medium to high Co
Finishing
C3
C7
Medium to low Co
Precision finishing
C4
C8
Low Co for max. hardness
Work materials
Al, brass, Ti, cast iron
Carbon and alloy steels
Typical ingredients
WC–Co
WC–TiC–TaC–Co
TABLE 23.6
ISO R513-1975(E) ‘‘Application of Carbides for Machining by Chip Removal.’’
Group
Carbide Type
Work Materials
Number Scheme (Cobalt and Properties)
P (blue)
Highly alloyed WC–
TiC–TaC–Co
Steel, steel castings, ductile cast
iron (ferrous metals with long
chips)
P01 (low Co for maximum hardness)
to
P50 (high Co for maximum toughness)
M (yellow)
Alloyed WC–TiC–
TaC–Co
Free-cutting steel, gray cast
iron, austenitic stainless steel,
superalloys
M10 (low Co for maximum hardness)
to
M40 (high Co for maximum toughness)
K (red)
Straight WC–Co
Nonferrous metals and alloys, gray
cast iron (ferrous metals with
short chips), nonmetallics
K01 (low Co for maximum hardness)
to
K40 (high Co for maximum toughness)
Section 23.2/Tool Materials
565

The two systems map into each other as follows: The ANSI C1 through C4-grades map
into the ISO K-grades, but in reverse numerical order, and the ANSI C5 through C8 grades
translate into the ISO P-grades, but again in reverse numerical order.
Cermets
Although cemented carbides are technically classified as cermet composites,
the term cermet in cutting-tool technology is generally reserved for combinations of TiC,
TiN, andtitaniumcarbonitride(TiCN),withnickeland/ormolybdenumasbinders. Someof
the cermet chemistries are more complex (e.g., ceramics such as TaxNbyC and binders such
as Mo2C). However, cermets exclude metallic composites that are primarily based on WC–
Co. Applications of cermets include high-speed finishing and semifinishing of steels,
stainless steels, and cast irons. Higher speeds are generally allowed with these tools
compared with steel-cutting carbide grades. Lower feeds are typically used so that better
surface finish is achieved, often eliminating the need for grinding.
Coated Carbides
The development of coated carbides around 1970 represented a
significant advance in cutting-tool technology. Coated carbides are a cemented carbide
insert coated with one or more thin layers of wear-resistant material, such as titanium
carbide, titanium nitride, and/or aluminum oxide (Al2O3). The coating is applied to the
substrate by chemical vapor deposition or physical vapor deposition (Section 28.5). The
coating thickness is only 2.5 to 13 mm (0.0001 to 0.0005 in). It has been found that thicker
coatings tend to be brittle, resulting in cracking, chipping, and separation from the
substrate.
The first generation of coated carbides had only a single layer coating (TiC, TiN, or
Al2O3). More recently, coated inserts have been developed that consist of multiple layers.
The first layer applied to the WC–Co base is usually TiN or TiCN because of good adhesion
and similar coefficient of thermal expansion. Additional layers of various combinations of
TiN, TiCN, Al2O3, and TiAlN are subsequently applied.
Coated carbides are used to machine cast irons and steels in turning and milling
operations. Theyare bestapplied athighcutting speeds insituationsinwhich dynamic force
and thermal shock are minimal. If these conditions become too severe, as in some
interrupted cut operations, chipping of the coating can occur, resulting in premature
tool failure. In this situation, uncoated carbides formulated for toughness are preferred.
When properly applied, coated carbide tools usually permit increases in allowable cutting
speeds compared with uncoated cemented carbides.
Use of coated carbide tools is expanding to nonferrous metal and nonmetal
applications for improved tool life and higher cutting speeds. Different coating materials
are required, such as chromium carbide (CrC), zirconium nitride (ZrN), and diamond [11].
23.2.4 CERAMICS
Cutting tools made from ceramics were first used commercially in the United States in
the mid-1950s, although their development and use in Europe dates back to the early
1900s. Today’s ceramic cutting tools are composed primarily of fine-grained aluminum
oxide (Al2O3), pressed and sintered at high pressures and temperatures with no binder
into insert form (Section 17.2). The aluminum oxide is usually very pure (99% is typical),
although some manufacturers add other oxides (such as zirconium oxide) in small
amounts. In producing ceramic tools, it is important to use a very fine grain size in
the alumina powder, and to maximize density of the mix through high-pressure compac-
tion to improve the material’s low toughness.
Aluminum oxide cutting tools are most successful in high-speed turning of cast iron
and steel. Applications also include finish turning of hardened steels using high cutting
speeds, low feeds and depths, and a rigid work setup. Many premature fracture failures of
566
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

ceramic tools are because of non-rigid machine tool setups, which subject the tools to
mechanical shock. When properly applied, ceramic cutting tools can be used to obtain
very good surface finish. Ceramics are not recommended for heavy interrupted cut
operations (e.g., rough milling) because of their low toughness. In addition to its use as
inserts in conventional machining operations, Al2O3 is widely used as an abrasive in
grinding and other abrasive processes (Chapter 25).
Other commercially available ceramic cutting-tool materials include silicon nitride
(SiN), sialon (silicon nitride and aluminum oxide, SiN–Al2O3), aluminum oxide and
titanium carbide (Al2O3–TiC), and aluminum oxide reinforced with single crystal-
whiskers of silicon carbide. These tools are usually intended for special applications,
a discussion of which is beyond our scope.
23.2.5 SYNTHETIC DIAMONDS AND CUBIC BORON NITRIDE
Diamond is the hardest material known (Section 7.5.1). By some measures of hardness,
diamond is three to four times as hard as tungsten carbide or aluminum oxide. Since high
hardness isone ofthedesirablepropertiesof a cutting tool,itisnaturaltothinkofdiamonds
for machining and grinding applications. Synthetic diamond cutting tools are made of
sintered polycrystalline diamond (SPD), which dates from the early 1970s. Sintered
polycrystalline diamond is fabricated by sintering fine-grained diamond crystals under
high temperatures and pressures into the desired shape. Little or no binder is used. The
crystals have a random orientation and this adds considerable toughness to the SPD tools
comparedwithsinglecrystaldiamonds.Toolinsertsaretypicallymadebydepositinga layer
of SPD about 0.5 mm (0.020 in) thick on the surface of a cemented carbide base. Very small
inserts have also been made of 100% SPD.
Applications of diamond cutting tools include high-speed machining of nonferrous
metals and abrasive nonmetals such as fiberglass, graphite, and wood. Machining of steel,
other ferrous metals, and nickel-based alloys with SPD tools is not practical because of
the chemical affinity that exists between these metals and carbon (a diamond, after all, is
carbon).
Nexttodiamond,cubicboronnitride(Section7.3.3)isthehardestmaterialknown,and
itsfabricationintocuttingtoolinsertsisbasicallythesameasSPD;thatis,coatingsonWC–Co
inserts. Cubic boron nitride (symbolized cBN) does not react chemically with iron and nickel
as SPD does; therefore, the applications of cBN-coated tools are for machining steel and
nickel-based alloys. Both SPD and cBN tools are expensive, as one might expect, and the
applications must justify the additional tooling cost.
23.3
TOOL GEOMETRY
A cutting tool must possess a shape that is suited to the machining operation. One
important way to classify cutting tools is according to the machining process. Thus, we
have turning tools, cutoff tools, milling cutters, drill bits, reamers, taps, and many other
cutting tools that are named for the operation in which they are used, each with its own
tool geometry—in some cases quite unique.
As indicated in Section 21.1, cutting tools can be divided into single-point tools and
multiple-cutting-edge tools. Single-point tools are used in turning, boring, shaping, and
planing. Multiple-cutting-edge tools are used in drilling, reaming, tapping, milling, broach-
ing, and sawing. Many of the principles that apply to single-point tools also apply to the
other cutting-tool types, simply because the mechanism of chip formation is basically the
same for all machining operations.
Section 23.3/Tool Geometry
567

23.3.1 SINGLE-POINT TOOL GEOMETRY
The general shape of a single-point cutting tool is illustrated in Figure 21.4(a). Figure 23.7
shows a more detailed drawing. The reader can observe single-point tools in action in our
video clip on turning and lathe basics.
VIDEO CLIP
Turning and Lathe Basics. The relevant segment is titled ‘‘Turning Operations.’’
We have previously treated the rake angle of a cutting tool as one parameter. In a
single-point tool, the orientation of the rake face is defined by two angles, back rake angle
(ab) and side rake angle (as). Together, these angles are influential in determining the
direction of chip flow across the rake face. The flank surface of the tool is defined by the end
relief angle (ERA) and side relief angle (SRA). These angles determine the amount of
clearance between the tool and the freshly cut work surface. The cutting edge of a single-
point tool is divided into two sections, side cutting edge and end cutting edge. These two
sections are separated by the tool point, which has a certain radius, called the nose radius.
The side cutting edge angle (SCEA) determines the entry of the tool into the work and can
be used to reduce the sudden force the tool experiences as it enters a workpart. Nose radius
(NR) determines to a large degree the texture of the surface generated in the operation. A
very pointed tool (small nose radius) results in very pronounced feed marks on the surface.
We returntothis issueof surfaceroughness inmachining inSection 24.2.2. End cuttingedge
angle (ECEA) provides a clearance between the trailing edge of the tool and the newly
generated work surface, thus reducing rubbing and friction against the surface.
In all, there are seven elements of tool geometry for a single-point tool. When
specified in the following order, they are collectively called the tool geometry signature:
back rake angle, side rake angle, end relief angle, side relief angle, end cutting edge angle,
side cutting edge angle, and nose radius. For example, a single-point tool used in turning
might have the following signature: 5, 5, 7, 7, 20, 15, 2/64 in.
FIGURE 23.7
(a) Seven
elements of single-point tool
geometry, and (b) the tool
signature convention that
deﬁnes the seven elements.
568
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

Chip Breakers
Chip disposal is a problem that is often encountered in turning and other
continuousoperations.Long,stringychipsareoftengenerated,especiallywhenturningductile
materialsathighspeeds.Thesechipscauseahazardtothemachineoperatorandtheworkpart
finish, and they interfere with automatic operation of the turning process. Chip breakers are
frequently used with single-point tools to force the chips to curl more tightly than they would
naturally be inclined to do, thus causing them to fracture. There are two principal forms of
chip breaker design commonly used on single-point turning tools, illustrated in Figure 23.8:
(a) groove-type chip breaker designed into the cutting tool itself, and (b) obstruction-type
chip breaker designedas an additionaldeviceon the rake faceof thetool. The chip breaker
distance can be adjusted in the obstruction-type device for different cutting conditions.
Effect of Tool Material on Tool Geometry
It was noted in our discussion of the
Merchant equation (Section 21.3.2) that a positive rake angleis generally desirable because
it reduces cutting forces, temperature, and power consumption. High-speed steel-cutting
toolsarealmostalways groundwith positiverake angles, typicallyrangingfrom+5 to+20.
HSS has goodstrength and toughness, sothat thethinnercrosssectionofthetool createdby
high positive rake angles does not usually cause a problem with tool breakage. HSS tools
are predominantly made of one piece. The heat treatment of high-speed steel can be
controlled to provide a hard cutting edge while maintaining a tough inner core.
With the development of the very hard tool materials (e.g., cemented carbides and
ceramics), changes in tool geometry were required. As a group, these materials have
higher hardness and lower toughness than HSS. Also, their shear and tensile strengths are
low relative to their compressive strengths, and their properties cannot be manipulated
through heat treatment like those of HSS. Finally, cost per unit weight for these very hard
materials is higher than the cost of HSS. These factors have affected cutting-tool design
for the very hard tool materials in several ways.
First, the very hard materials must be designed with either negative rake or small
positiveangles.Thischangetendstoloadthetoolmoreincompressionandlessinshear,thus
favoring the high compressive strength of these harder materials. Cemented carbides, for
example, are used with rake angles typically in the range from 5 to +10. Ceramics have
rake angles between 5 and 15. Reliefangles are made as small as possible(5 istypical)
to provide as much support for the cutting edge as possible.
Another difference is the way in which the cutting edge of the tool is held in position.
The alternative ways of holding and presenting the cutting edge for a single-point tool are
illustrated inFigure 23.9.Thegeometryofa HSS toolisground froma solidshank,asshown
in part (a) of the figure. The higher cost and differences in properties and processing of the
harder tool materials have given rise to the use of inserts that are either brazed or
mechanically clamped to a toolholder. Part (b) shows a brazed insert, in which a cemented
FIGURE 23.8
Two
methods of chip breaking
in single-point tools:
(a) groove-type and
(b) obstruction-type chip
breakers.
Section 23.3/Tool Geometry
569

carbide insert is brazed to a tool shank. The shank is made of tool steel for strength and
toughness. Part (c) illustrates one possible design for mechanically clamping an insert in a
toolholder. Mechanical clamping is used for cemented carbides, ceramics, and the other
hard materials. The significant advantage of the mechanically clamped insert is that each
insert contains multiple cutting edges. When an edge wears out, the insert is unclamped,
indexed(rotatedinthetoolholder)tothenextedge,andreclampedinthetoolholder.When
all of the cutting edges are worn, the insert is discarded and replaced.
Inserts
Cutting-tool inserts are widely used in machining because they are economical
and adaptableto many different typesof machiningoperations:turning, boring, threading,
milling, and even drilling. They are available in a variety of shapes and sizes for the variety
of cutting situations encountered in practice. A square insert is shown in Figure 23.9(c).
Other common shapes used in turning operations are displayed in Figure 23.10. In general,
FIGURE 23.9
Three ways of holding and presenting the cutting edge for a single-point tool: (a) solid
tool, typical of HSS; (b) brazed insert, one way of holding a cemented carbide insert; and (c) mechanically
clamped insert, used for cemented carbides, ceramics, and other very hard tool materials.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Strength, power requirements, vibration tendency
Versatility and accessibility
FIGURE 23.10
Common insert shapes: (a) round, (b) square, (c) rhombus with two 80 point angles, (d) hexagon with
three 80 point angles, (e) triangle (equilateral), (f) rhombus with two 55 point angles, (g) rhombus with two 35 point
angles. Also shown are typical features of the geometry. Strength, power requirements, and tendency for vibration
increase as we move to the left; whereas versatility and accessibility tend to be better with the geometries at the right.
570
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

the largest point angle should be selected for strength and economy. Round inserts possess
large point angles (and large nose radii) just because of their shape. Inserts with large point
angles are inherently stronger and less likely to chip or break during cutting, but they
require more power, and there is a greater likelihood of vibration. The economic
advantage of round inserts is that they can be indexed multiple times for more cuts
per insert. Square inserts present four cutting edges, triangular shapes have three edges,
whereas rhombus shapes have only two. Fewer edges are a cost disadvantage. If both
sides of the insert can be used (e.g., in most negative rake angle applications), then the
number of cutting edges is doubled. Rhombus shapes are used (especially with acute
point angles) because of their versatility and accessibility when a variety of operations
are to be performed. These shapes can be more readily positioned in tight spaces and can
be used not only for turning but also for facing (Figure 22.6(a)), and contour turning
(Figure 22.6(c)).
Inserts are usually not made with perfectly sharp cutting edges, because a sharp
edge is weaker and fractures more easily, especially for the very hard and brittle tool
materials from which inserts are made (cemented carbides, coated carbides, cermets,
ceramics, cBN, and diamond). Some kind of shape alteration is commonly performed on
the cutting edge at an almost microscopic level. The effect of this edge preparation is to
increase the strength of the cutting edge by providing a more gradual transition between
the clearance edge and the rake face of the tool. Three common edge preparations are
shown in Figure 23.11: (a) radius or edge rounding, also referred to as honed edge,
(b) chamfer, and (c) land. For comparison, a perfectly sharp cutting edge is shown in
(d). The radius in (a) is typically only about 0.025 mm (0.001 in), and the land in (c) is 15
or 20. Combinations of these edge preparations are often applied to a single cutting edge
to maximize the strengthening effect.
23.3.2 MULTIPLE-CUTTING-EDGE TOOLS
Most multiple-cutting-edge tools are used in machining operations in which the tool is
rotated. Primary examples are drilling and milling. On the other hand, broaching and
some sawing operations (hack sawing and band sawing) use multiple-cutting-edge tools
that operate with a linear motion. Other sawing operations (circular sawing) use rotating
saw blades.
Drills
Various cutting tools are available for hole making, but the twist drill is by far the
most common. It comes in diameters ranging from about 0.15 mm (0.006 in) to as large as
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Rake face
Clearance
edge
FIGURE 23.11
Three types of edge preparation that are applied to the cutting edge of an insert:
(a) radius, (b) chamfer, (c) land, and (d) perfectly sharp edge (no edge preparation).
Section 23.3/Tool Geometry
571

75 mm (3.0 in). Twist drills are widely used in industry to produce holes rapidly and
economically. The video clip on hole making illustrates the twist drill.
VIDEO CLIP
Hole making. See the segment titled ‘‘The Drill.’’
The standard twist drill geometry is illustrated in Figure 23.12. The body of the drill
has two spiral flutes (the spiral gives the twist drill its name). The angle of the spiral flutes
is called the helix angle, a typical value of which is around 30. While drilling, the flutes
act as passageways for extraction of chips from the hole. Although it is desirable for the
flute openings to be large to provide maximum clearance for the chips, the body of the
drill must be supported over its length. This support is provided by the web, which is the
thickness of the drill between the flutes.
The point of the twist drill has a conical shape. A typical value for the point angle is
118. The point can be designed in various ways, but the most common design is a chisel
edge, as in Figure 23.12. Connected to the chisel edge are two cutting edges (sometimes
called lips) that lead into the flutes. The portion of each flute adjacent to the cutting edge
acts as the rake face of the tool.
The cutting action of thetwist drilliscomplex.Therotation and feedingof thedrill bit
resultinrelativemotionbetweenthecuttingedgesandtheworkpiecetoformthechips. The
cutting speed along each cutting edge varies as a function of the distance from the axis of
rotation. Accordingly, the efficiency of the cutting action varies, being most efficient at the
outer diameter of thedrilland least efficient atthecenter. Infact, the relativevelocityatthe
drill point is zero, so no cutting takes place. Instead, the chisel edge of the drill point pushes
aside the material at the center as it penetrates into the hole; a large thrust force is required
to drive the twist drill forward into the hole. Also, at the beginning of the operation, the
rotating chisel edge tends to wander on the surface of the workpart, causing loss of
positional accuracy. Various alternative drill point designs have been developed to address
this problem.
Chip removal can be a problem in drilling. The cutting action takes place inside the
hole, and the flutes must provide sufficient clearance throughout the length of the drill to
allow the chips to be extracted from the hole. As the chip is formed it is forced through
the flutes to the work surface. Friction makes matters worse in two ways. In addition to
the usual friction in metal cutting between the chip and the rake face of the cutting edge,
friction also results from rubbing between the outside diameter of the drill bit and the
FIGURE 23.12
Standard geometry of a twist drill.
572
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

newly formed hole. This increases the temperature of the drill and work. Delivery of
cutting fluid to the drill point to reduce the friction and heat is difficult because the chips
are flowing in the opposite direction. Because of chip removal and heat, a twist drill is
normally limited to a hole depth of about four times its diameter. Some twist drills are
designed with internal holes running their lengths, through which cutting fluid can be
pumped to the hole near the drill point, thus delivering the fluid directly to the cutting
operation. An alternative approach with twist drills that do not have fluid holes is to use a
‘‘pecking’’ procedure during the drilling operation. In this procedure, the drill is
periodically withdrawn from the hole to clear the chips before proceeding deeper.
Twist drills are normally made of high-speed steel. The geometry of the drill is
fabricated before heat treatment, and then the outer shell of the drill (cutting edges and
friction surfaces) is hardened while retaining an inner core that is relatively tough.
Grinding is used to sharpen the cutting edges and shape the drill point.
Although twist drills are the most common hole-making tools, other drill types are
also available. Straight-flute drills operate like twist drills except that the flutes for chip
removal are straight along the length of the tool rather than spiraled. The simpler design
of the straight-flute drill permits carbide tips to be used as the cutting edges, either as
brazed or indexable inserts. Figure 23.13 illustrates the straight-flute indexable-insert
drill. The cemented carbide inserts allow higher cutting speeds and greater production
rates than HSS twist drills. However, the inserts limit how small the drills can be made.
Thus, the diameter range of commercially available indexable-insert drills runs from
about 16 mm (0.625 in) to about 127 mm (5 in) [9].
A straight-flute drill designed for deep-hole drilling is the gun drill, shown in
Figure 23.14. Whereas the twist drill is usually limited to a depth-to-diameter ratio of 4:1,
and the straight-flute drill to about 3:1, the gun drill can cut holes up to 125 times its diameter.
As shown inour figure, the gun drill has a carbide cutting edge, a single flute for chipremoval,
and a coolant hole running its complete length. In the typical gun drilling operation, the work
rotates around the stationary drill (opposite of most drilling operations), and the coolant
flows into the cutting process and out of the hole along the flute, carrying the chips with it.
Gun drills range in diameter from less than 2 mm (0.075 in) to about 50 mm (2 in).
It was previously mentioned that twist drills are available with diametersup to 75mm
(3 in). Twist drills that large are uncommon because so much metal is required in the drill
bit. An alternative for large diameter holes is the spade drill, illustrated in Figure 23.15.
Standard sizes range from 25 to 152 mm (1 to 6 in). The interchangeable drill bit is held in a
FIGURE 23.13
Straight-
ﬂute drill that uses
indexable inserts.
Carbide
 inserts (2)
Flute
Hole for clamping
Detail showing
 shape of
 six-sided
 insert (typical)
Shank
Section 23.3/Tool Geometry
573

toolholder, which provides rigidity during cutting. The mass of the spade drill is much less
than a twist drill of the same diameter.
More information on hole-making tools can be found in several of our references [3]
and [9].
Milling Cutters
Classification of milling cutters is closely associated with the milling
operations described in Section 22.4.1. The video clip on milling shows some of the tools
in operation. The major types of milling cutters are the following:

Plain milling cutters. These are used for peripheral or slab milling. As Figures 22.17
(a) and 22.18(a) indicate, they are cylinder shaped with several rows of teeth. The
cutting edgesare usuallyoriented ata helixangle (as in thefigures)to reduceimpact on
entry into the work, and these cutters are called helical milling cutters. Tool geometry
elements of a plain milling cutter are shown in Figure 23.16.

Form milling cutters. These are peripheral milling cutters in which the cutting edges
have a special profile that is to be imparted to the work. An important application is
in gear making, in which the form milling cutter is shaped to cut the slots between
adjacent gear teeth, thereby leaving the geometry of the gear teeth.

Face milling cutters. These are designed with teeth that cut on both the periphery
as well as the end of the cutter. Face milling cutters can be made of HSS, as in
FIGURE 23.15
Spade drill.
Blade
A
Chip
splitters
Chisel
edge
Blade thickness
Diameter
Rake face
Cross-section A-A
Blade holder
A
FIGURE 23.14
Gun drill.
A
Flute
Cross section A-A
Coolant hole
Carbide tip
A
574
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

Figure 22.17(b), or they can be designed to use cemented carbide inserts. Figure 23.17
shows a four-tooth face-milling cutter that uses inserts.

End milling cutters. As shown in Figure 22.20(c), an end milling cutter looks like a
drill bit, but close inspection indicates that it is designed for primary cutting with its
peripheral teeth rather than its end. (A drill bit cuts only on its end as it penetrates
into the work.) End mills are designed with square ends, ends with radii, and ball
ends. End mills can be used for face milling, profile milling and pocketing, cutting
slots, engraving, surface contouring, and die sinking.
VIDEO CLIP
Milling and Machining Center Basics. See the segment on milling cutters and operations.
FIGURE 23.16
Tool geometry
elements of an 18-tooth plain
milling cutter.
FIGURE 23.17
Tool geometry elements of a four-tooth face milling cutter: (a) side view and (b) bottom view.
Section 23.3/Tool Geometry
575

Broaches
The terminology and geometry of the broach are illustrated in Figure 23.18.
The broach consists of a series of distinct cutting teeth along its length. Feed is
accomplished by the increased step between successive teeth on the broach. This feeding
action is unique among machining operations, because most operations accomplish
feeding by a relative feed motion that is carried out by either the tool or the work.
The total material removed in a single pass of the broach is the cumulative result of all the
steps in the tool. The speed motion is accomplished by the linear travel of the tool past the
work surface. The shape of the cut surface is determined by the contour of the cutting
edges on the broach, particularly the final cutting edge. Owing to its complex geometry
and the low speeds used in broaching, most broaches are made of HSS. In broaching of
certain cast irons, the cutting edges are cemented carbide inserts either brazed or
mechanically held in place on the broaching tool.
Saw Blades
For each of the three sawing operations (Section 22.6.3), the saw blades
possess certain common features, including tooth form, tooth spacing, and tooth set, as seen
in Figure 23.19. Tooth form is concerned with the geometry of each cutting tooth. Rake
angle, clearance angle, tooth spacing, and other features of geometry are shown in
Figure 23.19(a). Tooth spacing is the distance between adjacent teeth on the saw blade.
This parameter determines the size of the teeth and the size of the gullet between teeth. The
gullet allows space for the formation of the chip by the adjacent cutting tooth. Different
tooth forms are appropriate for different work materials and cutting situations. Two forms
commonly used in hacksaw and bandsaw blades are shown in Figure 23.19(b). The tooth set
permits the kerf cut by the saw blade to be wider than the width of the blade itself; otherwise
the blade would bind against the walls of the slit made by the saw. Two common tooth sets
are illustrated in Figure 23.19(c).
FIGURE 23.18
The
broach: (a) terminology of
the tooth geometry, and
(b) a typical broach used
for internal broaching.
576
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

23.4
CUTTING FLUIDS
A cutting fluid is any liquid or gas that is applied directly to the machining operation to
improve cutting performance. Cutting fluids address two main problems: (1) heat genera-
tion at the shear zone and friction zone, and (2) friction at the tool–chip and tool–work
interfaces. In addition to removing heat and reducing friction, cutting fluids provide
additional benefits, such as washing away chips (especially in grinding and milling),
reducing the temperature of the workpart for easier handling, reducing cutting forces and
power requirements, improving dimensional stability of the workpart, and improving
surface finish.
23.4.1 TYPES OF CUTTING FLUIDS
A variety of cutting fluids are commercially available. It is appropriate to discuss them
first according to function and then to classify them according to chemical formulation.
Cutting Fluid Functions
There are two general categories of cutting fluids, correspond-
ing to the two main problems they are designed to address: coolants and lubricants.
Coolants are cutting fluids designed to reduce the effects of heat in the machining
operation. They have a limited effect on the amount of heat energy generated in cutting;
instead, they carry away the heat that is generated, thereby reducing the temperature of
tool and workpiece. This helps to prolong the life of the cutting tool. The capacity of a
cutting fluid to reduce temperatures in machining depends on its thermal properties.
FIGURE 23.19
Features of saw blades: (a) nomenclature for sawblade geometries, (b) two common tooth forms, and (c)
two types of tooth set.
Section 23.4/Cutting Fluids
577

Specific heat and thermal conductivity are the most important properties (Section 4.2.1).
Water has high specific heat and thermal conductivity relative to other liquids, which is why
water isused as the base incoolant-type cutting fluids. These properties allow thecoolantto
draw heat away from the operation, thereby reducing the temperature of the cutting tool.
Coolant-type cutting fluids seem to be most effective at relatively high cutting
speeds, in which heat generation and high temperatures are problems. They are most
effective on tool materials that are most susceptible to temperature failures, such as high-
speed steels, and are used frequently in turning and milling operations, in which large
amounts of heat are generated.
Lubricants are usually oil-based fluids (because oils possess good lubricating
qualities) formulated to reduce friction at the tool–chip and tool–work interfaces. Lubri-
cant cutting fluids operate by extreme pressure lubrication, a special form of lubrication
that involves formation of thin solid salt layers on the hot, clean metal surfaces through
chemical reaction with the lubricant. Compounds of sulfur, chlorine, and phosphorus in the
lubricant cause the formation of these surface layers, which act to separate the two metal
surfaces(i.e.,chipandtool).Theseextremepressurefilmsaresignificantlymoreeffectivein
reducing friction in metal cutting than conventional lubrication, which is based on the
presence of liquid films between the two surfaces.
Lubricant-type cutting fluids are most effective at lower cutting speeds. They tend
to lose their effectiveness at high speeds (above about 120 m/min [400 ft/min]) because
the motion of the chip at these speeds prevents the cutting fluid from reaching the tool–
chip interface. In addition, high cutting temperatures at these speeds cause the oils to
vaporize before they can lubricate. Machining operations such as drilling and tapping
usually benefit from lubricants. In these operations, built-up edge formation is retarded,
and torque on the tool is reduced.
Although the principal purpose of a lubricant is to reduce friction, it also reduces the
temperature in the operation through several mechanisms. First, the specific heat and
thermal conductivity of the lubricant help to remove heat from the operation, thereby
reducing temperatures. Second, because friction is reduced, the heat generated from
friction is also reduced. Third, a lower coefficient of friction means a lower friction angle.
AccordingtoMerchant’sequation,Eq.(21.16),alowerfrictionanglecausestheshearplane
angle to increase, hence reducing the amount of heat energy generated in the shear zone.
There is typically an overlapping effect between the two types of cutting fluids.
Coolants are formulated with ingredients that help reduce friction. And lubricants have
thermal properties that, although not as good as those of water, act to remove heat from
the cutting operation. Cutting fluids (both coolants and lubricants) manifest their effect
on the Taylor tool life equation through higher C values. Increases of 10% to 40% are
typical. The slope n is not significantly affected.
Chemical Formulation of Cutting Fluids
There are four categories of cutting fluids
according to chemical formulation: (1) cutting oils, (2) emulsified oils, (3) semichemical
fluids, and (4) chemical fluids.
All of these cutting fluids provide both coolant and
lubricating functions. The cutting oils are most effective as lubricants, whereas the other
three categories are more effective as coolants because they are primarily water.
Cutting oils are based on oil derived from petroleum, animal, marine, or vegetable
origin. Mineral oils (petroleum based) are the principal type because of their abundance and
generally desirable lubricating characteristics. To achieve maximum lubricity, several types of
oils are often combined in the same fluid. Chemical additives are also mixed with the oils to
increase lubricating qualities. These additives contain compounds of sulfur, chlorine, and
phosphorus, and are designed to react chemically with the chip and tool surfaces to form solid
films(extremepressurelubrication)thathelptoavoidmetal-to-metalcontactbetweenthetwo.
Emulsified oils consist of oil droplets suspended in water. The fluid is made by
blending oil (usually mineral oil) in water using an emulsifying agent to promote blending
578
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

and stability of the emulsion. A typical ratio of water to oil is 30:1. Chemical additives
based on sulfur, chlorine, and phosphorus are often used to promote extreme pressure
lubrication. Because they contain both oil and water, the emulsified oils combine cooling
and lubricating qualities in one cutting fluid.
Chemical fluids are chemicals in a water solution rather than oils in emulsion. The
dissolved chemicals include compounds of sulfur, chlorine, and phosphorus, plus wetting
agents. The chemicals are intended to provide some degree of lubrication to the solution.
Chemical fluids provide good coolant qualities but their lubricating qualities are less than
the other cutting fluid types. Semichemical fluids have small amounts of emulsified oil
added to increase the lubricating characteristics of the cutting fluid. In effect, they are a
hybrid class between chemical fluids and emulsified oils.
23.4.2 APPLICATION OF CUTTING FLUIDS
Cutting fluids are applied to machining operations in various ways. In this section we
consider these application techniques. We also consider the problem of cutting-fluid
contamination and what steps can be taken to address this problem.
Application Methods
The most common method is flooding, sometimes called flood-
cooling because it is generally used with coolant-type cutting fluids. In flooding, a steady
stream of fluid is directed at the tool–work or tool–chip interface of the machining
operation. A second method of delivery is mist application, primarily used for water-
based cutting fluids. In this method the fluid is directed at the operation in the form of a
high-speed mist carried by a pressurized air stream. Mist application is generally not as
effective as flooding in cooling the tool. However, because of the high-velocity air stream,
mist application may be more effective in delivering the cutting fluid to areas that are
difficult to access by conventional flooding.
Manual application by means of a squirt can or paint brush is sometimes used for
applying lubricants in tapping and other operations in which cutting speeds are low and
friction is a problem. It is generally not preferred by most production machine shops
because of its variability in application.
Cutting Fluid Filtration and Dry Machining
Cutting fluids become contaminated over
time with a variety of foreign substances, such as tramp oil (machine oil, hydraulic fluid,
etc.), garbage (cigarettebutts, food,etc.), smallchips, molds, fungi, and bacteria.Inaddition
to causing odors and health hazards, contaminated cutting fluids do not perform their
lubricating function as well. Alternative ways of dealing with this problem are to: (1)
replace the cutting fluid at regular and frequent intervals (perhaps twice per month); (2)
use a filtration system to continuously or periodically clean the fluid; or (3) dry machining;
that is, machine without cutting fluids. Because of growing concern about environmental
pollution and associated legislation, disposing old fluids has become both costly and
contrary to the general public welfare.
Filtration systems are being installed in numerous machine shops today to solve the
contamination problem. Advantages of these systems include: (1) prolonged cutting fluid
life between changes—instead of replacing the fluid once or twice per month, coolant lives
of 1 year have been reported; (2) reduced fluid disposal cost, since disposal is much less
frequent when a filter is used; (3) cleaner cutting fluid for better working environment and
reduced health hazards; (4) lower machine tool maintenance; and (5) longer tool life.
There are various types of filtration systems for filtering cutting fluids. For the interested
reader, filtration systems and the benefits of using them are discussed in reference [19].
The third alternative is called dry machining, meaning that no cutting fluid is used.
Dry machining avoids the problems of cutting fluid contamination, disposal, and filtration,
but can lead to problems of its own: (1) overheating the tool, (2) operating at lower cutting
Section 23.4/Cutting Fluids
579

speeds and production rates to prolong tool life, and (3) absence of chip removal benefits
in grinding and milling. Cutting-tool producers have developed certain grades of carbides
and coated carbides for use in dry machining.
REFERENCES
[1] Aronson, R. B.‘‘Using High-Pressure Fluids,’’ Man-
ufacturing Engineering, June 2004, pp. 87–96.
[2] ASM Handbook, Vol. 16: Machining, ASM Inter-
national, Materials Park, Ohio, 1989.
[3] Black, J, and Kohser, R. DeGarmo’s Materials and
Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed., John Wiley &
Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
[4] Brierley, R. G., and Siekman, H. J. Machining Prin-
ciples and Cost Control. McGraw-Hill, New York,
1964.
[5] Carnes, R., and Maddock, G.‘‘Tool Steel Selection,’’
AdvancedMaterials&Processes,June2004,pp.37–40.
[6] Cook, N. H.‘‘Tool Wear and Tool Life,’’ ASME
Transactions, Journal of Engineering for Industry,
Vol. 95, November 1973, pp. 931–938.
[7] Davis, J. R. (ed.), ASM Specialty Handbook Tool
Materials, ASM International, Materials Park, Ohio,
1995.
[8] Destephani, J.‘‘The Science of pCBN,’’ Manufactur-
ing Engineering, January 2005, pp. 53–62.
[9] Drozda, T. J., and Wick, C. (eds.). Tool and Manu-
facturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol. I.
Machining, Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
Dearborn, Michigan, 1983.
[10] Esford,
D.‘‘Ceramics
Take
a
Turn,’’
Cutting
Tool Engineering, Vol. 52, No. 7, July 2000, pp.
40–46.
[11] Koelsch, J. R.‘‘Beyond TiN,’’ Manufacturing Engi-
neering, October 1992, pp. 27–32.
[12] Krar, S. F., and Ratterman, E. Superabrasives:
Grinding and Machining with CBN and Diamond.
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1990.
[13] Liebhold, P.‘‘The History of Tools,’’ Cutting Tool
Engineer, June 1989, pp. 137–138.
[14] Machining Data Handbook, 3rd ed., Vols. I. and II.
Metcut Research Associates, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio,
1980.
[15] Modern Metal Cutting, AB Sandvik Coromant,
Sandvik, Sweden, 1994.
[16] Owen, J. V.‘‘Are Cermets for Real?’’ Manufacturing
Engineering, October 1991, pp. 28–31.
[17] Pfouts, W. R.‘‘Cutting Edge Coatings,’’ Manufactur-
ing Engineering, July 2000, pp. 98–107.
[18] Schey, J. A. Introduction to Manufacturing Pro-
cesses, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999.
[19] Shaw, M. C. Metal Cutting Principles, 2nd ed. Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford, England, 2005.
[20] Spitler, D., Lantrip, J., Nee, J., and Smith, D. A.
Fundamentals of Tool Design, 5th ed., Society of
Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 2003.
[21] Tlusty, J. Manufacturing Processes and Equipment,
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey,
2000.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
23.1.
What are the two principal aspects of cutting-tool
technology?
23.2.
Name the three modes of tool failure in machining.
23.3.
What are the two principal locations on a cutting
tool where tool wear occurs?
23.4.
Identify the mechanisms by which cutting tools
wear during machining.
23.5.
What is the physical interpretation of the parame-
ter C in the Taylor tool life equation?
23.6.
In addition to cutting speed, what other cutting
variables are included in the expanded version of
the Taylor tool life equation?
23.7.
What are some of the tool life criteria used in
production machining operations?
23.8.
Identify three desirable properties of a cutting-tool
material.
23.9.
What are the principal alloying ingredients in high-
speed steel?
23.10.
What is the difference in ingredients between steel
cutting grades and nonsteel-cutting grades of
cemented carbides?
23.11.
Identify some of the common compounds that
form the thin coatings on the surface of coated
carbide inserts.
23.12.
Name the seven elements of tool geometry for a
single point cutting tool.
23.13.
Why are ceramic cutting tools generally designed
with negative rake angles?
23.14.
Identify the alternative ways by which a cutting
tool is held in place during machining.
23.15.
Name the two main categories of cutting fluid
according to function.
580
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

23.16.
Name the four categories of cutting fluid according
to chemistry.
23.17.
What are the principal lubricating mechanisms by
which cutting fluids work?
23.18.
What are the methods by which cutting fluids are
applied in a machining operation?
23.19.
Why are cutting fluid filter systems becoming more
common and what are their advantages?
23.20.
Dry machining is being considered by machine
shops because of certain problems inherent in
the use of cutting fluids. What are those problems
associated with the use of cutting fluids?
23.21.
What are some of the new problems introduced by
machining dry?
23.22.
(Video) List the two principal categories of cutting
tools.
23.23.
(Video) According to the video clip, what is the
objective in selection of cutting tools for a given
operation?
23.24.
(Video) What are the factors a machinist should
know to select the proper tooling? List at least five.
23.25.
(Video) List five characteristics of a good tool
material.
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 19 correct answers in the following multiple-choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
23.1.
Of the following cutting conditions, which one has
the greatest effect on tool wear: (a) cutting speed,
(b) depth of cut, or (c) feed?
23.2.
As an alloying ingredient in high-speed steel,
tungsten serves which of the following functions
(two best answers): (a) forms hard carbides
to resist abrasion, (b) improves strength and
hardness,
(c)
increases
corrosion
resistance,
(d) increases hot hardness, and (e) increases
toughness?
23.3.
Cast cobalt alloys typically contain which of the
following main ingredients (three best answers):
(a) aluminum, (b) cobalt, (c) chromium, (d) iron,
(e) nickel, (f) steel, and (g) tungsten?
23.4.
Which of the following is not a common ingredient
in cemented carbide cutting tools (two correct
answers): (a) Al2O3, (b) Co, (c) CrC, (d) TiC,
and (e) WC?
23.5.
An increase in cobalt content has which of the
following effects on WC-Co cemented carbides
(two
best
answers):
(a)
decreases
hardness,
(b) decreases transverse rupture strength, (c) in-
creases hardness, (d) increases toughness, and
(e) increases wear resistance?
23.6.
Steel-cutting grades of cemented carbide are typi-
cally characterized by which of the following in-
gredients (three correct answers): (a) Co, (b) Fe,
(c) Mo, (d) Ni, (e) TiC, and (f) WC?
23.7.
If you had to select a cemented carbide for an
application involving finish turning of steel, which
C-grade would you select (one best answer):
(a) C1, (b) C3, (c) C5, or (d) C7?
23.8.
Which of the following processes are used to pro-
vide the thin coatings on the surface of coated
carbide inserts (two best answers): (a) chemical
vapor deposition, (b) electroplating, (c) physical
vapor deposition, (d) pressing and sintering, and
(e) spray painting?
23.9.
Which one of the following materials has the high-
est hardness: (a) aluminum oxide, (b) cubic boron
nitride, (c) high-speed steel, (d) titanium carbide,
or (e) tungsten carbide?
23.10.
Which of the following are the two main functions
of a cutting fluid in machining (two best answers):
(a) improve surface finish on the workpiece,
(b) reduce forces and power, (c) reduce friction
at the tool–chip interface, (d) remove heat from the
process, and (e) wash away chips?
PROBLEMS
Tool Life and the Taylor Equation
23.1.
Flank wear data were collected in a series of turn-
ing tests using a coated carbide tool on hardened
alloy steel at a feed of 0.30 mm/rev and a depth of
4.0 mm. At a speed of 125 m/min, flank wear ¼ 0.12
mm at 1 min, 0.27 mm at 5 min, 0.45 mm at 11 min,
0.58 mm at 15 min, 0.73 at 20 min, and 0.97 mm at
Problems
581

25 min. At a speed of 165 m/min, flank wear ¼
0.22 mm at 1 min, 0.47 mm at 5 min, 0.70 mm at 9
min, 0.80 mm at 11 min, and 0.99 mm at 13 min. The
last value in each case is when final tool failure
occurred. (a) On a single piece of linear graph
paper, plot flank wear as a function of time for
both speeds. Using 0.75 mm of flank wear as the
criterion of tool failure, determine the tool lives for
the two cutting speeds. (b) On a piece of natural
log-log paper, plot your results determined in the
previous part. From the plot, determine the values
of n and C in the Taylor Tool Life Equation. (c) As
a comparison, calculate the values of n and C in the
Taylor equation solving simultaneous equations.
Are the resulting n and C values the same?
23.2.
Solve Problem 23.1 except that the tool life crite-
rion is 0.50 mm of flank land wear rather than
0.75 mm.
23.3.
A series of turning tests were conducted using a
cemented carbide tool, and flank wear data were
collected. The feed was 0.010 in/rev and the depth
was 0.125 in. At a speed of 350 ft/min, flank wear ¼
0.005 in at 1 min, 0.008 in at 5 min, 0.012 in at
11 min, 0.0.015 in at 15 min, 0.021 in at 20 min, and
0.040 in at 25 min. At a speed of 450 ft/min, flank
wear ¼ 0.007 in at 1 min, 0.017 in at 5 min, 0.027 in
at 9 min, 0.033 in at 11 min, and 0.040 in at 13 min.
The last value in each case is when final tool failure
occurred. (a) On a single piece of linear graph
paper, plot flank wear as a function of time. Using
0.020 in of flank wear as the criterion of tool failure,
determine the tool lives for the two cutting speeds.
(b) On a piece of natural log–log paper, plot your
results determined in the previous part. From the
plot, determine the values of n and C in the Taylor
Tool Life Equation. (c) As a comparison, calculate
the values of n and C in the Taylor equation solving
simultaneous equations. Are the resulting n and C
values the same?
23.4.
Solve Problem 23.3 except the tool life wear crite-
rion is 0.015 in of flank wear. What cutting speed
should be used to get 20 minutes of tool life?
23.5.
Tool life tests on a lathe have resulted in the
following data: (1) at a cutting speed of 375 ft/
min, the tool life was 5.5 min; (2) at a cutting speed
of 275 ft/min, the tool life was 53 min. (a) Deter-
mine the parameters n and C in the Taylor tool life
equation. (b) Based on the n and C values, what is
the likely tool material used in this operation?
(c) Using your equation, compute the tool life
that corresponds to a cutting speed of 300 ft/min.
(d) Compute the cutting speed that corresponds to
a tool life T ¼ 10 min.
23.6.
Tool life tests in turning yield the following data:
(1) when cutting speed is 100 m/min, tool life is
10 min; (2) when cutting speed is 75 m/min, tool life
is 30 min. (a) Determine the n and C values in the
Taylor tool life equation. Based on your equation,
compute (b) the tool life for a speed of 110 m/min,
and (c) the speed corresponding to a tool life of
15 min.
23.7.
Turning tests have resulted in 1-min tool life at a
cutting speed ¼ 4.0 m/s and a 20-min tool life at a
speed ¼ 2.0 m/s. (a) Find the n and C values in the
Taylor tool life equation. (b) Project how long the
tool would last at a speed of 1.0 m/s.
23.8.
A 15.0-in  2.0-in-workpart is machined in a face
milling operation using a 2.5-in diameter fly cutter
with a single carbide insert. The machine is set for a
feed of 0.010 in/tooth and a depth of 0.20 in. If a
cutting speed of 400 ft/min is used, the tool lasts for
three pieces. If a cutting speed of 200 ft/min is used,
the tool lasts for 12 parts. Determine the Taylor
tool life equation.
23.9.
In a production turning operation, the workpart is
125 mm in diameter and 300 mm long. A feed of
0.225 mm/rev is used in the operation. If cutting
speed ¼ 3.0 m/s, the tool must be changed every
five workparts; but if cutting speed ¼ 2.0 m/s, the
tool can be used to produce 25 pieces between tool
changes. Determine the Taylor tool life equation
for this job.
23.10.
For the tool life plot of Figure 23.5, show that the
middle data point (v ¼ 130 m/min, T ¼ 12 min) is
consistent with the Taylor equation determined in
Example Problem 23.1.
23.11.
In the tool wear plots of Figure 23.4, complete
failure of the cutting tool is indicated by the end
of each wear curve. Using complete failure as the
criterion of tool life instead of 0.50 mm flank
wear, the resulting data are: (1) v ¼ 160 m/min,
T ¼ 5.75 min; (2) v ¼ 130 m/min, T ¼ 14.25 min;
and (3) v ¼ 100 m/min, T ¼ 47 min. Determine the
parameters n and C in the Taylor tool life equation
for this data.
23.12.
The Taylor equation for a certain set of test condi-
tions is vT.25 ¼ 1000, where the U.S. customary
units are used: ft/min for v and min for T. Convert
this equation to the equivalent Taylor equation in
the International System of units (metric), where v
is in m/sec and T is in seconds. Validate the metric
equation using a tool life ¼ 16 min. That is, com-
pute the corresponding cutting speeds in ft/min and
m/sec using the two equations.
23.13.
A series of turning tests are performed to determine
the parameters n, m, and K in the expanded version
of the Taylor equation, Eq. (23.4). The following
data were obtained during the tests: (1) cutting
speed ¼ 1.9 m/s, feed ¼ 0.22 mm/rev, tool life ¼
10 min; (2) cutting speed ¼ 1.3 m/s, feed ¼ 0.22 mm/
582
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

rev, toollife¼47min;and(3)cuttingspeed¼1.9m/s,
feed ¼ 0.32 mm/rev, tool life ¼ 8 min. (a) Determine
n, m, and K. (b) Using your equation, compute the
toollifewhenthecuttingspeedis1.5m/sandthefeed
is 0.28 mm/rev.
23.14.
Eq. (23.4) in the text relates tool life to speed and
feed. In a series of turning tests conducted to
determine the parameters n, m, and K, the follow-
ing data were collected: (1) v ¼ 400 ft/min, f ¼ 0.010
in/rev, T ¼ 10 min; (2) v ¼ 300 ft/min, f ¼ 0.010 in/
rev, T ¼ 35 min; and (3) v ¼ 400 ft/min, f ¼ 0.015 in/
rev, T ¼ 8 min. Determine n, m, and K. What is the
physical interpretation of the constant K?
23.15.
The n and C values in Table 23.2 are based on a feed
rate of 0.25 mm/rev and a depth of cut ¼ 2.5 mm.
Determine how many cubic mm of steel would be
removed for each of the following tool materials,
if a 10-min tool life were required in each case:
(a) plain carbon steel, (b) high speed steel,
(c) cemented carbide, and (d) ceramic. Use of a
spreadsheet calculator is recommended.
23.16.
A drilling operation is performed in which 0.5 in
diameter holes are drilled through cast iron plates
that are 1.0 in thick. Sample holes have been drilled
to determine the tool life at two cutting speeds. At
80 surface ft/min, the tool lasted for exactly 50
holes. At 120 surface ft/min, the tool lasted for
exactly five holes. The feed of the drill was 0.003 in/
rev. (Ignore effects of drill entrance and exit from
the hole. Consider the depth of cut to be exactly
1.00 in, corresponding to the plate thickness.) De-
termine the values of n and C in the Taylor tool life
equation for the above sample data, where cutting
speed v is expressed in ft/min, and tool life T is
expressed in min.
23.17.
The outside diameter of a cylinder made of tita-
nium alloy is to be turned. The starting diameter is
400 mm and the length is 1100 mm. The feed is 0.35
mm/rev and the depth of cut is 2.5 mm. The cut will
be made with a cemented carbide cutting tool
whose Taylor tool life parameters are: n ¼ 0.24
and C ¼ 450. Units for the Taylor equation are min
for tool life and m/min for cutting speed. Compute
the cutting speed that will allow the tool life to be
just equal to the cutting time for this part.
23.18.
The outside diameter of a roll for a steel rolling mill
is to be turned. In the final pass, the starting
diameter ¼ 26.25 in and the length ¼ 48.0 in. The
cutting conditions will be: feed ¼ 0.0125 in/rev,
and depth of cut ¼ 0.125 in. A cemented carbide
cutting tool is to be used and the parameters of the
Taylor tool life equation for this setup are: n ¼ 0.25
and C ¼ 1300. Units for the Taylor equation are
min for tool life and ft/min for cutting speed. It is
desirable to operate at a cutting speed so that the
tool will not need to be changed during the cut.
Determine the cutting speed that will make the tool
life equal to the time required to complete the
turning operation.
23.19.
The workpart in a turning operation is 88 mm in
diameter and 400 mm long. A feed of 0.25 mm/rev
is used in the operation. If cutting speed ¼ 3.5 m/s,
the tool must be changed every three workparts;
but if cutting speed ¼ 2.5 m/s, the tool can be used
to produce 20 pieces between tool changes. Deter-
mine the cutting speed that will allow the tool to be
used for 50 parts between tool changes.
23.20.
In a production turning operation, the steel work-
part has a 4.5 in diameter and is 17.5 in long. A feed
of 0.012 in/rev is used in the operation. If cutting
speed ¼ 400 ft/min, the tool must be changed every
four workparts; but if cutting speed ¼ 275 ft/min,
the tool can be used to produce 15 pieces between
tool changes. A new order for 25 pieces has been
received but the dimensions of the workpart have
been changed. The new diameter is 3.5 in, and the
new length is 15.0 in. The work material and tooling
remain the same, and the feed and depth are also
unchanged, so the Taylor tool life equation deter-
mined for the previous workparts is valid for the
new parts. Determine the cutting speed that will
allow one cutting tool to be used for the new order.
23.21.
The outside diameter of a cylinder made of a steel
alloyistobeturned. Thestartingdiameteris300 mm
and the length is 625 mm. The feed is 0.35 mm/rev
and the depth of cut is 2.5 mm. The cut will be made
with a cemented carbide cutting tool whose Taylor
tool life parameters are: n ¼ 0.24 and C ¼ 450. Units
for the Taylor equation are min for tool life and m/
min for cutting speed. Compute the cutting speed
that will allow the tool life to be just equal to the
cutting time for three of these parts.
Tooling Applications
23.22.
Specify the ANSI C-grade or grades (C1 through C8
in Table 23.5) of cemented carbide for each of the
following situations: (a) turning the diameter of a
high carbon steel shaft from 4.2 in to 3.5 in,
(b) making a final face milling pass using a shallow
depth of cut and feed on a titanium part, (c) boring
out the cylinders of an alloy steel automobile engine
block before honing, and (d) cutting the threads on
the inlet and outlet of a large brass valve.
Problems
583

23.23.
A certain machine shop uses four cemented carbide
grades in its operations. The chemical composition
of these grades are as follows: Grade 1 contains 95%
WC and 5% Co; Grade 2 contains 82% WC, 4% Co,
and 14% TiC; Grade 3 contains 80% WC, 10% Co,
and 10% TiC; and Grade 4 contains 89% WC and
11% Co. (a) Which grade should be used for finish
turning of unhardened steel? (b) Which grade
should be used for rough milling of aluminum?
(c) Which grade should be used for finish turning
of brass? (d) Which of the grades listed would be
suitable for machining cast iron? For each case,
explain your recommendation.
23.24.
List the ISO R513-1975(E) group (letter and color
in Table 23.6) and whether the number would be
toward the lower or higher end of the ranges for
each of the following situations: (a) milling the
head gasket surface of an aluminum cylinder
head of an automobile (cylinder head has a hole
for each cylinder and must be very flat and smooth
to mate up with the block), (b) rough turning a
hardened steel shaft, (c) milling a fiber-reinforced
polymer composite that requires a precise finish,
and (d) milling the rough shape in a die made of
steel before it is hardened.
23.25.
A turning operation is performed on a steel shaft with
diameter ¼ 5.0 inandlength¼ 32 in.Aslotorkeyway
has been milled along its entire length. The turning
operation reduces the shaft diameter. For each of the
following tool materials, indicate whether it is a rea-
sonable candidate to use in the operation: (a) plain
carbon steel, (b) high-speed steel, (c) cemented
carbide,
(d)
ceramic,
and
(e)
sintered
poly-
crystalline diamond. For each material that is not
a good candidate, give the reason why it is not.
Cutting Fluids
23.26.
In a milling operation with no coolant, a cutting
speed of 500 ft/min is used. The current cutting
conditions (dry) yield Taylor tool life equation
parameters of n ¼ 0.25 and C ¼ 1300 (ft/min).
When a coolant is used in the operation, the cutting
speed can be increased by 20% and still maintain
the same tool life. Assuming n does not change with
the addition of coolant, what is the resulting change
in the value of C?
23.27.
In a turning operation using high-speed steel tool-
ing, cutting speed ¼ 110 m/min. The Taylor tool life
equation has parameters n ¼ 0.140 and C ¼ 150 (m/
min) when the operation is conducted dry. When a
coolant is used in the operation, the value of C is
increased by 15%. Determine the percent increase
in tool life that results if the cutting speed is
maintained at 110 m/min.
23.28.
A production turning operation on a steel work-
piece normally operates at a cutting speed of 125 ft/
min using high-speed steel tooling with no cutting
fluid. The appropriate n and C values in the Taylor
equation are given in Table 23.2 in the text. It has
been found that the use of a coolant type cutting
fluid will allow an increase of 25 ft/min in the speed
without any effect on tool life. If it can be assumed
that the effect of the cutting fluid is simply to
increase the constant C by 25, what would be the
increase in tool life if the original cutting speed of
125 ft/min were used in the operation?
23.29.
A high speed steel 6.0 mm twist drill is being used
in a production drilling operation on mild steel. A
cutting oil is applied by the operator by brushing
the lubricant onto the drill point and flutes prior to
each hole. The cutting conditions are: speed ¼
25 m/min, and feed ¼ 0.10 mm/rev, and hole
depth ¼ 40 mm. The foreman says that the ‘‘speed
and feed are right out of the handbook’’ for this
work material. Nevertheless, he says, ‘‘the chips are
clogging in the flutes, resulting in friction heat, and
the drill bit is failing prematurely because of over-
heating.’’ What’s the problem? What do you rec-
ommend to solve it?
584
Chapter 23/Cutting-Tool Technology

24
ECONOMIC AND
PRODUCT DESIGN
CONSIDERATIONS
IN MACHINING
Chapter Contents
24.1
Machinability
24.2
Tolerances and Surface Finish
24.2.1
Tolerances in Machining
24.2.2
Surface Finish in Machining
24.3
Selection of Cutting Conditions
24.3.1
Selecting Feed and Depth of Cut
24.3.2
Optimizing Cutting Speed
24.4
Product Design Considerations in Machining
In this chapter, we conclude our coverage of traditional
machining technology by discussing several remaining
topics. The first topic is machinability, which is concerned
with how work material properties affect machining per-
formance. The second topic is concerned with the tolerances
and surface finishes (Chapter 5) that can be expected in
machining processes. Third, we consider how to select cut-
ting conditions (speed, feed, anddepth of cut) in a machining
operation. This selection determines to a large extent the
economic success of a given operation. Finally, we provide
some guidelines for product designers to consider when they
design parts that are to be produced by machining.
24.1
MACHINABILITY
Propertiesof theworkmaterial haveasignificantinfluenceon
the success of the machining operation. These properties and
other characteristics of the work are often summarized in the
term ‘‘machinability.’’ Machinability denotes the relative
ease with which a material (usually a metal) can be machined
using appropriate tooling and cutting conditions.
There are various criteria used to evaluate machin-
ability, the most important of which are: (1) tool life,
(2) forces and power, (3) surface finish, and (4) ease of
chip disposal. Although machinability generally refers to
the work material, it should be recognized that machining
performance depends on more than just material. The type
of machining operation, tooling, and cutting conditions are
also important factors. In addition, the machinability crite-
rion is a source of variation. One material may yield a
longer tool life, whereas another material provides a better
surface finish. All of these factors make evaluation of
machinability difficult.
585

Machinability testing usually involves a comparison of work materials. The machining
performance of a test material is measured relative to that of a base (standard) material.
Possiblemeasuresofperformanceinmachinabilitytestinginclude:(1) tool life, (2) tool wear,
(3) cutting force, (4) power in the operation, (5) cutting temperature, and (6) material
removal rate under standard test conditions. The relative performance is expressed as an
indexnumber,calledthemachinabilityrating (MR). Thebasematerialusedasthestandardis
given a machinability rating of 1.00. B1112 steel is often used as the base material in
machinability comparisons. Materials that are easier to machine than the base have ratings
greater than 1.00, and materials that are more difficult to machine have ratings less than 1.00.
Machinability ratings are often expressed as percentages rather than index numbers. Let us
illustrate how a machinability rating might be determined using a tool life test as the basis of
comparison.
Example 24.1
Machinability
A series of tool life tests are conducted on two work materials under identical cutting
conditions, varying only speed in the test procedure. The first material, defined as the
base material, yields a Taylor tool life equation vT 0.28 ¼ 350, and the other material
(test material) yields a Taylor equation vT 0.27 ¼ 440, where speed is in m/min and tool
life is in min. Determine the machinability rating of the test material using the cutting
speed that provides a 60-min tool life as the basis of comparison. This speed is denoted
by v60.
Solution:
The base material has a machinability rating ¼ 1.0. Its v60 value can be
determined from the Taylor tool life equation as follows:
v60 ¼ 350=600:28


¼ 111 m/min
The cutting speed at a 60-min tool life for the test material is determined similarly:
v60 ¼ 440=600:27


¼ 146 m/min
Accordingly, the machinability rating can be calculated as
MR(for the test material) ¼ 146
111 ¼ 1:31 (131%)
n
Many work material factors affect machining performance. Important mechanical
properties include hardness and strength. As hardness increases, abrasive wear of the tool
increases so that tool life is reduced. Strength is usually indicated as tensile strength, even
though machining involves shear stresses. Of course, shear strength and tensile strength
are correlated. As work material strength increases, cutting forces, specific energy, and
cutting temperature increase, making the material more difficult to machine. On the
other hand, very low hardness can be detrimental to machining performance. For
example, low carbon steel, which has relatively low hardness, is often too ductile to
machine well. High ductility causes tearing of the metal as the chip is formed, resulting in
poor finish, and problems with chip disposal. Cold drawing is often used on low carbon
bars to increase surface hardness and promote chip-breaking during cutting.
A metal’s chemistry has an important effect on properties; and in some cases,
chemistry affects the wear mechanisms that act on the tool material. Through these
relationships, chemistry affects machinability. Carbon content has a significant effect
on the properties of steel. As carbon is increased, the strength and hardness of the steel
increase; this reduces machining performance. Many alloying elements added to steel
to enhance properties are detrimental to machinability. Chromium, molybdenum, and
tungsten form carbides in steel, which increase tool wear and reduce machinability.
Manganese and nickel add strength and toughness to steel, which reduce machinability.
Certain elements can be added to steel to improve machining performance, such as
586
Chapter 24/Economic and Product Design Considerations in Machining

lead, sulfur, and phosphorus. The additives have the effect of reducing the coefficient
of friction between the tool and chip, thereby reducing forces, temperature, and built-
up edge formation. Better tool life and surface finish result from these effects. Steel
alloys formulated to improve machinability are referred to as free machining steels
(Section 6.2.3).
Similar relationships exist for other work materials. Table 24.1 lists selected metals
and their approximate machinability ratings. These ratings are intended to summarize the
machining performance of the materials.
24.2
TOLERANCES AND SURFACE FINISH
Machining operations are used to produce parts with defined geometries to tolerances
and surface finishes specified by the product designer. In this section we examine these
issues of tolerance and surface finish in machining.
TABLE 24.1
Approximate values of Brinell hardness and typical machinability ratings for selected
work materials.
Work Material
Brinell
Hardness
Machinability
Ratinga
Work Material
Brinell
Hardness
Machinability
Ratinga
Base steel: B1112
180–220
1.00
Tool steel (unhardened)
200–250
0.30
Low carbon steel:
130–170
0.50
Cast iron
C1008, C1010, C1015
Soft
60
0.70
Medium carbon steel:
140–210
0.65
Medium hardness
200
0.55
C1020, C1025, C1030
Hard
230
0.40
High carbon steel:
180–230
0.55
Super alloys
C1040, C1045, C1050
Inconel
240–260
0.30
Alloy steels24b
Inconel X
350–370
0.15
1320, 1330, 3130, 3140
170–230
0.55
Waspalloy
250–280
0.12
4130
180–200
0.65
Titanium
4140
190–210
0.55
Plain
160
0.30
4340
200–230
0.45
Alloys
220–280
0.20
4340 (casting)
250–300
0.25
Aluminum
6120, 6130, 6140
180–230
0.50
2-S, 11-S, 17-S
Soft
5.00c
8620, 8630
190–200
0.60
Aluminum alloys (soft)
Soft
2.00d
B1113
170–220
1.35
Aluminum alloys (hard)
Hard
1.25d
Free machining steels
160–220
1.50
Copper
Soft
0.60
Stainless steel
Brass
Soft
2.00d
301, 302
170–190
0.50
Bronze
Soft
0.65d
304
160–170
0.40
316, 317
190–200
0.35
403
190–210
0.55
416
190–210
0.90
Values are estimated average values based on [1], [4], [5], [7], and other sources. Ratings represent relative cutting speeds for a given tool
life (see Example 24.1).
aMachinability ratings are often expressed as percents (index number  100%).
bOur list of alloy steels is by no means complete. We have attempted to include some of the more common alloys and to indicate the range
of machinability ratings among these steels.
cThe machinability of aluminum varies widely. It is expressed here as MR ¼ 5.00, but the range is probably from 3.00 to 10.00 or more.
dAluminum alloys, brasses, and bronzes also vary significantly in machining performance. Different grades have different machinability
ratings. For each case, we have attempted to reduce the variation to a single average value to indicate relative performance with other
work materials.
Section 24.2/Tolerances and Surface Finish
587

24.2.1 TOLERANCES IN MACHINING
There is variability in any manufacturing process, and tolerances are used to set
permissible limits on this variability (Section 5.1.1). Machining is often selected when
tolerances are close, because it is more accurate than most other shape-making processes.
Table 24.2 indicates typical tolerances that can be achieved for most machining opera-
tions examined in Chapter 22. It should be mentioned that the values in this tabulation
represent ideal conditions, yet conditions that are readily achievable in a modern factory.
If the machine tool is old and worn, process variability will likely be greater than the
ideal, and these tolerances would be difficult to maintain. On the other hand, newer
machine tools can achieve closer tolerances than those listed.
Tighter tolerances usually mean higher costs. For example, if the product designer
specifies a tolerance of 0.10 mm on a hole diameter of 6.0 mm, this tolerance could be
achieved by a drilling operation, according to Table 24.2. However, if the designer
specifies a tolerance of 0.025 mm, then an additional reaming operation is needed to
satisfy this tighter requirement. This is not to suggest that looser tolerances are always
good. It often happens that closer tolerances and lower variability in the machining of the
individual components will lead to fewer problems in assembly, final product testing, field
service, and customer acceptance. Although these costs are not always as easy to quantify
as direct manufacturing costs, they can nevertheless be significant. Tighter tolerances that
push a factory to achieve better control over its manufacturing processes may lead to
lower total operating costs for the company over the long run.
24.2.2 SURFACE FINISH IN MACHINING
Because machining is often the manufacturing process that determines the final geome-
try and dimensions of the part, it is also the process that determines the part’s surface
texture (Section 5.3.2). Table 24.2 lists typical surface roughness values that can be
TABLE 24.2
Typical tolerances and surface roughness values (arithmetic average) achievable in machining
operations.
Tolerance
Capability
—Typical
Surface
Roughness
AA—Typical
Tolerance
Capability
—Typical
Surface
Roughness
AA—Typical
Machining Operation
mm
in
mm
m-in
Machining Operation
mm
in
mm
m-in
Turning, boring
0.8
32
Reaming
0.4
16
Diameter D < 25 mm
0.025
0.001
Diameter D < 12 mm
0.025
0.001
25 mm < D < 50 mm
0.05
0.002
12 mm < D < 25 mm
0.05
0.002
Diameter D > 50 mm
0.075
0.003
Diameter D > 25 mm
0.075
0.003
Drilling
0.8
32
Milling
0.4
16
Diameter D < 2.5 mm
0.05
0.002
Peripheral
0.025
0.001
2.5 mm < D < 6 mm
0.075
0.003
Face
0.025
0.001
6 mm < D < 12 mm
0.10
0.004
End
0.05
0.002
12 mm < D < 25 mm
0.125
0.005
Shaping, slotting
0.025
0.001
1.6
63
Diameter D > 25 mm
0.20
0.008
Planing
0.075
0.003
1.6
63
Broaching
0.025
0.001
0.2
8
Sawing
0.50
0.02
6.0
250
Drilling tolerances are typically expressed as biased bilateral tolerances (e.g., þ 0.010/–0.002).
Values in this table are expressed as closest bilateral tolerance (e.g., 0.006).
Compiled from various sources, including [2], [5], [7], [8], [12], and [15].
588
Chapter 24/Economic and Product Design Considerations in Machining

achieved in various machining operations. These finishes should be readily achievable by
modern, well-maintained machine tools.
Let us examine how surface finish is determined in a machining operation. The
roughness of a machined surface depends on many factors that can be grouped as follows:
(1) geometric factors, (2) work materialfactors, and (3) vibrationand machine tool factors.
Our discussion of surface finish in this section examines these factors and their effects.
Geometric Factors
These are the machining parameters that determine the surface
geometry of a machined part. They include: (1) type of machining operation; (2) cutting
tool geometry, most importantly nose radius; and (3) feed. The surface geometry that
would result from these factors is referred to as the ‘‘ideal’’ or ‘‘theoretical’’ surface
roughness, which is the finish that would be obtained in the absence of work material,
vibration, and machine tool factors.
Type of operation refers to the machining process used to generate the surface. For
example, peripheral milling, facing milling, and shaping all produce a flat surface;
however, the surface geometry is different for each operation because of differences
in tool shape and the way the tool interacts with the surface. A sense of the differences
can be seen in Figure 5.14 showing various possible lays of a surface.
Tool geometry and feed combine to form the surface geometry. The shape of the
tool point is the important tool geometry factor. The effects can be seen for a single-point
tool in Figure 24.1. With the same feed, a larger nose radius causes the feed marks to be
less pronounced, thus leading to a better finish. If two feeds are compared with the same
nose radius, the larger feed increases the separation between feed marks, leading to an
increase in the value of ideal surface roughness. If feed rate is large enough and the nose
radius is small enough so that the end cutting edge participates in creating the new
surface, then the end cutting-edge angle will affect surface geometry. In this case, a higher
ECEAwill result in a higher surface roughness value. In theory, a zero ECEAwould yield
a perfectly smooth surface; however, imperfections in the tool, work material, and
machining process preclude achieving such an ideal finish.
Feed
New work
surface
Feed
Large
ECEA
New work
surface
Feed
New work
surface
Large
feed
New work
surface
Small
feed
New work
surface
Large nose
radius
Feed
New work
surface
(c)
(b)
(a)
Zero nose
radius
FIGURE 24.1
Effect of geometric factors in determining the theoretical ﬁnish on a work surface for
single-point tools: (a) effect of nose radius, (b) effect of feed, and (c) effect of end cutting-edge angle.
Section 24.2/Tolerances and Surface Finish
589

The effects of nose radius and feed can be combined in an equation to predict the
ideal average roughness for a surface produced by a single-point tool. The equation
applies to operations such as turning, shaping, and planing
Ri ¼
f 2
32NR
ð24:1Þ
where Ri ¼ theoretical arithmetic average surface roughness, mm (in); f ¼ feed, mm (in);
and NR ¼ nose radius on the tool point, mm (in).
The equation assumes that the nose radius is not zero and that feed and nose radius
will be the principal factors that determine the geometry of the surface. The values for Ri
will be in units of mm (in), which can be converted to mm (m-in). Eq. (24.1) can also be
used to estimate the ideal surface roughness in face milling with insert tooling, using f to
represent the chip load (feed per tooth).
Equation (24.1) assumes a sharp cutting tool. As the tool wears, the shape of the
cutting point changes, which is reflected in the geometry of the work surface. For slight
amounts of tool wear, the effect is not noticeable. However, when tool wear becomes
significant, especially nose radius wear, surface roughness deteriorates compared with
the ideal values given by the preceding equations.
Work Material Factors
Achieving the ideal surface finish is not possible in most
machining operations because of factors related to the work material and its interaction
with the tool. Work material factors that affect finish include: (1) built-up edge effects—as
the BUE cyclically forms and breaks away, particles are deposited on the newly created
work surface, causing it to have a rough ‘‘sandpaper’’ texture; (2) damage to the surface
caused by the chip curling back into the work; (3) tearing of the work surface during chip
formation when machining ductile materials; (4) cracks in the surface caused by dis-
continuous chip formation when machining brittle materials; and (5) friction between the
tool flank and the newly generated work surface. These work material factors are influenced
by cutting speed and rake angle, such that an increase in cutting speed or rake angle
generally improves surface finish.
The work material factors usually cause the actual surface finish to be worse than
the ideal. An empirical ratio can be developed to convert the ideal roughness value into
an estimate of the actual surface roughness value. This ratio takes into account BUE
formation, tearing, and other factors. The value of the ratio depends on cutting speed as
well as work material. Figure 24.2 shows the ratio of actual to ideal surface roughness as a
function of speed for several classes of work material.
The procedure for predicting the actual surface roughness in a machining operation
is to compute the ideal surface roughness value and then multiply this value by the ratio
of actual to ideal roughness for the appropriate class of work material. This can be
summarized as
Ra ¼ raiRi
ð24:2Þ
where Ra ¼ the estimated value of actual roughness; rai ¼ ratio of actual to ideal surface
finish from Figure 24.2, and Ri ¼ ideal roughness value from Eq. (24.1).
Example 24.2
Surface
Roughness
A turning operation is performed on C1008 steel (a relatively ductile material) using a
tool with a nose radius ¼ 1.2 mm. The cutting conditions arespeed ¼ 100 m/min, and feed ¼
0.25 mm/rev. Compute an estimate of the surface roughness in this operation.
Solution:
The ideal surface roughness can be calculated from Eq. (24.1):
Ri ¼ (0:25)2=(32  1:2) ¼ 0:0016 mm ¼ 1:6 mm
n
590
Chapter 24/Economic and Product Design Considerations in Machining

From the chart in Figure 24.2, the ratio of actual to ideal roughness for ductile metals at
100 m/min is approximately 1.25. Accordingly, the actual surface roughness for the
operation would be (approximately)
Ra ¼ 1:25  1:6 ¼ 2:0 mm
Vibration and Machine Tool Factors
These factors are related to the machine tool,
tooling, and setup in the operation. They include chatter or vibration in the machine tool
or cutting tool; deflections in the fixturing, often resulting in vibration; and backlash in
the feed mechanism, particularly on older machine tools. If these machine tool factors
can be minimized or eliminated, the surface roughness in machining will be determined
primarily by geometric and work material factors described in the preceding.
Chatter or vibration in a machining operation can result in pronounced waviness in
the work surface. When chatter occurs, a distinctive noise occurs that can be recognized
by any experienced machinist. Possible steps to reduce or eliminate vibration include:
(1) adding stiffness and/or damping to the setup, (2) operating at speeds that do not cause
cyclical forces whose frequency approaches the natural frequency of the machine tool
system, (3) reducing feeds and depths to reduce forces in cutting, and (4) changing the
cutter design to reduce forces. Workpiece geometry can sometimes play a role in chatter.
Thin cross sections tend to increase the likelihood of chatter, requiring additional
supports to alleviate the condition.
24.3
SELECTION OF CUTTING CONDITIONS
One of the practical problems in machining is selecting the proper cutting conditions for a
given operation. This is one of the tasks in process planning (Section 40.1). For each
FIGURE 24.2
Ratio of
actual surface roughness
to ideal surface
roughness for several
classes of materials.
(Source: General Electric
Co. data [14].)
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0
100
200
Cutting speed–ft/min
Cutting speed–m/min
300
400
30.5
61
91.5
122
Actual
Theoretical
Ratio =
Free machining alloys
Ductile metals
Cast irons
Section 24.3/Selection of Cutting Conditions
591

operation, decisions must be made about machine tool, cutting tool(s), and cutting
conditions. These decisions must give due consideration to workpart machinability, part
geometry, surface finish, and so forth.
24.3.1 SELECTING FEED AND DEPTH OF CUT
Cutting conditions in a machining operation consist of speed, feed, depth of cut, and
cutting fluid (whether a cutting fluid is to be used and, if so, type of cutting fluid). Tooling
considerations are usually the dominant factor in decisions about cutting fluids (Section
23.4). Depth of cut is often predetermined by workpiece geometry and operation
sequence. Many jobs require a series of roughing operations followed by a final finishing
operation. In the roughing operations, depth is made as large as possible within the
limitations of availablehorsepower, machine tool and setuprigidity, strengthof the cutting
tool, and so on. In the finishing cut, depth is set to achieve the final dimensions for the part.
The problem then reduces to selection of feed and speed. In general, values of these
parameters should be decided in the order: feed first, speed second. Determining the
appropriate feed rate for a given machining operation depends on the following factors:

Tooling. What type of tooling will be used? Harder tool materials (e.g., cemented
carbides, ceramics, etc.) tend to fracture more readily than high-speed steel. These
tools are normally used at lower feed rates. HSS can tolerate higher feeds because of
its greater toughness.

Roughing or finishing. Roughing operations involve high feeds, typically 0.5 to 1.25
mm/rev (0.020 to 0.050 in/rev) for turning; finishing operations involve low feeds,
typically 0.125 to 0.4 mm/rev (0.005 to 0.015 in/rev) for turning.

Constraints on feed in roughing. If the operation is roughing, how high can the feed
rate be set? To maximize metal removal rate, feed should be set as high as possible.
Upper limits on feed are imposed by cutting forces, setup rigidity, and sometimes
horsepower.

Surface finish requirements in finishing. If the operation is finishing, what is the
desired surface finish? Feed is an important factor in surface finish, and computations
like those in Example 24.2 can be used to estimate the feed that will produce a desired
surface finish.
24.3.2 OPTIMIZING CUTTING SPEED
Selection of cutting speed is based on making the best use of the cutting tool, which
normally means choosing a speed that provides a high metal removal rate yet suitably
long tool life. Mathematical formulas have been derived to determine optimal cutting
speed for a machining operation, given that the various time and cost components of the
operation are known. The original derivation of these machining economics equations is
credited to W. Gilbert [10]. The formulas allow the optimal cutting speed to be calculated
for either of two objectives: (1) maximum production rate, or (2) minimum unit cost.
Both objectives seek to achieve a balance between material removal rate and tool life.
The formulas are based on a known Taylor tool life equation for the tool used in the
operation. Accordingly, feed, depth of cut, and work material have already been set. The
derivation will be illustrated for a turning operation. Similar derivations can be devel-
oped for other types of machining operations [3].
Maximizing Production Rate
Formaximumproductionrate,thespeedthatminimizes
machiningtimeperworkpieceisdetermined. Minimizingcuttingtimeperunitisequivalent
592
Chapter 24/Economic and Product Design Considerations in Machining

to maximizing production rate. This objective is important in cases when the production
order must be completed as quickly as possible.
In turning, there are three time elements that contribute to the total production
cycle time for one part:
1. Part handling time Th. This is the time the operator spends loading the part into the
machine tool at the beginning of the production cycle and unloading the part after
machining is completed. Any additional time required to reposition the tool for the
start of the next cycle should also be included here.
2. Machining time Tm. This is the time the tool is actually engaged in machining during
the cycle.
3. Tool change time Tt. At the end of the tool life, the tool must be changed, which takes
time. This time mustbeapportioned over thenumberof partscut during the tool life. Let
np ¼ the number of pieces cut in one tool life (the number of pieces cut with one cutting
edge until the tool is changed); thus, the tool change time per part ¼ Tt/np.
The sum of these three time elements gives the total time per unit product for the
operation cycle
Tc ¼ Th þ Tm þ Tt
np
ð24:3Þ
where Tc ¼ production cycle time per piece, min; and the other terms are defined in the
preceding.
The cycle time Tc is a function of cutting speed. As cutting speed is increased, Tm
decreases and Tt/np increases; Th is unaffected by speed. These relationships are shown in
Figure 24.3.
The cycle time per part is minimized at a certain value of cutting speed. This
optimal speed can be identified by recasting Eq. (24.3) as a function of speed. Machining
time in a straight turning operation is given by previous Eq. (22.5)
Tm ¼ pDL
vf
where Tm ¼ machining time, min; D ¼ workpart diameter, mm (in); L ¼ workpart length,
mm (in); f ¼ feed, mm/rev (in/rev); and v ¼ cutting speed, mm/min for consistency of
units (in/min for consistency of units).
FIGURE 24.3
Time
elements in a machining
cycle plotted as a function
of cutting speed. Total
cycle time per piece is
minimized at a certain
value of cutting speed.
This is the speed for
maximum production rate.
Section 24.3/Selection of Cutting Conditions
593

The number of pieces per tool np is also a function of speed. It can be shown that
np ¼ T
Tm
ð24:4Þ
where T ¼ tool life, min/tool; and Tm ¼ machining time per part, min/pc. Both Tand Tm
are functions of speed; hence, the ratio is a function of speed
np ¼
fC1=n
pDLv1=n1
ð24:5Þ
The effect of this relation is to cause the Tt/np term in Eq. (24.3) to increase as cutting
speed increases. Substituting Eqs. (22.5) and (24.5) into Eq. (24.3) for Tc, we have
Tc ¼ Th þ pDL
fv
þ Tt pDLv1=n1


fC1=n
ð24:6Þ
The cycle time per piece is a minimum at the cutting speed at which the derivative of
Eq. (24.6) is zero
dTc
dv ¼ 0
Solving this equation yields the cutting speed for maximum production rate in the
operation
vmax ¼
C
1
n  1


Tt

n
ð24:7Þ
where vmax is expressed in m/min (ft/min). The corresponding tool life for maximum
production rate is
Tmax ¼
1
n  1


Tt
ð24:8Þ
Minimizing Cost per Unit
For minimum cost per unit, the speed that minimizes
production cost per piece for the operation is determined. To derive the equations for this
case, we begin with the four cost components that determine total cost of producing one
part during a turning operation:
1. Cost of part handling time. This is the cost of the time the operator spends loading
and unloading the part. Let Co ¼ the cost rate (e.g., $/min) for the operator and
machine. Thus the cost of part handling time ¼ CoTh.
2. Cost of machining time. This is the cost of the time the tool is engaged in machining.
Using Co again to represent the cost per minute of the operator and machine tool, the
cutting time cost ¼ CoTm.
3. Cost of tool change time. The cost of tool change time ¼ CoTt/np.
4. Tooling cost. In addition to the tool change time, the tool itself has a cost that must be
added to the total operation cost. This cost is the cost per cutting edge Ct, divided by the
numberofpiecesmachinedwiththatcuttingedgenp.Thus,toolcostperworkpieceisgiven
by Ct/np.
Tooling cost requires an explanation, because it is affected by different tooling
situations. For disposable inserts (e.g., cemented carbide inserts), tool cost is determined as
Ct ¼ Pt
ne
ð24:9Þ
594
Chapter 24/Economic and Product Design Considerations in Machining

where Ct ¼ cost per cutting edge, $/tool life; Pt ¼ price of the insert, $/insert; and ne ¼
number of cutting edges per insert.
This depends on the insert type; for example, triangular inserts that can be used
only one side (positive rake tooling) have three edges/insert; if both sides of the insert can
be used (negative rake tooling), there are six edges/insert; and so forth.
For regrindable tooling (e.g., high-speed steel solid shank tools, brazed carbide
tools), the tool cost includes purchase price plus cost to regrind:
Ct ¼ Pt
ne
þ TgCg
ð24:10Þ
where Ct ¼ cost per tool life, $/tool life; Pt ¼ purchase price of the solid shank tool or brazed
insert,$/tool;ng ¼ number of toollives per tool, whichisthenumber oftimesthetool can be
ground before it can no longer be used (5 to 10 times for roughing tools and 10 to 20 times
for finishing tools); Tg ¼ time to grind or regrind the tool, min/tool life; and Cg ¼ grinder’s
rate, $/min.
The sum of the four cost components gives the total cost per unit product Cc for the
machining cycle:
Cc ¼ CoTh þ CoTm þ CoTt
np
þ Ct
np
ð24:11Þ
Cc is a function of cutting speed, just as Tc is a function of v. The relationships for the
individual terms and total cost as a function of cutting speed are shown in Figure 24.4.
Eq. (24.11) can be rewritten in terms of v to yield:
Cc ¼ CoTh þ CopDL
fv
þ CoTt þ Ct
ð
Þ pDLv1=n1


fC1=n
ð24:12Þ
The cutting speed that obtains minimum cost per piece for the operation can be
determined by taking the derivative of Eq. (24.12) with respect to v, setting it to zero,
and solving for vmin
vmin ¼ C
n
1  n 
Co
CoTt þ Ct

n
ð24:13Þ
FIGURE 24.4
Cost
components in a
machining operation
plotted as a function of
cutting speed. Total cost
per piece is minimized
at a certain value of
cutting speed. This is the
speed for minimum cost
per piece.
Section 24.3/Selection of Cutting Conditions
595

The corresponding tool life is given by
Tmin ¼
1
n  1

 CoTt þ Ct
Co


ð24:14Þ
Example 24.3
Determining
Cutting Speeds in
Machining
Economics
Suppose a turning operation is to be performed with HSS tooling on mild steel, with Taylor
tool life parameters n ¼ 0.125, C ¼ 70 m/min (Table 23.2). Workpart length ¼ 500 mm and
diameter ¼ 100 mm. Feed ¼ 0.25 mm/rev. Handling time per piece ¼ 5.0 min, and tool
change time ¼ 2.0 min. Cost of machine and operator ¼ $30/hr, and tooling cost ¼ $3 per
cutting edge. Find: (a) cutting speed for maximum production rate, and (b) cutting speed
for minimum cost.
Solution:
(a) Cutting speed for maximum production rate is given by Eq. (24.7)
vmax ¼ 70 0:125
0:875  1
2

0:125
¼ 50 m/min
(b) Converting Co ¼ $30/hr to $0.5/min, minimum cost cutting speed is givenby Eq. (24.13)
vmin ¼ 70 0:125
0:875 
0:5
0:5(2) þ 3:00

0:125
¼ 42 m/min
n
Example 24.4
Production Rate
and Cost in
Machining
Economics
Determine the hourly production rate and cost per piece for the two cutting speeds
computed in Example 24.3.
Solution:
(a) For the cutting speed for maximum production, vmax ¼ 50 m/min, let us
calculate machining time per piece and tool life.
Machining time Tm ¼
p(0:5)(0:1)
(0:25)(103)(50)
¼ 12:57 min/pc
Tool life T ¼
70
50

8
¼ 14:76 min/cutting edge
From this we see that the number of pieces per tool np ¼ 14.76=12.57 ¼ 1.17. Use np ¼ 1.
From Eq. (24.3), average production cycle time for the operation is
Tc ¼ 5:0 þ 12:57 þ 2:0=1 ¼ 19:57 min/pc
CorrespondinghourlyproductionrateRp¼60=19.57¼3.1pc/hr.FromEq.(24.11),average
cost per piece for the operation is
Cc ¼ 0:5(5:0) þ 0:5(12:57) þ 0:5(2:0)=1 þ 3:00=1 ¼ $12:79=pc
(b) For the cutting speed for minimum production cost per piece, vmin ¼ 42 m/min, the
machining time per piece and tool life are calculated as follows
Machining time Tm ¼
p(0:5)(0:1)
(0:25)(103)(42)
¼ 14:96 min/pc
Tool life T ¼
70
42

8
¼ 59:54 min/cutting edge
596
Chapter 24/Economic and Product Design Considerations in Machining

The number of pieces per tool np ¼ 59.54=14.96 ¼ 3.98 ! Use np ¼ 3 to avoid failure
during the fourth workpiece. Average production cycle time for the operation is
Tc ¼ 5:0 þ 14:96 þ 2:0=3 ¼ 20:63 min/pc:
Corresponding hourly production rate Rp ¼ 60=20.63 ¼ 2.9 pc/hr. Average cost per piece
for the operation is
Cc ¼ 0:5(5:0) þ 0:5(14:96) þ 0:5(2:0)=3 þ 3:00=3 ¼ $11:32/pc
Note that production rate is greater for vmax and cost per piece is minimum for vmin.
n
Some Comments on Machining Economics
Some practical observations can be
made relative to these optimum cutting speed equations. First, as the values of C and n
increase in the Taylor tool life equation, the optimum cutting speed increases by either
Eq. (24.7) or Eq. (24.13). Cemented carbides and ceramic cutting tools should be used at
speeds that are significantly higher than for high-speed steel tools.
Second, as the tool change time and/or tooling cost (Ttc and Ct) increase, the cutting
speed equations yield lower values. Lower speeds allow the tools to last longer, and it is
wasteful to change tools too frequently if either the cost of tools or the time to change
them is high. An important effect of this tool cost factor is that disposable inserts usually
possess a substantial economic advantage over regrindable tooling. Even though the cost
per insert is significant, the number of edges per insert is large enough and the time
required to change the cutting edge is low enough that disposable tooling generally
achieves higher production rates and lower costs per unit product.
Third, vmax is always greater than vmin. The Ct/np term in Eq. (24.13) has the effect
of pushing the optimum speed value to the left in Figure 24.4, resulting in a lower value
than in Figure 24.3. Rather than taking the risk of cutting at a speed above vmax or below
vmin, some machine shops strive to operate in the interval between vmin and vmax—an
interval sometimes referred to as the ‘‘high-efficiency range.’’
The procedures outlined for selecting feeds and speeds in machining are often
difficult to apply in practice. The best feed rate is difficult to determine because the
relationships between feed and surface finish, force, horsepower, and other constraints
are not readily available for each machine tool. Experience, judgment, and experimen-
tation are required to select the proper feed. The optimum cutting speed is difficult to
calculate because the Taylor equation parameters C and n are not usually known without
prior testing. Testing of this kind in a production environment is expensive.
24.4
PRODUCT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS IN MACHINING
Several important aspects of product design have already been considered in our
discussion of tolerance and surface finish (Section 24.2). In this section, we present
some design guidelines for machining, compiled from sources [1], [5], and [15]:

If possible, parts should be designed that do not need machining. If this is not
possible, then minimize the amount of machining required on the parts. In general, a
lower-cost product is achieved through the use of net shape processes such as
precision casting, closed die forging, or (plastic) molding; or near net shape processes
such as impression die forging. Reasons why machining may be required include
close tolerances; good surface finish; and special geometric features such as threads,
precision holes, cylindrical sections with high degree of roundness, and similar shapes
that cannot be achieved except by machining.
Section 24.4/Product Design Considerations in Machining
597


Tolerances should be specified to satisfy functional requirements, but process
capabilities should also be considered. See Table 24.2 for tolerance capabilities in
machining. Excessively close tolerances add cost but may not add value to the part.
As tolerances become tighter (smaller), product costs generally increase because of
additional processing, fixturing, inspection, sortation, rework, and scrap.

Surface finish should be specified to meet functional and/or aesthetic requirements,
but better finishes generally increase processing costs by requiring additional
operations such as grinding or lapping.

Machined features such as sharp corners, edges, and points should be avoided; they
are often difficult to accomplish by machining. Sharp internal corners require pointed
cutting tools that tend to break during machining. Sharp external corners and edges
tend to create burrs and are dangerous to handle.

Deep holes that must be bored should be avoided. Deep hole boring requires a long
boring bar. Boring bars must be stiff, and this often requires use of high modulus
materials such as cemented carbide, which is expensive.

Machined parts should be designed so they can be produced from standard available
stock. Choose exterior dimensions equal to or close to the standard stock size to
minimize machining; for example, rotational parts with outside diameters that are
equal to standard bar stock diameters.

Parts should be designed to be rigid enough to withstand forces of cutting and
workholder clamping. Machining of long narrow parts, large flat parts, parts with thin
walls, and similar shapes should be avoided if possible.

Undercuts as in Figure 24.5 should be avoided because they often require additional
setups and operations and/or special tooling; they can also lead to stress concentra-
tions in service.

Materials with good machinability should be selected by the designer (Section 24.1).
As a rough guide, the machinability rating of a material correlates with the allowable
cutting speed and production rate that can be used. Thus, parts made of materials
with low machinability cost more to produce. Parts that are hardened by heat
treatment must usually be finish ground or machined with higher cost tools after
hardening to achieve final size and tolerance.

Machined parts should be designed with features that can be produced in a minimum
number of setups—one setup if possible. This usually means geometric features that
can be accessed from one side of the part (see Figure 24.6).
FIGURE 24.5
Two machined
parts with undercuts: cross
sections of (a) bracket and (b) rota-
tional part. Also shown is how the
part design might be improved.
598
Chapter 24/Economic and Product Design Considerations in Machining


Machined parts should be designed with features that can be achieved with standard
cutting tools. This means avoiding unusual hole sizes, threads, and features with
unusual shapes requiring special form tools. In addition, it is helpful to design parts
such that the number of individual cutting tools needed in machining is minimized;
this often allows the part to be completed in one setup on a machine such as a
machining center (Section 22.5).
REFERENCES
[1] Bakerjian, R. (ed.). Tool and Manufacturing Engi-
neers Handbook. 4th ed. Vol VI, Design for Man-
ufacturability. Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
Dearborn, Michigan, 1992.
[2] Black, J, and Kohser, R. DeGarmo’s Materials and
Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed., John Wiley &
Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
[3] Boothroyd, G., and Knight, W. A. Fundamentals of
Metal Machining and Machine Tools. 3rd ed. CRC
Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2006.
[4] Boston, O. W. Metal Processing. 2nd ed. John Wiley
& Sons, New York, 1951.
[5] Bralla, J. G. (ed.). Design for Manufacturability
Handbook. 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1998.
[6] Brierley, R. G., and Siekman, H. J. Machining Prin-
ciples and Cost Control. McGraw-Hill, New York,
1964.
[7] Drozda, T. J., and Wick, C. (eds.). Tool and Manu-
facturing Engineers Handbook. 4th ed. Vol I,
Machining. Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
Dearborn, Michigan, 1983.
[8] Eary, D. F., and Johnson, G. E. Process Engineering:
for Manufacturing. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
New Jersey, 1962.
[9] Ewell, J. R.‘‘Thermal Coefficients—A Proposed
Machinability Index.’’Technical Paper MR67-200.
Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn,
Michigan, 1967.
[10] Gilbert, W. W. ‘‘Economics of Machining.’’ Machin-
ing—Theory and Practice. American Society for
Metals, Metals Park, Ohio, 1950, pp. 465–485.
[11] Groover, M. P.‘‘A Survey on the Machinability of
Metals.’’Technical Paper MR76-269. Society of
Manufacturing
Engineers,
Dearborn,
Michigan,
1976.
[12] Machining Data Handbook. 3rd ed. Vols. I. and II,
Metcut Research Associates, Cincinnati, Ohio,
1980.
[13] Schaffer, G. H.‘‘The Many Faces of Surface
Texture.’’ Special Report 801, American Machinist
& Automated Manufacturing. June 1988 pp. 61–68.
[14] Surface Finish. Machining Development Service,
Publication A-5, General Electric Company, Sche-
nectady, New York (no date).
[15] Trucks, H. E., and Lewis, G. Designing for Econom-
ical Production. 2nd ed. Society of Manufacturing
Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1987.
[16] Van Voast, J. United States Air Force Machinability
Report. Vol. 3. Curtis-Wright Corporation, 1954.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
24.1.
Define machinability.
24.2.
What are the criteria by which machinability is com-
monly assessedinaproductionmachiningoperation?
24.3.
Name some of the important mechanical and phys-
ical properties that affect the machinability of a
work material.
FIGURE 24.6
Two parts
with similar hole
features: (a) holes that
must be machined from
two sides, requiring two
setups, and (b) holes that
can all be machined from
one side.
Review Questions
599

24.4.
Why do costs tend to increase when better surface
finish is required on a machined part?
24.5.
What are the basic factors that affect surface finish
in machining?
24.6.
What are the parameters that have the greatest
influence in determining the ideal surface rough-
ness Ri in a turning operation?
24.7.
Name some of the steps that can be taken to reduce
or eliminate vibrations in machining.
24.8.
What are the factors on which the selection of feed
in a machining operation should be based?
24.9.
The unit cost in a machining operation is the sum of
four cost terms. The first three terms are: (1) part
load/unload cost, (2) cost of time the tool is actually
cutting the work, and (3) cost of the time to change
the tool. What is the fourth term?
24.10.
Which cutting speed is always lower for a given
machining operation, cutting speed for minimum
cost or cutting speed for maximum production
rate? Why?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 14 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
24.1.
Which of the following criteria are generally rec-
ognized to indicate good machinability (four best
answers): (a) ease of chip disposal, (b) high cutting
temperatures,
(c)
high
power
requirements,
(d) high value of Ra, (e) long tool life, (f) low
cutting forces, and (g) zero shear plane angle?
24.2.
Of the various methods for testing machinability,
which one of the following is the most important:
(a) cutting forces, (b) cutting temperature, (c)
horsepower consumed in the operation, (d) surface
roughness, (e) tool life, or (f) tool wear?
24.3.
A machinability rating greater than 1.0 indicates
that the work material is (a) easier to machine than
the base metal or (b) more difficult to machine
than the base metal, where the base metal has a
rating ¼ 1.0?
24.4.
Ingeneral,whichoneofthefollowingmaterialshasthe
highest machinability: (a) aluminum, (b) cast iron,
(c) copper, (d) low carbon steel, (e) stainless steel,
(f) titanium alloys, or (g) unhardened tool steel?
24.5.
Which one of the following operations is generally
capable of the closest tolerances: (a) broaching, (b)
drilling, (c) end milling, (d) planing, or (e) sawing?
24.6.
When cutting a ductile work material, an increase in
cutting speed will generally (a) degrade surface
finish, which means a higher value of Ra or
(b) improve surface finish, which means a lower
value of Ra?
24.7.
Which one of the following operations is generally
capable of the best surface finishes (lowest value of
Ra): (a) broaching, (b) drilling, (c) end milling,
(d) planing, or (e) turning?
24.8.
Which of the following time components in the
average production machining cycle is affected by
cutting speed (two correct answers): (a) part load-
ing and unloading time, and (b) setup time for the
machine tool, (c) time the tool is engaged in cut-
ting, and (d) average tool change time per piece?
24.9.
Which cutting speed is always lower for a given
machining operation: (a) cutting speed for maxi-
mum production rate, or (b) cutting speed for
minimum cost?
24.10.
A high tooling cost and/or tool change time will
tend to (a) decrease, (b) have no effect on, or
(c) increase the cutting speed for minimum cost?
PROBLEMS
Machinability
24.1.
A machinability rating is to be determined for a
new work material using the cutting speed for a 60-
min tool life as the basis of comparison. For the
base material (B1112 steel), test data resulted in
Taylor equation parameter values of n ¼ 0.29 and
C ¼ 500, where speed is in m/min and tool life is
min. For the new material, the parameter values
were n ¼ 0.21 and C ¼ 400. These results were
obtained using cemented carbide tooling. (a) Com-
pute a machinability rating for the new material.
600
Chapter 24/Economic and Product Design Considerations in Machining

(b) Suppose the machinability criterion were the
cutting speed for a 10-min tool life rather than the
present criterion. Compute the machinability rat-
ing for this case. (c) What do the results of the two
calculations show about the difficulties in machin-
ability measurement?
24.2.
A small company uses a band saw to cut through 2-
inch metal bar stock. A material supplier is pushing
a new material that is supposed to be more ma-
chinable while providing similar mechanical prop-
erties. The company does not have access to
sophisticated measuring devices, but they do
have a stopwatch. They have acquired a sample
of the new material and cut both the present
material and the new material with the same
band saw settings. In the process, they measured
how long it took to cut through each material. To
cut through the present material, it took an average
of 2 minutes, 20 seconds. To cut through the new
material, it took an average of 2 minutes, 6 seconds.
(a) Develop a machinability rating system based on
time to cut through the 2.0-inch bar stock, using the
present material as the base material. (b) Using
your rating system, determine the machinability
rating for the new material.
24.3.
A machinability rating is to be determined for a
new work material. For the base material (B1112),
test data resulted in a Taylor equation with param-
eters n ¼ 0.29 and C ¼ 490. For the new material,
the Taylor parameters were n ¼ 0.23 and C ¼ 430.
Units in both cases are: speed in m/min and tool life
in
min.
These
results
were
obtained
using
cemented carbide tooling. (a) Compute a machin-
ability rating for the new material using cutting
speed for a 30-min tool life as the basis of compari-
son. (b) If the machinability criterion were tool life
for a cutting speed of 150 m/min, what is the
machinability rating for the new material?
24.4.
Tool life turning tests have been conducted on
B1112 steel with high-speed steel tooling, and
the resulting parameters of the Taylor equation
are: n ¼ 0.13 and C ¼ 225. B1112 is the base metal
and has a machinability rating ¼ 1.00 (100%).
During the tests, feed ¼ 0.010 in/rev, and depth
of cut ¼ 0.100 in. Based on this information, and
machinability data given in Table 24.1, determine
the cutting speed you would recommend for the
following work materials, if the tool life desired
in operation is 30 min (the same feed and depth of
cut are to be used): (a) C1008 low carbon steel with
150 Brinell hardness, (b) 4130 alloy steel with 190
Brinell hardness, and (c) B1113 steel with 170
Brinell hardness.
Surface Roughness
24.5.
In a turning operation on cast iron, the nose radius on
the tool ¼ 1.5 mm, feed ¼ 0.22 mm/rev, and speed ¼
1.8 m/s. Compute an estimate of the surface rough-
ness for this cut.
24.6.
A turning operation uses a 2/64 in nose radius
cutting tool on a free machining steel with a feed
rate ¼ 0.010 in/rev and a cutting speed ¼ 300 ft/min.
Determine the surface roughness for this cut.
24.7.
A single-point HSS tool with a 3/64 in nose radius is
used in a shaping operation on a ductile steel work-
part. The cutting speed is 120 ft/min. The feed is
0.014 in/pass and depth of cut is 0.135 in. Determine
the surface roughness for this operation.
24.8.
A part to be turned in an engine lathe must have a
surface finish of 1.6 mm. The part is made of a free-
machining aluminum alloy. Cutting speed ¼ 150 m/
min, and depth of cut ¼ 4.0 mm. The nose radius on
the tool ¼ 0.75 mm. Determine the feed that will
achieve the specified surface finish.
24.9.
Solve previous Problem 24.8 except that the part is
made of cast iron instead of aluminum and the
cutting speed is reduced to 100 m/min.
24.10.
A part to be turned in an engine lathe must have a
surface finish of 1.5 mm. The part is made of alumi-
num. The cutting speed is 1.5 m/s and the depth is 3.0
mm. The nose radius on the tool ¼ 1.0 mm. Deter-
mine the feed that will achieve the specified surface
finish.
24.11.
The surface finish specification in a turning job is
0.8 mm. The work material is cast iron. Cutting
speed ¼ 75 m/min, feed ¼ 0.3 mm/rev, and depth of
cut ¼ 4.0 mm. The nose radius of the cutting tool
must be selected. Determine the minimum nose
radius that will obtain the specified finish in this
operation.
24.12.
A face milling operation is to be performed on a
cast iron part to finish the surface to 36 m-in. The
cutter uses four inserts and its diameter is 3.0 in.
The cutter rotates at 475 rev/min. To obtain the
best possible finish, a type of carbide insert with 4/
64 in nose radius is to be used. Determine the
required feed rate (in/min) that will achieve the
36 m-in finish.
24.13.
A face milling operation is not yielding the re-
quired surface finish on the work. The cutter is a
four-tooth insert type face milling cutter. The ma-
chine shop foreman thinks the problem is that the
work material is too ductile for the job, but this
property tests well within the ductility range for the
material
specified
by
the
designer.
Without
Problems
601

knowing any more about the job, what changes in
(a) cutting conditions and (b) tooling would you
suggest to improve the surface finish?
24.14.
A turning operation is to be performed on C1010
steel, which is a ductile grade. It is desired to
achieve a surface finish of 64 m-in, while at the
same time maximizing the metal removal rate. It
has been decided that the speed should be in the
range 200 ft/min to 400 ft/min, and that the depth of
cut will be 0.080 in. The tool nose radius ¼ 3/64 in.
Determine the speed and feed combination that
meets these criteria.
Machining Economics
24.15.
A high-speed steel tool is used to turn a steel work-
part that is 300 mm long and 80 mm in diameter. The
parameters in the Taylor equation are: n ¼ 0.13 and
C ¼ 75 (m/min) for a feed of 0.4 mm/rev. The
operator and machine tool rate ¼ $30/hr, and the
tooling cost per cutting edge ¼ $4. It takes 2.0 min to
load and unload the workpart and 3.50 min to
change tools. Determine (a) cutting speed for maxi-
mum production rate, (b) tool life in min of cutting,
and (c) cycle time and cost per unit of product.
24.16.
Solve Problem 24.15 except that in part (a) deter-
mine cutting speed for minimum cost.
24.17.
A cemented carbide tool is used to turn a part with a
length of 14.0 in and diameter ¼ 4.0 in. The parame-
tersintheTaylorequationare:n¼ 0.25andC¼ 1000
(ft/min). The rate for the operator and machine tool
¼ $45/hr, and the tooling cost per cutting edge ¼
$2.50. It takes 2.5 min to load and unload the work-
part and 1.50 min to change tools. The feed ¼ 0.015
in/rev. Determine (a) cutting speed for maximum
production rate, (b) tool life in min of cutting, and
(c) cycle time and cost per unit of product.
24.18.
Solve Problem 24.17 except that in part (a) deter-
mine cutting speed for minimum cost.
24.19.
Compare disposable and regrindable tooling. The
same grade of cemented carbide tooling is availa-
ble in two forms for turning operations in a certain
machine shop: disposable inserts and brazed in-
serts. The parameters in the Taylor equation for
this grade are: n ¼ 0.25 and C ¼ 300 (m/min) under
the cutting conditions considered here. For the
disposable inserts, price of each insert ¼ $6, there
are four cutting edges per insert, and the tool
change time ¼ 1.0 min (this is an average of the
time to index the insert and the time to replace it
when all edges have been used). For the brazed
insert, the price of the tool ¼ $30 and it is estimated
that it can be used a total of 15 times before it must
be scrapped. The tool change time for the regrind-
able tooling ¼ 3.0 min. The standard time to grind
or regrind the cutting edge is 5.0 min, and the
grinder is paid at a rate ¼ $20/hr. Machine time
on the lathe costs $24/hr. The workpart to be used
in the comparison is 375 mm long and 62.5 mm in
diameter, and it takes 2.0 min to load and unload
the work. The feed ¼ 0.30 mm/rev. For the two
tooling cases, compare (a) cutting speeds for mini-
mum cost, (b) tool lives, (c) cycle time and cost
per unit of production. Which tool would you
recommend?
24.20.
Solve Problem 24.19 except that in part (a) deter-
mine the cutting speeds for maximum production
rate.
24.21.
Three tool materials are to be compared for the
same finish turning operation on a batch of 150
steel parts: high-speed steel, cemented carbide, and
ceramic. For the high-speed steel tool, the Taylor
equation parameters are: n ¼ 0.130 and C ¼ 80 (m/
min). The price of the HSS tool is $20 and it is
estimated that it can be ground and reground 15
times at a cost of $2 per grind. Tool change time is 3
min. Both carbide and ceramic tools are in insert
form and can be held in the same mechanical
toolholder. The Taylor equation parameters for
the cemented carbide are: n ¼ 0.30 and C ¼ 650
(m/min); and for the ceramic: n ¼ 0.6 and C ¼ 3,500
(m/min). The cost per insert for the carbide is $8
and for the ceramic is $10. There are six cutting
edges per insert in both cases. Tool change time is
1.0 min for both tools. The time to change a part is
2.5 min. The feed is 0.30 mm/rev, and depth of cut is
3.5 mm. The cost of machine time is $40/hr. The
part is 73.0 mm in diameter and 250 mm in length.
Setup time for the batch is 2.0 hr. For the three
tooling cases, compare: (a) cutting speeds for mini-
mum cost, (b) tool lives, (c) cycle time, (d) cost per
production unit, (e) total time to complete the
batch and production rate. (f) What is the propor-
tion of time spent actually cutting metal for each
tooling?
Use of a spreadsheet calculator is
recommended.
24.22.
Solve Problem 24.21 except that in parts (a) and (b)
determine the cutting speeds and tool lives for
maximum production rate. Use of a spreadsheet
calculator is recommended.
24.23.
A vertical boring mill is used to bore the inside
diameter of a large batch of tube-shaped parts. The
diameter ¼ 28.0 in and the length of the bore ¼ 14.0
in. Current cutting conditions are: speed ¼ 200 ft/min,
feed ¼ 0.015 in/rev, and depth ¼ 0.125 in. The
parameters of the Taylor equation for the cutting
tool in the operation are: n ¼ 0.23 and C ¼ 850 (ft/
602
Chapter 24/Economic and Product Design Considerations in Machining

min). Tool change time ¼ 3.0 min, and tooling cost ¼
$3.50 per cutting edge. The time required to load and
unload the parts ¼ 12.0 min, and the cost of machine
time on this boring mill ¼ $42/hr. Management has
decreedthattheproductionratemustbeincreasedby
25%. Is that possible? Assume that feed must remain
unchanged to achieve the required surface finish.
Whatisthecurrentproductionrateandthemaximum
possible production rate for this job?
24.24.
An NC lathe cuts two passes across a cylindrical
workpiece under automatic cycle. The operator
loads and unloads the machine. The starting diam-
eter of the work is 3.00 in and its length ¼ 10 in. The
work cycle consists of the following steps (with
element times given in parentheses where applica-
ble): (1) Operator loads part into machine, starts
cycle (1.00 min); (2) NC lathe positions tool for first
pass (0.10 min); (3) NC lathe turns first pass (time
depends on cutting speed); (4) NC lathe repositions
tool for second pass (0.4 min); (5) NC lathe turns
second pass (time depends on cutting speed); and
(6) Operator unloads part and places in tote pan
(1.00 min). In addition, the cutting tool must be
periodically changed. This tool change time takes
1.00 min. The feed rate ¼ 0.007 in/rev and the depth
of cut for each pass ¼ 0.100 in. The cost of the
operator and machine ¼ $39/hr and the tool cost ¼
$2/cutting edge. The applicable Taylor tool life
equation has parameters: n ¼ 0.26 and C ¼ 900
(ft/min). Determine (a) the cutting speed for mini-
mum cost per piece, (b) the average time required
to complete one production cycle, (c) cost of the
production cycle. (d) If the setup time for this job is
3.0 hours and the batch size ¼ 300 parts, how long
will it take to complete the batch?
24.25.
As indicated in Section 23.4, the effect of a cutting
fluid is to increase the value of C in the Taylor tool
life equation. In a certain machining situation using
HSS tooling, the C value is increased from C ¼ 200
to C ¼ 225 owing to the use of the cutting fluid. The
n value is the same with or without fluid at n ¼
0.125. Cutting speed used in the operation is v ¼
125 ft/min. Feed ¼ 0.010 in/rev and depth ¼ 0.100
in. The effect of the cutting fluid can be to either
increase cutting speed (at the same tool life) or
increase tool life (at the same cutting speed). (a)
What is the cutting speed that would result from
using the cutting fluid if tool life remains the same
as with no fluid? (b) What is the tool life that would
result if the cutting speed remained at 125 ft/min?
(c) Economically, which effect is better, given that
tooling cost ¼ $2 per cutting edge, tool change time
¼ 2.5 min, and operator and machine rate ¼ $30/
hr? Justify you answer with calculations, using cost
per cubic in of metal machined as the criterion of
comparison. Ignore effects of workpart handling
time.
24.26.
In a turning operation on ductile steel, it is desired
to obtain an actual surface roughness of 63 m-in
with a 2/64 in nose radius tool. The ideal roughness
is given by Eq. (24.1) and an adjustment will have
to be made using Figure 24.2 to convert the 63 m-in
actual roughness to an ideal roughness, taking into
account the material and cutting speed. Disposable
inserts are used at a cost of $1.75 per cutting edge
(each insert costs $7 and there are four edges per
insert). Average time to change each insert ¼ 1.0
min. The workpiece length ¼ 30.0 in and its diame-
ter ¼ 3.5 in. The machine and operator’s rate ¼ $39
per hour including applicable overheads. The Tay-
lor tool life equation for this tool and work combi-
nation is given by: vT0.23f0.55 ¼ 40.75, where T ¼
tool life, min; v ¼ cutting speed, ft/min; and f ¼
feed, in/rev. Solve for (a) the feed in in/rev that will
achieve the desired actual finish, (b) cutting speed
for minimum cost per piece at the feed determined
in (a). Hint: To solve (a) and (b) requires an
iterative
computational
procedure.
Use
of
a
spreadsheet calculator is recommended for this
iterative procedure.
24.27.
Solve Problem 24.26 only using maximum produc-
tion rate as the objective rather than minimum
piece cost. Use of a spreadsheet calculator is
recommended.
24.28.
Verify that the derivative of Eq. (24.6) results in
Eq. (24.7).
24.29.
Verify that the derivative of Eq. (24.12) results in
Eq. (24.13).
Problems
603

25
GRINDING AND
OTHER ABRASIVE
PROCESSES
Chapter Contents
25.1
Grinding
25.1.1
The Grinding Wheel
25.1.2
Analysis of the Grinding Process
25.1.3
Application Considerations in
Grinding
25.1.4
Grinding Operations and Grinding
Machines
25.2
Related Abrasive Processes
25.2.1
Honing
25.2.2
Lapping
25.2.3
Superfinishing
25.2.4
Polishing and Buffing
Abrasive machining involves material removal by the action
of hard, abrasive particles that are usually in the form of a
bonded wheel. Grinding is the most important abrasive
process. In terms of number of machine tools in use, grinding
is the most common of all metalworking operations [11].
Othertraditionalabrasiveprocessesinclude honing,lapping,
superfinishing, polishing, and buffing. The abrasive machin-
ing processes are generally used as finishing operations,
although some abrasive processes are capable of high mate-
rial removal rates rivaling those of conventional machining
operations.
The use of abrasives to shape parts is probably the
oldest material removal process (Historical Note 25.1).
Abrasive processes are important commercially and tech-
nologically for the following reasons:

They can be used on all types of materials ranging from
soft metals to hardened steels and hard nonmetallic
materials such as ceramics and silicon.

Some of these processes can produce extremely fine
surface finishes, to 0.025 mm (1 m-in).

For certain abrasive processes, dimensions can be held
to extremely close tolerances.
Abrasive water jet cutting and ultrasonicmachining are
also abrasive processes, because material removal is accom-
plished by means of abrasives. However, they are commonly
classified as nontraditional processes and are covered in the
following chapter.
25.1
GRINDING
Grinding is a material removal process accomplished by
abrasive particles that are contained in a bonded grinding
wheel rotating at very high surface speeds. The grinding
wheel is usually disk-shaped, and is precisely balanced for
604

high rotational speeds. The reader can see grinding in action in our video clip titled Basics
of Grinding.
VIDEO CLIP
Basics of Grinding. This clip contains four segments: (1) CNC grinding, (2) grinding
wheel ring testing, (3) wheel dressing, and (4) grinding fluids.
Grinding can be likened to the milling process. Cutting occurs on either the
periphery or the face of the grinding wheel, similar to peripheral and face milling.
Peripheral grinding is much more common than face grinding. The rotating grinding
wheel consists of many cutting teeth (the abrasive particles), and the work is fed relative
to the wheel to accomplish material removal. Despite these similarities, there are
significant differences between grinding and milling: (1) the abrasive grains in the wheel
are much smaller and more numerous than the teeth on a milling cutter; (2) cutting speeds
in grinding are much higher than in milling; (3) the abrasive grits in a grinding wheel are
randomly oriented and possess on average a very high negative rake angle; and (4) a
grinding wheel is self-sharpening—as the wheel wears, the abrasive particles become dull
and either fracture to create fresh cutting edges or are pulled out of the surface of the
wheel to expose new grains.
Historical Note 25.1
Development of abrasive processes
Use of abrasives predates any of the other machining
operations. There is archaeological evidence that ancient
people used abrasive stones such as sandstone found in
nature to sharpen tools and weapons and scrape away
unwanted portions of softer materials to make domestic
implements.
Grinding became an important technical trade in
ancient Egypt. The large stones used to build the Egyptian
pyramids were cut to size by a rudimentary grinding
process. The grinding of metals dates to around 2000 BCE
and was a highly valued skill at that time.
Early abrasive materials were those found in nature,
such as sandstone, which consists primarily of quartz
(SiO2); emery, consisting of corundum (Al2O3) plus equal
or lesser amounts of the iron minerals hematite (Fe2O3)
and magnetite (Fe3O4); and diamond. The ﬁrst grinding
wheels were likely cut out of sandstone and were no
doubt rotated under manual power. However, grinding
wheels made in this way were not consistent in quality.
In the early 1800s, the ﬁrst solid bonded grinding
wheels were produced in India. They were used to grind
gems, an important trade in India at the time. The
abrasives were corundum, emery, or diamond. The
bonding material was natural gum-resin shellac. The
technology was exported to Europe and the United
States, and other bonding materials were subsequently
introduced: rubber bond in the mid-1800s, vitriﬁed bond
around 1870, shellac bond around 1880, and resinoid
bond in the 1920s with the development of the ﬁrst
thermosetting plastics (phenol-formaldehyde).
In the late 1800s, synthetic abrasives were ﬁrst
produced: silicon carbide (SiC) and aluminum oxide
(Al2O3). By manufacturing the abrasives, chemistry and
size of the individual abrasive grains could be controlled
more closely, resulting in higher quality grinding wheels.
The ﬁrst real grinding machines were made by the
U.S. ﬁrm Brown & Sharpe in the 1860s for grinding parts
for sewing machines, an important industry during the
period. Grinding machines also contributed to the
development of the bicycle industry in the 1890s and
later the U.S. automobile industry. The grinding process
was used to size and ﬁnish heat-treated (hardened) parts
in these products.
The superabrasives diamond and cubic boron nitride
are products of the twentieth century. Synthetic
diamonds were ﬁrst produced by the General Electric
Company in 1955. These abrasives were used to grind
cemented carbide cutting tools, and today this remains
one of the important applications of diamond abrasives.
Cubic boron nitride (cBN), second only to diamond in
hardness, was ﬁrst synthesized in 1957 by GE using a
similar process to that for making artiﬁcial diamonds.
Cubic BN has become an important abrasive for grinding
hardened steels.
Section 25.1/Grinding
605

25.1.1 THE GRINDING WHEEL
A grinding wheel consists of abrasive particles and bonding material. The bonding material
holds the particles in place and establishes the shape and structure of the wheel. These two
ingredients and the way they are fabricated determine the five basic parameters of a
grinding wheel: (1) abrasive material, (2) grain size, (3) bonding material, (4) wheel grade,
and (5) wheel structure. To achieve thedesired performance in a given application,each of
the parameters must be carefully selected.
Abrasive Material
Different abrasive materials are appropriate for grinding different
work materials. General properties of an abrasive material used in grinding wheels include
high hardness, wear resistance, toughness, and friability. Hardness, wear resistance, and
toughness are desirable properties of any cutting-tool material. Friability refers to the
capacity of the abrasive material to fracture when the cutting edge of the grain becomes
dull, thereby exposing a new sharp edge.
The development of grinding abrasives is described in our historical note. Today, the
abrasive materials of greatest commercial importance are aluminum oxide, silicon carbide,
cubic boron nitride, and diamond. They are briefly described in Table 25.1, together with
their relative hardness values.
Grain Size
The grain size of the abrasive particle is important in determining surface
finish and material removal rate. Small grit sizes produce better finishes, whereas larger
grainsizes permitlargermaterialremovalrates. Thus, achoicemustbemade betweenthese
two objectives when selecting abrasive grain size. The selection of grit size also depends to
some extent on the hardness of the work material. Harder work materials require smaller
grain sizes to cut effectively, whereas softer materials require larger grit sizes.
The grit size is measured using a screen mesh procedure, as explained in Section 16.1.
In this procedure, smaller grit sizes have larger numbers and vice versa. Grain sizes used in
grinding wheels typically range between 8 and 250. Grit size 8 is very coarse and size 250 is
very fine. Even finer grit sizes are used for lapping and superfinishing (Section 25.2).
Bonding Materials
The bonding material holds the abrasive grains and establishes the
shape and structural integrity of the grinding wheel. Desirable properties of the bond
TABLE 25.1
Abrasives of greatest importance in grinding.
Abrasive
Description
Knoop Hardness
Aluminum oxide (Al2O3)
Most common abrasive material (Section 7.3.1), used to grind steel
and other ferrous, high-strength alloys.
2100
Silicon carbide (SiC)
Harder than Al2O3, but not as tough (Section 7.2). Applications
include ductile metals such as aluminum, brass, and stainless steel,
as well as brittle materials such as some cast irons and certain
ceramics. Cannot be used effectively for grinding steel because of
the strong chemical affinity between the carbon in SiC and the iron
in steel.
2500
Cubic boron nitride (cBN)
When used as an abrasive, cBN (Section 7.3.3) is produced under
the trade name Borazon by the General Electric Company. cBN
grinding wheels are used for hard materials such as hardened tool
steels and aerospace alloys.
5000
Diamond
Diamond abrasives occur naturally and are also made synthetically
(Section 7.5.1). Diamond wheels are generally used in grinding
applications on hard, abrasive materials such as ceramics, cemented
carbides, and glass.
7000
606
Chapter 25/Grinding and Other Abrasive Processes

material include strength, toughness, hardness, and temperature resistance. The bonding
material must be able to withstand the centrifugal forces and high temperatures experi-
enced by the grinding wheel, resist shattering in shock loading of the wheel, and hold the
abrasive grains rigidly in place to accomplish the cutting action while allowing those grains
that are worn to be dislodged so that new grains can be exposed. Bonding materials
commonly used in grinding wheels are identified and briefly described in Table 25.2.
Wheel Structure and Wheel Grade
Wheel structure refers to the relative spacing of
the abrasive grains in the wheel. In addition to the abrasive grains and bond material,
grinding wheels contain air gaps or pores, as illustrated in Figure 25.1. The volumetric
proportions of grains, bond material, and pores can be expressed as
Pg þ Pb þ Pp ¼ 1:0
ð25:1Þ
where Pg ¼ proportion of abrasive grains in the total wheel volume, Pb ¼ proportion of
bond material, and Pp ¼ proportion of pores (air gaps).
Wheel structureis measured on a scale that rangesbetween ‘‘open’’ and ‘‘dense.’’ An
open structure is one in which Pp is relatively large, and Pg is relatively small. That is, there
aremore poresand fewer grains perunit volume in a wheel of open structure. By contrast, a
TABLE 25.2
Bonding materials used in grinding wheels.
Bonding Material
Description
Vitrified bond
Consists chiefly of baked clay and ceramic materials. Most grinding
wheels in common use are vitrified bonded wheels. They are strong
and rigid, resistant to elevated temperatures, and relatively
unaffected by water and oil that might be used in grinding fluids.
Silicate bond
Consists of sodium silicate (Na2SO3). Applications are generally
limited to situations in which heat generation must be minimized,
such as grinding cutting tools.
Rubber bond
Most flexible of the bonding materials and used as a bonding
material in cutoff wheels.
Resinoid bond
Consists of various thermosetting resin materials, such as phenol-
formaldehyde. It has very high strength and is used for rough
grinding and cutoff operations.
Shellac bond
Relatively strong but not rigid; often used in applications requiring a
good finish.
Metallic bond
Metal, usually bronze, is the common bond material for diamond and
cBN grinding wheels. Particulate processing (Chapters 16 and 17) is
used to bond the metal matrix and abrasive grains to the outside
periphery of the wheel, thus conserving the costly abrasive materials.
FIGURE 25.1
Typical
structure of a grinding
wheel.
Section 25.1/Grinding
607

dense structure is one in which Pp is relatively small, and Pg is larger. Generally, open
structures are recommended in situations in which clearance for chips must be provided.
Dense structures are used to obtain better surface finish and dimensional control.
Wheel grade indicates the grinding wheel’s bond strength in retaining the abrasive
grits during cutting. This is largely dependent on the amount of bonding material present
in the wheel structure—Pb in Eq. (25.1). Grade is measured on a scale that ranges
between soft and hard. ‘‘Soft’’ wheels lose grains readily, whereas ‘‘hard’’ wheels retain
their abrasive grains. Soft wheels are generally used for applications requiring low
material removal rates and grinding of hard work materials. Hard wheels are typically
used to achieve high stock removal rates and for grinding of relative soft work materials.
Grinding Wheel Speciﬁcation
The preceding parameters can be concisely designated
in a standard grinding wheel marking system defined by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) [3]. This marking system uses numbers and letters to specify
abrasive type, grit size, grade, structure, and bond material. Table 25.3 presents an
abbreviated version of the ANSI Standard, indicating how the numbers and letters are
interpreted. The standard also provides for additional identifications that might be used
by the grinding wheel manufacturers. The ANSI Standard for diamond and cubic boron
nitride grinding wheels is slightly different than for conventional wheels. The marking
system for these newer grinding wheels is presented in Table 25.4.
TABLE 25.3
Marking system for conventional grinding wheels as deﬁned by ANSI
Standard B74.13-1977 [3].
30
A
46
H
6
V
XX
Manufacturer’s private marking for wheel (optional).
Bond type: B  Resinoid, BF  resinoid reinforced, E  Shellac, 
R  Rubber, RF  rubber reinforced, S  Silicate, V  Vitrified.
Structure: Scale ranges from 1 to 15: 1  very dense structure, 
15  very open structure.
Grade: Scale ranges from A to Z: A soft, M  medium, Z  hard.
Grain size: Coarse  grit sizes 8 to 24, Medium  grit sizes 30 to 60,  
Fine  grit sizes 70 to 180, Very fine  grit sizes 220 to 600.
Abrasive type: A  aluminum oxide, C  silicon carbide. 
Prefix: Manufacturer’s symbol for abrasive (optional).
TABLE 25.4
Marking system for diamond and cubic boron nitride grinding wheels as
deﬁned by ANSI Standard B74.13-1977 [3].
XX
D
150
P
YY
M
ZZ
3
Depth of abrasive  working depth of abrasive
     section in mm (shown) or inches, as in
     Figure 25.2(c). 
Bond modification  manufacturer’s notation of special
     bond type or modification. 
Bond type: B  Resin, M  metal, V  Vitrified. 
Concentration: Manufacturer’s designation. May be number or symbol.
Grade: Scale ranges from A to Z: A  soft, M  medium, Z  hard.
Grain size: Coarse  grit sizes 8 to 24, Medium  grit sizes 30 to 60,  
Fine  Grit sizes 70 to 180, Very fine  grit sizes 220 to 600.
Abrasive type: D  diamond, B  cubic boron nitride. 
Prefix: Manufacturer’s symbol for abrasive (optional).
608
Chapter 25/Grinding and Other Abrasive Processes

Grinding wheels come in a variety of shapes and sizes, as shown in Figure 25.2.
Configurations (a), (b), and (c) areperipheral grinding wheels, in which material removal is
accomplished by the outside circumference of the wheel. A typical abrasive cutoff wheel is
shown in (d), which also involves peripheral cutting. Wheels (e), (f), and (g) are face
grinding wheels, in which the flat face of the wheel removes material from the work surface.
25.1.2 ANALYSIS OF THE GRINDING PROCESS
The cutting conditions in grinding are characterized by very high speeds and very small
cut size, compared to milling and other traditional machining operations. Using surface
grinding to illustrate, Figure 25.3(a) shows the principal features of the process. The
peripheral speed of the grinding wheel is determined by the rotational speed of the wheel:
v ¼ pDN
ð25:2Þ
FIGURE 25.2
Some of the standard grinding wheel shapes: (a) straight, (b) recessed two sides, (c) metal wheel
frame with abrasive bonded to outside circumference, (d) abrasive cutoff wheel, (e) cylinder wheel, (f) straight cup
wheel, and (g) ﬂaring cup wheel.
Section 25.1/Grinding
609

where v ¼ surface speed of wheel, m/min (ft/min); N ¼ spindle speed, rev/min; and D ¼
wheel diameter, m (ft).
Depth of cut d, called the infeed, is the penetration of the wheel below the original
work surface. As the operation proceeds, the grinding wheel is fed laterally across the
surface on each pass by the work. This is called the crossfeed, and it determines the width
of the grinding path w in Figure 25.3(a). This width, multiplied by depth d determines the
cross-sectional area of the cut. In most grinding operations, the work moves past the
wheel at a certain speed vw, so that the material removal rate is
RMR ¼ vwwd
ð25:3Þ
Each grain in the grinding wheel cuts an individual chip whose longitudinal shape
before cutting is shown in Figure 25.3(b) and whose assumed cross-sectional shape is
triangular, as in Figure 25.3(c). At the exit point of the grit from the work, where the chip
cross section is largest, this triangle has height t and width w0.
In a grinding operation, we are interested in how the cutting conditions combine
with the grinding wheel parameters to affect (1) surface finish, (2) forces and energy,
(3) temperature of the work surface, and (4) wheel wear.
Surface Finish
Most commercial grinding is performed to achieve a surface finish that is
superiortothatwhichcanbeaccomplishedwithconventionalmachining.Thesurfacefinish
of the workpart is affected by the size of the individual chips formed during grinding. One
obvious factor in determining chip size is grit size—smaller grit sizes yield better finishes.
Let us examine the dimensions of an individual chip. From the geometry of the
grinding process in Figure 25.3, it can be shown that the average length of a chip is given by
lc ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Dd
p
ð25:4Þ
where lc is the length of the chip, mm (in); D ¼ wheel diameter, mm (in); and d ¼ depth of
cut, or infeed, mm (in).
FIGURE 25.3
(a) The geometry of surface grinding, showing the cutting conditions; (b) assumed longitudinal
shape and (c) cross section of a single chip.
610
Chapter 25/Grinding and Other Abrasive Processes

This assumes the chip is formed by a grit that acts throughout the entire sweep arc
shown in the diagram.
Figure 25.3(c) shows the assumed cross section of a chip in grinding. The cross-
sectional shape is triangular with width w0 being greater than the thickness t by a factor
called the grain aspect ratio rg, defined by
rg ¼ w0
t
ð25:5Þ
Typical values of grain aspect ratio are between 10 and 20.
The number of active grits (cutting teeth) per square inch on the outside periphery
of the grinding wheel is denoted by C. In general, smaller grain sizes give larger C values.
C is also related to the wheel structure. A denser structure means more grits per area.
Based on the value of C, the number of chips formed per time nc is given by
nc ¼ vwC
ð25:6Þ
where v ¼ wheel speed, mm/min (in/min); w ¼ crossfeed, mm (in); and C ¼ grits per area
on the grinding wheel surface, grits/mm2 (grits/in2).
It stands to reason that surface finish will be improved by increasing the number of
chips formed per unit time on the work surface for a given width w. Therefore, according
to Eq. (25.6), increasing v and/or C will improve finish.
Forces and Energy
If the force required to drive the work past the grinding wheel were
known, the specific energy in grinding could be determined as
U ¼ Fcv
vwwd
ð25:7Þ
where U ¼ specific energy, J/mm3 (in-lb/in3); Fc ¼ cutting force, which is the force to drive
the work past the wheel, N (lb); v ¼ wheel speed, m/min (ft/min); vw ¼ work speed, mm/
min (in/min); w ¼ width of cut, mm (in); and d ¼ depth of cut, mm (in).
In grinding, the specific energy is much greater than in conventional machining.
There are several reasons for this. First is the size effect in machining. As discussed, the
chip thickness in grinding is much smaller than for other machining operations, such as
milling. According to the size effect (Section 21.4), the small chip sizes in grinding cause
the energy required to remove each unit volume of material to be significantly higher
than in conventional machining—roughly 10 times higher.
Second, the individual grains in a grinding wheel possess extremely negative rake
angles. The averagerake angle isabout –30, with values onsomeindividual grains believed
to be as low as –60. These very low rake angles result in low values of shear plane angle and
high shear strains, both of which mean higher energy levels in grinding.
Third, specific energy is higher in grinding because not all of the individual grits are
engaged in actual cutting. Because of the random positions and orientations of the grains in
thewheel,somegrainsdonotprojectfarenoughintotheworksurfacetoaccomplishcutting.
Three types of grain actions can be recognized, as illustrated in Figure 25.4: (a) cutting, in
which the grit projects far enough into the work surface to form a chip and remove
material; (b) plowing, in which the grit projects into the work, but not far enough to cause
cutting; instead, the work surface is deformed and energy is consumed without any
material removal; and (c) rubbing, in which the grit contacts the surface during its sweep,
but only rubbing friction occurs, thus consuming energy without removing any material.
The size effect, negative rake angles, and ineffective grainactions combine to make the
grinding processinefficient in termsof energyconsumption per volume of material removed.
Using the specific energy relationship in Eq. (25.7), and assuming that the cutting
force acting on a single grain in the grinding wheel is proportional to rgt, it can be
Section 25.1/Grinding
611

shown [10] that
F
0
c ¼ K1
rgvw
vC

0:5
d
D

0:25
ð25:8Þ
where F0c is the cutting force acting on an individual grain, K1 is a constant of proportion-
ality that depends on the strength of the material being cut and the sharpness of the
individual grain, and the other terms have been previously defined.
The practical significance of this relationship is that F0c affects whether an individual
grain will be pulled out of the grinding wheel, an important factor in the wheel’s capacity to
‘‘resharpen’’ itself. Referring back to our discussion on wheel grade, a hard wheel can be
made to appear softer by increasing the cutting force acting on an individual grain through
appropriate adjustments in vw, v, and d, according to Eq. (25.8).
Temperatures at the Work Surface
Because of the size effect, high negative rake
angles, and plowing and rubbing of the abrasive grits against the work surface, the grinding
process is characterized by high temperatures. Unlike conventional machining operations
in which most of the heat energy generated in the process is carried off in the chip, much of
the energy in grinding remains in the ground surface [11], resulting in high work surface
temperatures. The high surface temperatures have several possible damaging effects,
primarily surface burns and cracks. The burn marks show themselves as discolorations
onthesurfacecaused byoxidation.Grinding burns are often a signof metallurgical damage
immediately beneath the surface. The surface cracks are perpendicular to the wheel speed
direction. They indicate an extreme case of thermal damage to the work surface.
A second harmful thermal effect is softening of the work surface. Many grinding
operations are carried out on parts that have been heat-treated to obtain high hardness.
High grinding temperatures can cause the surface to lose some of its hardness. Third,
thermal effects in grinding can cause residual stresses in the work surface, possibly
decreasing the fatigue strength of the part.
It is important to understand what factors influence work surface temperatures in
grinding. Experimentally, it has been observed that surface temperature is dependent on
energy per surface area ground (closely related to specific energy U). Because this varies
inversely with chip thickness, it can be shown that surface temperature Ts is related to
grinding parameters as follows [10]:
Ts ¼ K2d0:75 rgCv
vw

0:5
D0:25
ð25:9Þ
where K2 ¼ a constant of proportionality.
The practical implication of this relationship is that surface damage owing to high
work temperatures can be mitigated by decreasing depth of cut d, wheel speed v, and
FIGURE 25.4
Three types of grain action in grinding: (a) cutting, (b) plowing, and (c) rubbing.
612
Chapter 25/Grinding and Other Abrasive Processes

number of active grits per square inch on the grinding wheel C, or by increasing work
speed vw. In addition, dull grinding wheels and wheels that have a hard grade and dense
structure tend to cause thermal problems. Of course, using a cutting fluid can also reduce
grinding temperatures.
Wheel Wear
Grinding wheels wear, just as conventional cutting tools wear. Three
mechanisms are recognized as the principal causes of wear in grinding wheels: (1) grain
fracture, (2) attritious wear, and (3) bond fracture. Grain fracture occurs when a portion
of the grain breaks off, but the rest of the grain remains bonded in the wheel. The edges of
the fractured area become new cutting edges on the grinding wheel. The tendency of the
grain to fracture is called friability. High friability means that the grains fracture more
readily because of the cutting forces on the grains Fc0.
Attritious wear involves dulling of the individual grains, resulting in flat spots and
rounded edges. Attritious wear is analogous to tool wear in a conventional cutting tool. It
is caused by similar physical mechanisms including friction and diffusion, as well as
chemical reactions between the abrasive material and the work material in the presence
of very high temperatures.
Bond fractureoccurs whentheindividual grains arepulledoutof the bonding material.
The tendency toward this mechanism depends on wheel grade, among other factors. Bond
fracture usually occurs because the grain has become dull because of attritious wear, and the
resulting cutting forceis excessive. Sharp grainscut moreefficientlywithlower cutting forces;
hence, they remain attached in the bond structure.
The three mechanisms combine to cause the grinding wheel to wear as depicted in
Figure 25.5. Three wear regions can be identified. In the first region, the grains are initially
sharp, and wear is accelerated because of grain fracture. This corresponds to the ‘‘break-in’’
period in conventional tool wear. In the second region, the wear rate is fairly constant,
resulting in a linear relationship between wheel wear and volume of metal removed. This
region is characterized by attritious wear, with some grain and bond fracture. In the third
region of the wheel wear curve, the grains become dull, and the amount of plowing and
rubbing increases relative to cutting. In addition, some of the chips become clogged in the
pores of the wheel. This is called wheel loading, and it impairs the cutting action and leads to
higher heat and work surface temperatures. As a consequence, grinding efficiency decreases,
and the volume of wheel removed increases relative to the volume of metal removed.
The grinding ratio is a term used to indicate the slope of the wheel wear curve.
Specifically
GR ¼ Vw
Vg
ð25:10Þ
where GR ¼ the grinding ratio, Vw ¼ the volume of work material removed, and Vg ¼ the
corresponding volume of the grinding wheel that is worn in the process.
FIGURE 25.5
Typical wear
curve of a grinding wheel. Wear
is conveniently plotted as a
function of volume of material
removed, rather than as a
function of time. (Based on
[16].)
Section 25.1/Grinding
613

The grinding ratio has the most significance in the linear wear region of Figure 25.5.
Typical values of GR range between 95 and 125 [5], which is about five orders of
magnitude less than the analogous ratio in conventional machining. Grinding ratio is
generally increased by increasing wheel speed v. The reason for this is that the size of the
chip formed by each grit is smaller with higher speeds, so the amount of grain fracture is
reduced. Because higher wheel speeds also improve surface finish, there is a general
advantage in operating at high grinding speeds. However, when speeds become too high,
attritious wear and surface temperatures increase. As a result, the grinding ratio is reduced
and the surface finish is impaired. This effect was originally reported by Krabacher [14], as
in Figure 25.6.
When the wheel is in the third region of the wear curve, it must be resharpened by a
procedure called dressing, which consists of (1) breaking off the dulled grits on the outside
periphery of the grinding wheel in order to expose fresh sharp grains and (2) removing
chips that have become clogged in the wheel. It is accomplished by a rotating disk, an
abrasive stick, or another grinding wheel operating at high speed, held against the wheel
beingdressed as it rotates. Although dressing sharpensthe wheel, it doesnotguarantee the
shape of the wheel. Truing is an alternative procedure that not only sharpens the wheel,
but also restores its cylindrical shape and ensures that it is straight across its outside
perimeter. The procedure uses a diamond-pointed tool (other types of truing tools are also
used) that is fed slowly and precisely across the wheel as it rotates. A very light depth is
taken (0.025 mm or less) against the wheel.
25.1.3 APPLICATION CONSIDERATIONS IN GRINDING
In this section, we attempt to bring together the previous discussion of wheel parameters
and theoretical analysis of grinding and consider their practical application. We also
consider grinding fluids, which are commonly used in grinding operations.
Application Guidelines
There are many variables in grinding that affect the performance
and success of the operation. The guidelines listed in Table 25.5 are helpful in sorting out the
many complexities and selecting the proper wheel parameters and grinding conditions.
Grinding Fluids
The proper application of cutting fluids has been found to be effective
in reducing the thermal effects and high work surface temperatures described previously.
When used in grinding operations, cutting fluids are called grinding fluids. The functions
FIGURE 25.6
Grinding
ratio and surface ﬁnish as
a function of wheel
speed. (Based on data in
Krabacher [14].)
614
Chapter 25/Grinding and Other Abrasive Processes

performed by grinding fluids are similar to those performed by cutting fluids (Section
23.4). Reducing friction and removing heat from the process are the two common
functions. In addition, washing away chips and reducing temperature of the work surface
are very important in grinding.
Types of grinding fluids by chemistry include grinding oils and emulsified oils. The
grinding oils are derived from petroleum and other sources. These products are attractive
because friction is such an important factor in grinding. However, they pose hazards in
terms of fire and operator health, and their cost is high relative to emulsified oils. In
addition, their capacity to carry away heat is less than fluids based on water. Accordingly,
mixtures of oil in water are most commonly recommended as grinding fluids. These are
usually mixed with higher concentrations than emulsified oils used as conventional cutting
fluids. In this way, the friction reduction mechanism is emphasized.
25.1.4 GRINDING OPERATIONS AND GRINDING MACHINES
Grinding is traditionally used to finish parts whose geometries have already been created
by other operations. Accordingly, grinding machines have been developed to grind plain
flat surfaces, external and internal cylinders, and contour shapes such as threads. The
contour shapes are often created by special formed wheels that have the opposite of the
desired contour to be imparted to the work. Grinding is also used in tool rooms to form
the geometries on cutting tools. In addition to these traditional uses, applications of
grinding are expanding to include more high speed, high material removal operations.
Our discussion of operations and machines in this section includes the following types:
TABLE 25.5
Application guidelines for grinding.
Application Problem or Objective
Recommendation or Guideline
Grinding steel and most cast irons
Select aluminum oxide as the abrasive.
Grinding most nonferrous metals
Select silicon carbide as the abrasive.
Grinding hardened tool steels and
certain aerospace alloys
Select cubic boron nitride as the abrasive.
Grinding hard abrasive materials
such as ceramics, cemented carbides,
and glass
Select diamond as the abrasive.
Grinding soft metals
Select a large grit size and harder grade
wheel.
Grinding hard metals
Select a small grit size and softer grade
wheel.
Optimize surface finish
Select a small grit size and dense wheel
structure. Use high wheel speeds (v), lower
work speeds (vw).
Maximize material removal rate
Select a large grit size, more open wheel
structure, and vitrified bond.
To minimize heat damage, cracking, and
warping of the work surface
Maintain sharpness of the wheel. Dress the
wheel frequently. Use lighter depths of cut
(d), lower wheel speeds (v), and faster work
speeds (vw).
If the grinding wheel glazes and burns
Select wheel with a soft grade and open
structure.
If the grinding wheel breaks down too
rapidly
Select wheel with a hard grade and dense
structure.
Compiled from [8], [11], and [16].
Section 25.1/Grinding
615

(1) surface grinding, (2) cylindrical grinding, (3) centerless grinding, (4) creep feed
grinding, and (5) other grinding operations.
Surface Grinding
Surface grinding is normally used to grind plain flat surfaces. It is
performed using either the periphery of the grinding wheel or the flat face of the wheel.
Because the work is normally held in a horizontal orientation, peripheral grinding is
performed by rotating the wheel about a horizontal axis, and face grinding is performed by
rotating the wheel about a vertical axis. In either case, the relative motion of the workpart is
achieved by reciprocating the work past the wheel or by rotating it. These possible
combinations of wheel orientations and workpart motions provide the four types of surface
grinding machines illustrated in Figure 25.7.
Of the four types, the horizontal spindle machine with reciprocating worktable is the
most common, shown in Figure 25.8. Grinding is accomplished by reciprocating the work
longitudinally under the wheel at a very small depth (infeed) and by feeding the wheel
transversely intotheworka certaindistancebetweenstrokes. Inthese operations, thewidth
of the wheel is usually less than that of the workpiece.
In addition to its conventional application, a grinding machine with horizontal
spindle and reciprocating table can be used to form special contoured surfaces by employ-
ing a formed grinding wheel. Instead of feeding the wheel transversely across the work as it
reciprocates, the wheel is plunge-fed vertically into the work. The shape of the formed
wheel is therefore imparted to the work surface.
Grinding machines with vertical spindles and reciprocating tables are set up so that
the wheel diameter is greater than the work width. Accordingly, these operations can be
performed without using a transverse feed motion. Instead, grinding is accomplished by
reciprocating the work past the wheel, and feeding the wheel vertically into the work to the
desireddimension. Thisconfigurationiscapable of achievinga very flat surfaceon the work.
FIGURE 25.7
Four
types of surface grinding:
(a) horizontal spindle with
reciprocating worktable,
(b) horizontal spindle
with rotating worktable,
(c) vertical spindle with
reciprocating worktable,
and (d) vertical spindle
with rotating worktable.
616
Chapter 25/Grinding and Other Abrasive Processes

Of the two types of rotary table grinding in Figure 25.7(b) and (d), the vertical
spindle machines are more common. Owing to the relatively large surface contact area
between wheel and workpart, vertical spindle-rotary table grinding machines are capable
of high metal removal rates when equipped with appropriate grinding wheels.
Cylindrical Grinding
As its name suggests, cylindrical grinding is used for rotational
parts. These grinding operations divide into two basic types (Figure 25.9): (a) external
cylindrical grinding and (b) internal cylindrical grinding.
External cylindrical grinding (also called center-type grinding to distinguish it from
centerless grinding) is performed much like a turning operation. The grinding machines
used for these operations closely resemble a lathe in which the tool post has been replaced
by a high-speed motor to rotate the grinding wheel. The cylindrical workpiece is rotated
between centersto provide a surface speedof 18 to 30 m/min (60to 100 ft/min) [16], and the
grinding wheel, rotating at 1200 to 2000 m/min (4000 to 6500 ft/min), is engaged to perform
thecut. There are two typesof feed motion possible, traverse feed and plunge-cut, shown in
Figure 25.10. In traverse feed, the grinding wheel is fed in a direction parallel to the axis of
rotation of the workpart. The infeed is set within a range typically from 0.0075 to 0.075 mm
(0.0003 to 0.003 in). A longitudinal reciprocating motion is sometimes given to either the
FIGURE 25.8
Surface
grinder with horizontal
spindle and reciprocating
worktable.
FIGURE 25.9
Two
types of cylindrical
grinding: (a) external, and
(b) internal.
Section 25.1/Grinding
617

workor the wheelto improve surfacefinish.Inplunge-cut, thegrinding wheelisfed radially
into the work. Formed grinding wheels use this type of feed motion.
External cylindrical grinding is used to finish parts that have been machined to
approximate size and heat treated to desired hardness. The parts include axles, crank-
shafts, spindles, bearings and bushings, and rolls for rolling mills. The grinding operation
produces the final size and required surface finish on these hardened parts.
Internal cylindrical grinding operates somewhat like a boring operation. The work-
piece is usually held in a chuck and rotated to provide surface speeds of 20 to 60 m/min (75 to
200 ft/min) [16]. Wheel surface speeds similar to external cylindrical grinding are used. The
wheel is fed ineitheroftwo ways: traverse feed, Figure 25.9(b), orplunge feed. Obviously, the
wheel diameter in internal cylindrical grinding must be smaller than the original bore hole.
This often means that the wheel diameter is quite small, necessitating very high rotational
speeds in order to achieve the desired surface speed. Internal cylindrical grinding is used to
finish the hardened inside surfaces of bearing races and bushing surfaces.
Centerless Grinding
Centerless grinding is an alternative process for grinding external
and internal cylindrical surfaces. As its name suggests, the workpiece is not held between
centers. This results in a reduction in work handling time; hence, centerless grinding is often
used for high-production work. The setup for external centerless grinding (Figure 25.11),
consists of two wheels: the grinding wheel and a regulating wheel. The workparts, which
may bemanyindividualshort piecesorlongrods(e.g.,3 to4mlong), aresupportedbya rest
blade and fed through between the two wheels. The grinding wheel does the cutting,
FIGURE 25.10
Two
types of feed motion in
external cylindrical
grinding:(a)traversefeed,
and (b) plunge-cut.
FIGURE 25.11
External
centerless grinding.
618
Chapter 25/Grinding and Other Abrasive Processes

rotating at surface speeds of 1200 to 1800 m/min (4000to 6000 ft/min).The regulating wheel
rotates at much lower speeds and is inclined at a slight angle I to control throughfeed of the
work. The following equation can be used to predict throughfeed rate, based on inclination
angle and other parameters of the process [16]:
f r ¼ pDrNr sin I
ð25:11Þ
where fr ¼ throughfeed rate, mm/min (in/min); Dr ¼ diameter of the regulating wheel, mm
(in); Nr ¼ rotational speed of the regulating wheel, rev/min; and I ¼ inclination angle of the
regulating wheel.
The typical setup in internal centerless grinding is shown in Figure 25.12. In place of
the rest blade, two support rolls are used to maintain the position of the work. The
regulating wheel is tilted at a small inclination angle to control the feed of the work past
the grinding wheel. Because of the need to support the grinding wheel, throughfeed of the
work as in external centerless grinding is not possible. Therefore this grinding operation
cannot achieve the same high-production rates as in the external centerless process. Its
advantage is that it is capable of providing very close concentricity between internal and
external diameters on a tubular part such as a roller bearing race.
Creep Feed Grinding
A relatively new form of grinding is creep feed grinding,
developed around 1958. Creep feed grinding is performed at very high depths of cut
and very low feed rates; hence, the name creep feed. The comparison with conventional
surface grinding is illustrated in Figure 25.13.
FIGURE 25.12
Internal
centerless grinding.
FIGURE 25.13
Comparison of (a) conventional surface grinding and (b) creep feed grinding.
Section 25.1/Grinding
619

Depths of cut in creep feed grinding are 1000 to 10,000 times greater than in
conventional surface grinding, and the feed rates are reduced by about the same pro-
portion. However, material removal rate and productivity are increased in creep feed
grindingbecausethewheeliscontinuouslycutting. Thiscontrastswithconventionalsurface
grinding in which thereciprocating motion of the work resultsin significant lost time during
each stroke.
Creep feed grinding can be applied in both surface grinding and external cylindrical
grinding. Surface grinding applications include grinding of slots and profiles. The process
seems especially suited to those cases in which depth-to-width ratios are relatively large.
The cylindrical applications include threads, formed gear shapes, and other cylindrical
components. The term deep grinding is used in Europe to describe these external
cylindrical creep feed grinding applications.
The introduction of grinding machines designed with special features for creep feed
grinding has spurred interest in the process. The features include [11] high static and dynamic
stability, highly accurate slides, two to three times the spindlepower of conventional grinding
machines, consistent table speeds forlowfeeds, high-pressuregrindingfluid deliverysystems,
and dressing systems capable of dressing the grinding wheels during the process. Typical
advantages of creep feed grinding include: (1) high material removal rates, (2) improved
accuracy for formed surfaces, and (3) reduced temperatures at the work surface.
Other Grinding Operations
Several other grinding operations should be briefly men-
tioned to complete our review. These include tool grinding, jig grinding, disk grinding, snag
grinding, and abrasive belt grinding.
Cutting tools are made of hardened tool steel and other hard materials. Tool
grinders are special grinding machines of various designs to sharpen and recondition
cutting tools. They have devices for positioning and orienting the tools to grind the
desired surfaces at specified angles and radii. Some tool grinders are general purpose
while others cut the unique geometries of specific tool types. General-purpose tool and
cutter grinders use special attachments and adjustments to accommodate a variety of tool
geometries. Single-purpose tool grinders include gear cutter sharpeners, milling cutter
grinders of various types, broach sharpeners, and drill point grinders.
Jig grinders are grinding machines traditionally used to grind holes in hardened
steel parts to high accuracies. The original applications included pressworking dies and
tools. Although these applications are still important, jig grinders are used today in a
broader range of applications in which high accuracy and good finish are required on
hardened components. Numerical control is available on modern jig grinding machines to
achieve automated operation.
Diskgrindersaregrindingmachineswithlargeabrasivedisksmountedoneitherendof
a horizontal spindle as in Figure 25.14. The work is held (usually manually) against the flat
FIGURE 25.14
Typical
conﬁguration of a disk
grinder.
620
Chapter 25/Grinding and Other Abrasive Processes

surfaceof the wheel toaccomplish the grinding operation. Some diskgrinding machines have
double opposing spindles. By setting the disks at the desired separation, the workpart can be
fed automatically between the two disks and ground simultaneously on opposite sides.
Advantages of the disk grinder are good flatness and parallelism at high production rates.
The snag grinder is similar in configuration to a disk grinder. The difference is that
the grinding is done on the outside periphery of the wheel rather than on the side flat
surface. The grinding wheels are therefore different in design than those in disk grinding.
Snag grinding is generally a manual operation, used for rough grinding operations such as
removing the flash from castings and forgings, and smoothing weld joints.
Abrasive belt grinding uses abrasive particles bonded to a flexible (cloth) belt. A
typical setup is illustrated in Figure 25.15. Support of the belt is required when the work is
pressed against it, and this support is provided by a roll or platen located behind the belt. A
flat platen is used for work that will have a flat surface. A soft platen can be used if it is
desirable for the abrasive belt to conformto thegeneral contour of the part during grinding.
Belt speed depends on the material being ground; a range of 750 to 1700 m/min (2500 to
5500 ft/min) is typical [16]. Owing to improvements in abrasives and bonding materials,
abrasive belt grinding is being used increasingly for heavy stock removal rates, rather than
light grinding, whichwas its traditional application. The term belt sandingrefers to the light
grinding applications in which the workpart is pressed against the belt to remove burrs and
high spots, and produce an improved finish quickly by hand.
25.2
RELATED ABRASIVE PROCESSES
Otherabrasiveprocessesincludehoning,lapping,superfinishing,polishing,andbuffing.They
are used exclusively as finishing operations. The initial part shape is created by some other
process; then the part is finished by one of these operations to achieve superior surface finish.
The usual part geometries and typical surface roughness values for these processes are
indicated in Table 25.6. For comparison, we also present corresponding data for grinding.
Another class of finishing operations, called mass finishing (Section 28.1.2), is used
to finish parts in bulk rather than individually. These mass finishing methods are also used
for cleaning and deburring.
25.2.1 HONING
Honing is an abrasive process performed by a set of bonded abrasive sticks. A common
application is to finish the bores of internal combustion engines. Other applications
include bearings, hydraulic cylinders, and gun barrels. Surface finishes of around 0.12 mm
FIGURE 25.15
Abrasive belt grinding.
Section 25.2/Related Abrasive Processes
621

(5 m-in) or slightly better are typically achieved in these applications. In addition, honing
produces a characteristic cross-hatched surface that tends to retain lubrication during
operation of the component, thus contributing to its function and service life.
The honing process for an internal cylindrical surface is illustrated in Figure 25.16.
The honing tool consists of a set of bonded abrasive sticks. Four sticks are used on the tool
shown in the figure, but the number depends on hole size. Two to four sticks would be
used for small holes (e.g., gun barrels), and a dozen or more would be used for larger
diameter holes. The motion of the honing tool is a combination of rotation and linear
reciprocation, regulated in such a way that a given point on the abrasive stick does not
trace the same path repeatedly. This rather complex motion accounts for the cross-
hatched pattern on the bore surface. Honing speeds are 15 to 150 m/min (50 to 500 ft/min)
[4]. During the process, the sticks are pressed outward against the hole surface to produce
the desired abrasive cutting action. Hone pressures of 1 to 3 MPa (150 to 450 lb/in2) are
typical. The honing tool is supported in the hole by two universal joints, thus causing the
tool to follow the previously defined hole axis. Honing enlarges and finishes the hole but
cannot change its location.
Grit sizes in honing range between 30 and 600. The same trade-off between better
finish and faster material removal rates exists in honing as in grinding. The amount of
material removed from the work surface during a honing operation may be as much as
FIGURE 25.16
The
honing process: (a) the
honing tool used for in-
ternal bore surface, and
(b) cross-hatched surface
pattern created by the
action of the honing tool.
TABLE 25.6
Usual part geometries for honing, lapping, superﬁnishing,
polishing, and bufﬁng.
Surface Roughness
Process
Usual Part Geometry
mm
m-in
Grinding, medium grit size
Flat, external cylinders, round holes
0.4–1.6
16–63
Grinding, fine grit size
Flat, external cylinders, round holes
0.2–0.4
8–16
Honing
Round hole (e.g., engine bore)
0.1–0.8
4–32
Lapping
Flat or slightly spherical (e.g., lens)
0.025–0.4
1–16
Superfinishing
Flat surface, external cylinder
0.013–0.2
0.5–8
Polishing
Miscellaneous shapes
0.025–0.8
1–32
Buffing
Miscellaneous shapes
0.013–0.4
0.5–16
622
Chapter 25/Grinding and Other Abrasive Processes

0.5 mm (0.020 in), but is usually much less than this. A cutting fluid must be used in honing
to cool and lubricate the tool and to help remove the chips.
25.2.2 LAPPING
Lapping is an abrasive process used to produce surface finishes of extreme accuracy and
smoothness. It is used in the production of optical lenses, metallic bearing surfaces, gages,
and other parts requiring very good finishes. Metal parts that are subject to fatigue loading
or surfaces that must be used to establish a seal with a mating part are often lapped.
Instead of a bonded abrasive tool, lapping uses a fluid suspension of very small
abrasive particles between the workpiece and the lapping tool. The process is illustrated
in Figure 25.17 as applied in lens-making. The fluid with abrasives is referred to as the
lapping compound and has the general appearance of a chalky paste. The fluids used to
make the compound include oils and kerosene. Common abrasives are aluminum oxide
and silicon carbide with typical grit sizes between 300 and 600. The lapping tool is called a
lap, and it has the reverse of the desired shape of the workpart. To accomplish the
process, the lap is pressed against the work and moved back and forth over the surface in
a figure-eight or other motion pattern, subjecting all portions of the surface to the same
action. Lapping is sometimes performed by hand, but lapping machines accomplish the
process with greater consistency and efficiency.
Materials used to make the lap range from steel and cast iron to copper and lead.
Wood laps have also been made. Because a lapping compound is used rather than a bonded
abrasive tool, the mechanism by which this process works is somewhat different than
grinding and honing. It is hypothesized that two alternative cutting mechanisms are at work
in lapping [4]. The first mechanism is that the abrasive particles roll and slide between the
lap and the work, with very small cuts occurring in both surfaces. The second mechanism is
that theabrasives become embedded in the lap surface and the cutting action is very similar
to grinding. Itis likely that lapping is a combination of these two mechanisms, depending on
the relative hardnesses of the work and the lap. For laps made of soft materials, the
embedded grit mechanism is emphasized; and for hard laps, the rolling and sliding
mechanism dominates.
25.2.3 SUPERFINISHING
Superfinishing is an abrasive process similar to honing. Both processes use a bonded abrasive
stick moved with a reciprocating motion and pressed against the surface to be finished.
Superfinishing differs from honing in the following respects [4]: (1) the strokes are shorter,
5 mm (3/16 in); (2) higher frequencies are used, up to 1500 strokes per minute; (3) lower
pressures are applied between the tool and the surface, below 0.28 MPa (40 lb/in2);
(4) workpiece speeds are lower, 15 m/min (50 ft/min) or less; and (5) grit sizes are generally
smaller. The relative motion between the abrasive stick and the work surface is varied so
FIGURE 25.17
The lapping process in
lens-making.
Section 25.2/Related Abrasive Processes
623

that individual grains do not retrace the same path. A cutting fluid is used to cool the work
surface and wash away chips. Inaddition, thefluid tends to separate theabrasive stick from
the work surface after a certain level of smoothness is achieved, thus preventing further
cutting action. The result of these operating conditions is mirror-like finishes with surface
roughness values around 0.025 mm (1 m-in). Superfinishing can be used to finish flat and
external cylindrical surfaces. The process is illustrated in Figure 25.18 for the latter
geometry.
25.2.4 POLISHING AND BUFFING
Polishing is used to remove scratches and burrs and to smooth rough surfaces by means of
abrasive grains attached to a polishing wheel rotating at high speed—around 2300 m/min
(7500 ft/min). The wheels are made of canvas, leather, felt, and even paper; thus, the wheels
are somewhat flexible. The abrasive grains are glued to the outside periphery of the wheel.
After the abrasives have been worn down and used up, the wheel is replenished with new
grits. Grit sizes of 20 to 80 are used for rough polishing, 90 to 120 for finish polishing, and
above 120 for fine finishing. Polishing operations are often accomplished manually.
Buffing is similar to polishing in appearance, but its function is different. Buffing is
used to provide attractive surfaces with high luster. Buffing wheels are made of materials
similar to those used for polishing wheels—leather, felt, cotton, etc.—but buffing wheels
are generally softer. The abrasives are very fine and are contained in a buffing compound
that is pressed into the outside surface of the wheel while it rotates. This contrasts with
polishing in which the abrasive grits are glued to the wheel surface. As in polishing, the
abrasive particles must be periodically replenished. Buffing is usually done manually,
although machines have been designed to perform the process automatically. Speeds are
generally 2400 to 5200 m/min (8000 to 17,000 ft/min).
REFERENCES
[1] Aronson, R. B.‘‘More Than a Pretty Finish,’’ Man-
ufacturing Engineering, February 2005, pp. 57–69.
[2] Andrew, C., Howes, T. D., and Pearce, T. R. A. Creep
Feed
Grinding.
Holt,
Rinehart
and
Winston,
London, 1985.
[3] ANSI Standard B74. 13-1977, ‘‘Markings for Iden-
tifying Grinding Wheels and Other Bonded Abra-
sives.’’ American National Standards Institute, New
York, 1977.
[4] Armarego, E. J. A., and Brown, R. H. The Machin-
ing of Metals. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey, 1969.
[5] Bacher, W. R., and Merchant, M. E.‘‘On the Basic
Mechanics of the Grinding Process,’’ Transactions
ASME, Series B, Vol. 80 No. 1, 1958, pp. 141.
[6] Black, J, and Kohser, R. DeGarmo’s Materials and
Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed. John Wiley &
Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
FIGURE 25.18
Superﬁnishing on an
external cylindrical
surface.
624
Chapter 25/Grinding and Other Abrasive Processes

[7] Black, P. H. Theory of Metal Cutting. McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1961.
[8] Boothroyd, G., and Knight, W. A. Fundamentals of
Metal Machining and Machine Tools. 3rd ed. CRC
Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2006.
[9] Boston, O. W. Metal Processing. 2nd ed. John Wiley
& Sons, New York, 1951.
[10] Cook, N. H. Manufacturing Analysis. Addison-
Wesley, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts, 1966.
[11] Drozda, T. J., and Wick, C. (eds.). Tool and Manu-
facturing Engineers Handbook. 4th ed. Vol. I,
Machining, Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
Dearborn, Michigan, 1983.
[12] Eary, D. F., and Johnson, G. E. Process Engineering:
for Manufacturing. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
New Jersey, 1962.
[13] Kaiser, R.‘‘The Facts about Grinding.’’ Manufactur-
ing Engineering. Vol. 125, No. 3, September 2000,
pp. 78–85.
[14] Krabacher, E. J.‘‘Factors Influencing the Perform-
ance of Grinding Wheels.’’ Transactions ASME,
Series B, Vol. 81, No. 3, 1959, pp. 187–199.
[15] Krar, S. F. Grinding Technology. 2nd ed. Delmar
Publishers, Florence, Kentucky, 1995.
[16] Machining Data Handbook. 3rd ed. Vol. I. and II.
Metcut Research Associates, Cincinnati, Ohio, 1980.
[17] Malkin, S. Grinding Technology: Theory and Appli-
cations of Machining with Abrasives. 2nd ed. Indus-
trial Press, New York, 2008.
[18] Phillips, D.‘‘Creeping Up.’’ Cutting Tool Engineer-
ing. Vol. 52, No. 3, March 2000, pp. 32–43.
[19] Rowe, W. Principles of Modern Grinding Technol-
ogy, William Andrew, Elsevier Applied Science Pub-
lishers, New York, 2009.
[20] Salmon, S.‘‘Creep-Feed Grinding Is Surprisingly
Versatile.’’ Manufacturing Engineering, November
2004, pp. 59–64.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
25.1.
Why are abrasive processes technologically and
commercially important?
25.2.
What are the five principal parameters of a grind-
ing wheel?
25.3.
What are some of the principal abrasive materials
used in grinding wheels?
25.4.
Name some of the principal bonding materials used
in grinding wheels.
25.5.
What is wheel structure?
25.6.
What is wheel grade?
25.7.
Why are specific energy values so much higher in
grinding than in traditional machining processes
such as milling?
25.8.
Grinding creates high temperatures. How is tem-
perature harmful in grinding?
25.9.
What are the three mechanisms of grinding wheel
wear?
25.10.
What is dressing, in reference to grinding wheels?
25.11.
What is truing, in reference to grinding wheels?
25.12.
What abrasive material would one select for grind-
ing a cemented carbide cutting tool?
25.13.
What are the functions of a grinding fluid?
25.14.
What is centerless grinding?
25.15.
How does creep feed grinding differ from conven-
tional grinding?
25.16.
How does abrasive belt grinding differ from a
conventional surface grinding operation?
25.17.
Name some of the abrasive operations available to
achieve very good surface finishes.
25.18.
(Video) Describe a wheel ring test.
25.19.
(Video) List two purposes of dressing a grinding
wheel.
25.20.
(Video) What is the purpose of using a coolant in
the grinding process?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 16 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
25.1.
Which one of the following conventional machin-
ing processes is closest to grinding: (a) drilling,
(b) milling, (c) shaping, or (d) turning?
25.2.
Of the following abrasive materials, which one has
the highest hardness: (a) aluminum oxide, (b) cubic
boron nitride, or (c) silicon carbide?
25.3.
Smaller grain size in a grinding wheel tends to
(a) degrade surface finish, (b) have no effect on
surface finish, or (c) improve surface finish?
25.4.
Which of the following would tend to give higher
material removal rates: (a) larger grain size, or
(b) smaller grain size?
Multiple Choice Quiz
625

25.5.
Which of the following will improve surface finish
in grinding (three best answers): (a) denser wheel
structure, (b) higher wheel speed, (c) higher work-
speeds, (d) larger infeed, (e) lower infeed, (f) lower
wheel speed, (g) lower workspeed, and (h) more
open wheel structure?
25.6.
Which one of the following abrasive materials is
most appropriate for grinding steel and cast iron:
(a) aluminum oxide, (b) cubic boron nitride,
(c) diamond, or (d) silicon carbide?
25.7.
Which one of the following abrasive materials is
most appropriate for grinding hardened tool steel:
(a) aluminum oxide, (b) cubic boron nitride,
(c) diamond, or (d) silicon carbide?
25.8.
Which one of the following abrasive materials is
most appropriate for grinding nonferrous metals:
(a) aluminum oxide, (b) cubic boron nitride,
(c) diamond, or (d) silicon carbide?
25.9.
Which of the following will help to reduce the
incidence of heat damage to the work surface in
grinding (four correct answers): (a) frequent dress-
ing or truing of the wheel, (b) higher infeeds,
(c) higher wheel speeds, (d) higher workspeeds,
(e) lower infeeds, (f) lower wheel speeds, and
(g) lower workspeeds?
25.10.
Which one of the following abrasive processes
achieves the best surface finish: (a) centerless grind-
ing, (b) honing, (c) lapping, or (d) superfinishing?
25.11.
The term deep grinding refers to which one of the
following: (a) alternative name for any creep feed
grinding operation, (b) external cylindrical creep
feed grinding, (c) grinding operation performed at
the bottom of a hole, (d) surface grinding that uses
a large crossfeed, or (e) surface grinding that uses a
large infeed?
PROBLEMS
25.1.
In a surface grinding operation wheel diameter ¼
150 mm and infeed ¼ 0.07 mm. Wheel speed ¼ 1450
m/min, workspeed ¼ 0.25 m/s, and crossfeed ¼ 5 mm.
Thenumberofactivegritsperareaofwheelsurface¼
0.75 grits/mm2. Determine (a) average length per
chip, (b) metal removal rate, and (c) number of
chips formed per unit time for the portion of the
operation when the wheel is engaged in the work.
25.2.
The following conditions and settings are used in a
certain surface grinding operation: wheel diameter ¼
6.0 in, infeed ¼ 0.003 in, wheel speed ¼ 4750 ft/min,
workspeed ¼ 50 ft/min, and crossfeed ¼ 0.20 in. The
number of active grits per square inch of wheel
surface ¼ 500. Determine (a) average length per
chip, (b) metal removal rate, and (c) number of
chips formed per unit time for the portion of the
operation when the wheel is engaged in the work.
25.3.
An internal cylindrical grinding operation is used
to finish an internal bore from an initial diameter of
250 mm to a final diameter of 252.5 mm. The bore is
125 mm long. A grinding wheel with an initial
diameter of 150 mm and a width of 20 mm is
used. After the operation, the diameter of the
grinding wheel has been reduced to 149.75 mm.
Determine the grinding ratio in this operation.
25.4.
In a surface grinding operation performed on hard-
ened plain carbon steel, the grinding wheel has a
diameter ¼ 200 mm and width ¼ 25 mm. The wheel
rotates at 2400 rev/min, with a depth of cut (infeed) ¼
0.05 mm/pass and a crossfeed ¼ 3.50 mm. The recip-
rocating speed of the work is 6 m/min, and the
operation is performed dry. Determine (a) length
of contact between the wheel and the work and
(b) volume rate of metal removed. (c) If there are 64
active grits/cm2 of wheel surface, estimate the num-
ber of chips formed per unit time. (d) What is the
average volume per chip? (e) If the tangential
cutting force on the work ¼ 25 N, compute the
specific energy in this operation?
25.5.
An 8-in diameter grinding wheel, 1.0 in wide, is
used in a surface grinding job performed on a flat
piece of heat-treated 4340 steel. The wheel rotates
to achieve a surface speed of 5000 ft/min, with a
depth of cut (infeed) ¼ 0.002 in per pass and a
crossfeed ¼ 0.15 in. The reciprocating speed of the
work is 20 ft/min, and the operation is performed
dry. (a) What is the length of contact between the
wheel and the work? (b) What is the volume rate of
metal removed? (c) If there are 300 active grits/in2
of wheel surface, estimate the number of chips
formed per unit time. (d) What is the average
volume per chip? (e) If the tangential cutting force
on the workpiece ¼ 7.3 lb, what is the specific
energy calculated for this job?
25.6.
A surface grinding operation is being performed on
a 6150 steel workpart (annealed, approximately
200 BHN). The designation on the grinding wheel
is C-24-D-5-V. The wheel diameter ¼ 7.0 in and its
width¼1.00in.Rotationalspeed¼3000rev/min.The
depth(infeed)¼0.002inperpass,andthecrossfeed¼
0.5 in. Workspeed ¼ 20 ft/min. This operation has
beenasourceoftroublerightfromthebeginning.The
surface finish is not as good as the 16 m-in specified on
the part print, and there are signs of metallurgical
626
Chapter 25/Grinding and Other Abrasive Processes

damageonthesurface.Inaddition,thewheelseemsto
become clogged almost as soon as the operation
begins. In short, nearly everything that can go wrong
with the job has gone wrong. (a) Determine the rate
of metal removal when the wheel is engaged in the
work. (b) If the number of active grits per square
inch ¼ 200, determine the average chip length and
the number of chips formed per time. (c) What
changes would you recommend in the grinding
wheel to help solve the problems encountered?
Explain why you made each recommendation.
25.7.
The grinding wheel in a centerless grinding opera-
tion has a diameter ¼ 200 mm, and the regulating
wheel diameter ¼ 125 mm. The grinding wheel
rotates at 3000 rev/min and the regulating wheel
rotates at 200 rev/min. The inclination angle of the
regulating wheel ¼ 2.5. Determine the through-
feed rate of cylindrical workparts that are 25.0 mm
in diameter and 175 mm long.
25.8.
A centerless grinding operation uses a regulating
wheel that is 150 mm in diameter and rotates at 500
rev/min. At what inclination angle should the reg-
ulating wheel be set, if it is desired to feed a
workpiece with length ¼ 3.5 m and diameter ¼
18 mm through the operation in exactly 30 sec?
25.9.
In a certain centerless grinding operation, the
grinding wheel diameter ¼ 8.5 in, and the regulat-
ing wheel diameter ¼ 5 in. The grinding wheel
rotates at 3500 rev/min and the regulating wheel
rotates at 150 rev/min. The inclination angle of the
regulating wheel ¼ 3. Determine the throughfeed
rate of cylindrical workparts that have the follow-
ing dimensions: diameter ¼ 1.25 in and length ¼
8 in.
25.10.
It is desired to compare the cycle times required to
grind a particular workpiece using traditional sur-
face grinding and using creep feed grinding. The
workpiece is 200 mm long, 30 mm wide, and 75 mm
thick. To make a fair comparison, the grinding wheel
in both cases is 250 mm in diameter, 35 mm in width,
and rotates at 1500 rev/min. It is desired to remove
25 mm of material from the surface. When tradi-
tional grinding is used, the infeed is set at 0.025 mm,
and the wheel traverses twice (forward and back)
across the work surface during each pass before
resetting the infeed. There is no crossfeed since
the wheel width is greater than the work width.
Each pass is made at a workspeed of 12 m/min,
butthewheelovershootsthepartonbothsides.With
acceleration and deceleration, the wheel is engaged
in the work for 50% of the time on each pass. When
creep feed grinding is used, the depth is increased by
1000andtheforwardfeedisdecreasedby1000.How
long will it take to complete the grinding operation
(a) with traditional grinding and (b) with creep feed
grinding?
25.11.
In a certain grinding operation, the grade of the
grinding wheel should be ‘‘M’’ (medium), but the
only available wheel is grade ‘‘T’’ (hard). It is
desired to make the wheel appear softer by making
changes in cutting conditions. What changes would
you recommend?
25.12.
An aluminum alloy is to be ground in an external
cylindrical grinding operation to obtain a good
surface finish. Specify the appropriate grinding
wheel parameters and the grinding conditions for
this job.
25.13.
A high-speed steel broach (hardened) is to be
resharpened to achieve a good finish. Specify the
appropriate parameters of the grinding wheel for
this job.
25.14.
Based on equations in the text, derive an equation
to compute the average volume per chip formed in
the grinding process.
Problems
627

26
NONTRADITIONAL
MACHINING AND
THERMAL CUTTING
PROCESSES
Chapter Contents
26.1
Mechanical Energy Processes
26.1.1
Ultrasonic Machining
26.1.2
Processes Using Water Jets
26.1.3
Other Nontraditional Abrasive
Processes
26.2
Electrochemical Machining Processes
26.2.1
Electrochemical Machining
26.2.2
Electrochemical Deburring and
Grinding
26.3
Thermal Energy Processes
26.3.1
Electric Discharge Processes
26.3.2
Electron Beam Machining
26.3.3
Laser Beam Machining
26.3.4
Arc-Cutting Processes
26.3.5
Oxyfuel-Cutting Processes
26.4
Chemical Machining
26.4.1
Mechanics and Chemistry of Chemical
Machining
26.4.2
CHM Processes
26.5
Application Considerations
Conventional machining processes (i.e., turning, drilling,
milling) use a sharp cutting tool to form a chip from the
work by shear deformation. In addition to these conven-
tional methods, there is a group of processes that uses other
mechanisms to remove material. The term nontraditional
machining refers to this group that removes excess mate-
rial by various techniques involving mechanical, thermal,
electrical, or chemical energy (or combinations of these
energies). They do not use a sharp cutting tool in the
conventional sense.
The nontraditional processes have been developed
since World War II largely in response to new and unusual
machining requirements that could not be satisfied by
conventional methods. These requirements, and the result-
ing commercial and technological importance of the non-
traditional processes, include:

The need to machine newly developed metals and non-
metals. These new materials often have special propert-
ies (e.g., high strength, high hardness, high toughness)
that make them difficult or impossible to machine by
conventional methods.

The need for unusual and/or complex part geometries
that cannot easily be accomplished and in some cases
are impossible to achieve by conventional machining.

The need to avoid surface damage that often accom-
panies the stresses created by conventional machining.
Many of these requirements are associated with the
aerospace and electronics industries, which have become
increasingly important in recent decades.
There are literally dozens of nontraditional machin-
ing processes, most of which are unique in their range of
applications. In the present chapter, we discuss those that
628

are most important commercially. More detailed discussions of these nontraditional
methods are presented in several of the references.
The nontraditional processes are often classified according to principal form of
energy used to effect material removal. By this classification, there are four types:
1. Mechanical. Mechanical energy in some form other than the action of a conventional
cutting tool is used in these nontraditional processes. Erosion of the work material by a
high velocity stream of abrasives or fluid (or both) is a typical form of mechanical
action in these processes.
2. Electrical. These nontraditional processes use electrochemical energy to remove
material; the mechanism is the reverse of electroplating.
3. Thermal. These processes use thermal energy to cut or shape the workpart. The
thermal energy is generally applied to a very small portion of the work surface, causing
that portion to be removed by fusion and/or vaporization. The thermal energy is
generated by the conversion of electrical energy.
4. Chemical. Most materials (metals particularly) are susceptible to chemical attack by
certain acids or other etchants. In chemical machining, chemicals selectively remove
material from portions of the workpart, whereas other portions of the surface are
protected by a mask.
26.1
MECHANICAL ENERGY PROCESSES
In this section we examine several of the nontraditional processes that use mechanical
energy other than a sharp cutting tool: (1) ultrasonic machining, (2) water jet processes,
and (3) other abrasive processes.
26.1.1 ULTRASONIC MACHINING
Ultrasonic machining (USM) is a nontraditional machining process in which abrasives
contained in a slurry are driven at high velocity against the work by a tool vibrating at low
amplitude and high frequency. The amplitudes are around 0.075 mm (0.003 in), and the
frequencies are approximately 20,000 Hz. The tool oscillates in a direction perpendicular to
the work surface, and is fed slowly into the work, so that the shape of the tool is formed in the
part. However, it is the action of the abrasives, impinging against the work surface, that
performs the cutting. The general arrangement of the USMprocess is depicted inFigure 26.1.
Common tool materials used in USM include soft steel and stainless steel. Abrasive
materials in USM include boron nitride, boron carbide, aluminum oxide, silicon carbide,
FIGURE 26.1
Ultrasonic machining.
Section 26.1/Mechanical Energy Processes
629

and diamond. Grit size (Section 16.1.1) ranges between 100 and 2000. The vibration
amplitude should be set approximately equal to the grit size, and the gap size should be
maintained at about two times grit size. To a significant degree, grit size determines the
surface finish on the new work surface. In addition to surface finish, material removal rate
is an important performance variable in ultrasonic machining. For a given work material,
the removal rate in USM increases with increasing frequency and amplitude of vibration.
The cutting action in USM operates on the tool as well as the work. As the abrasive
particles erode the work surface, they also erode the tool, thus affecting its shape. It is
therefore important to know the relative volumes of work material and tool material
removed during the process—similar to the grinding ratio (Section 25.1.2). This ratio of
stock removed to tool wear varies for different work materials, ranging from around 100:1
for cutting glass down to about 1:1 for cutting tool steel.
The slurry in USM consists of a mixture of water and abrasive particles. Concen-
tration of abrasives in water ranges from 20% to 60% [5]. The slurry must be continu-
ously circulated to bring fresh grains into action at the tool–work gap. It also washes away
chips and worn grits created by the cutting process.
The development of ultrasonic machining was motivated by the need to machine
hard, brittle work materials, such as ceramics, glass, and carbides. It is also successfully
used on certain metals, such as stainless steel and titanium. Shapes obtained by USM
include non-round holes, holes along a curved axis, and coining operations, in which an
image pattern on the tool is imparted to a flat work surface.
26.1.2 PROCESSES USING WATER JETS
The two processes described in this section remove material by means of high-velocity
streams of water or a combination of water and abrasives.
Water Jet Cutting
Water jet cutting (WJC) uses a fine, high-pressure, high-velocity
stream of water directed at the work surface to cause cutting of the work, as illustrated in
Figure 26.2. To obtain the fine stream of water a small nozzle opening of diameter 0.1 to 0.4
mm (0.004 to 0.016 in) is used. To provide the stream with sufficient energy for cutting,
pressures up to 400 MPa (60,000 lb/in2) are used, and the jet reaches velocities up to 900 m/s
(3000 ft/sec). The fluid is pressurized to the desired level by a hydraulic pump. The nozzle
unitconsistsofaholdermadeofstainlesssteel,andajewelnozzlemadeofsapphire,ruby,or
FIGURE 26.2
Water jet cutting.
630
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

diamond. Diamond lasts the longest but costs the most. Filtration systems must be used in
WJC to separate the swarf produced during cutting.
Cutting fluids in WJC are polymer solutions, preferred because of their tendency to
produce a coherent stream. We have discussed cutting fluids before in the context of
conventional machining (Section 23.4), but never has the term been more appropriately
applied than in WJC.
Important process parameters include standoff distance, nozzle opening diameter,
water pressure, andcutting feed rate. As in Figure 26.2, the standoff distance is the separation
between the nozzle opening and the work surface. It is generally desirable for this distance to
be small to minimize dispersion of the fluid stream before it strikes the surface. A typical
standoff distance is 3.2 mm (0.125 in). Size of the nozzleorifice affects the precision of the cut;
smaller openings are used for finer cuts on thinner materials. To cut thicker stock, thicker jet
streamsandhigherpressuresarerequired.Thecuttingfeedratereferstothevelocityatwhich
the WJC nozzle is traversed along the cutting path. Typical feed rates range from 5 mm/s
(12 in/min) to more than 500 mm/s (1200 in/min), depending on work material and its
thickness [5]. The WJC process is usually automated using computer numerical control or
industrial robots to manipulate the nozzle unit along the desired trajectory.
Water jet cutting can be used effectively to cut narrow slits in flat stock such as plastic,
textiles, composites, floor tile, carpet, leather, and cardboard. Robotic cells have been
installed with WJC nozzles mounted as the robot’s tool to follow cutting patterns that are
irregular in three dimensions, such as cutting and trimming of automobile dashboards
before assembly [9]. In these applications, advantages of WJC include: (1) no crushing or
burningof thework surfacetypicalinother mechanicalor thermalprocesses, (2)minimum
material loss because of the narrow cut slit, (3) no environmental pollution, and (4) ease of
automating the process. A limitation of WJC is that the process is not suitable for cutting
brittle materials (e.g., glass) because of their tendency to crack during cutting.
Abrasive Water Jet Cutting
WhenWJCisusedonmetallicworkparts,abrasiveparticles
must usually be added to the jet stream to facilitate cutting. This process is therefore called
abrasive water jet cutting (AWJC). Introduction of abrasive particles into the stream
complicates the process by adding to the number of parameters that must be controlled.
Among the additional parameters are abrasive type, grit size, and flow rate. Aluminum
oxide, silicon dioxide, and garnet (a silicate mineral) are typical abrasive materials, at grit
sizes ranging between 60 and 120. The abrasive particles are added to the water stream at
approximately 0.25 kg/min (0.5 lb/min) after it has exited the WJC nozzle.
The remaining process parameters include those that are common to WJC: nozzle
opening diameter, water pressure, and standoff distance. Nozzle orifice diameters are
0.25 to 0.63 mm (0.010 to 0.025 in)—somewhat larger than in water jet cutting to permit
higher flow rates and more energy to be contained in the stream before injection of
abrasives. Water pressures are about the same as in WJC. Standoff distances are
somewhat less to minimize the effect of dispersion of the cutting fluid that now contains
abrasive particles. Typical standoff distances are between 1/4 and 1/2 of those in WJC.
26.1.3 OTHER NONTRADITIONAL ABRASIVE PROCESSES
Two additional mechanical energy processes use abrasives to accomplish deburring,
polishing, or other operations in which very little material is removed.
Abrasive Jet Machining
Not to be confused with AWJC is the process called abrasive
jet machining (AJM), a material removal process caused by the action of a high-velocity
stream of gas containing small abrasive particles, as in Figure 26.3. The gas is dry, and
pressures of 0.2 to 1.4 MPa (25 to 200 lb/in2) are used to propel it through nozzle orifices
Section 26.1/Mechanical Energy Processes
631

of diameter 0.075 to 1.0 mm (0.003 to 0.040 in) at velocities of 2.5 to 5.0 m/s (500 to 1000 ft/
min). Gases include dry air, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and helium.
The process is usually performed manually by an operator who directs the nozzle at
the work. Typical distances between nozzle tip and work surface range between 3 mm and
75 mm (0.125 in and 3 in). The workstation must be set up to provide proper ventilation for
the operator.
AJM is normally used as a finishing process rather than a production cutting process.
Applications include deburring, trimming and deflashing, cleaning, and polishing. Cutting is
accomplished successfully on hard, brittle materials (e.g., glass, silicon, mica, and ceramics)
that are in the form of thin flat stock. Typical abrasives used in AJM include aluminum oxide
(for aluminum and brass), silicon carbide (for stainless steel and ceramics), and glass beads
(for polishing). Grit sizes are small, 15 to 40 mm (0.0006 to 0.0016 in) in diameter, and must be
uniform in size for a given application. It is important not to recycle the abrasives because
used grains become fractured (and therefore smaller in size), worn, and contaminated.
Abrasive Flow Machining
This process was developed in the 1960s to deburr and polish
difficult-to-reach areas using abrasive particles mixed in a viscoelastic polymer that is
forced to flow through or around the part surfaces and edges. The polymer has the
consistency of putty. Silicon carbide is a typical abrasive. Abrasive flow machining
(AFM) is particularly well-suited for internal passageways that are often inaccessible
by conventional methods. The abrasive-polymer mixture, called the media, flows past the
target regionsof thepart under pressures ranging between 0.7 and20MPa(100 and 3000lb/
in2). In addition to deburring and polishing, other AFM applications include forming radii
on sharp edges, removing rough surfaces on castings, and other finishing operations. These
applications are found in industries such as aerospace, automotive, and die-making. The
process can be automated to economically finish hundreds of parts per hour.
A common setup is to position the workpart between two opposing cylinders, one
containing media and the other empty. The media is forced to flow through the part from
the first cylinder to the other, and then back again, as many times as necessary to achieve
the desired material removal and finish.
26.2
ELECTROCHEMICAL MACHINING PROCESSES
An important group of nontraditional processes use electrical energy to remove material.
This group is identified by the term electrochemical processes, because electrical energy
is used in combination with chemical reactions to accomplish material removal. In effect,
these processes are the reverse of electroplating (Section 28.3.1). The work material must
be a conductor in the electrochemical machining processes.
FIGURE 26.3
Abrasive
jet machining (AJM).
632
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

26.2.1 ELECTROCHEMICAL MACHINING
The basic process in this group is electrochemical machining (ECM). Electrochemical
machining removes metal from an electrically conductive workpiece by anodic dissolu-
tion, in which the shape of the workpiece is obtained by a formed electrode tool in close
proximity to, but separated from, the work by a rapidly flowing electrolyte. ECM is
basically a deplating operation. As illustrated in Figure 26.4, the workpiece is the anode,
and the tool is the cathode. The principle underlying the process is that material is
deplated from the anode (the positive pole) and deposited onto the cathode (the negative
pole) in the presence of an electrolyte bath (Section 4.5). The difference in ECM is that
the electrolyte bath flows rapidly between the two poles to carry off the deplated
material, so that it does not become plated onto the tool.
The electrode tool, usually made of copper, brass, or stainless steel, is designed to
possess approximately the inverse of the desired final shape of the part. An allowance in the
tool size must be provided for the gap that exists between the tool and the work. To
accomplish metal removal, the electrode is fed into the work at a rate equal to the rate of
metal removal from the work. Metal removal rate is determined by Faraday’s First Law,
which states that the amount of chemical change produced by an electric current (i.e., the
amount of metal dissolved) is proportional to the quantity of electricity passed (current 
time):
V ¼ CIt
ð26:1Þ
where V ¼ volume of metal removed, mm3 (in3); C ¼ a constant called the specific removal
rate that depends on atomic weight, valence, and density of the work material, mm3/amp-s
(in3/amp-min); I ¼ current, amps; and t ¼ time, s (min).
Based on Ohm’s law, current I ¼ E/R, where E ¼ voltage and R ¼ resistance. Under
the conditions of the ECM operation, resistance is given by
R ¼ gr
A
ð26:2Þ
where g ¼ gap between electrode and work, mm (in); r ¼ resistivity of electrolyte, ohm-mm
(ohm-in);andA¼ surfaceareabetweenworkandtoolintheworkingfrontalgap,mm2(in2).
Substituting this expression for R into Ohm’s law, we have
I ¼ EA
gr
ð26:3Þ
FIGURE 26.4
Electrochemical
machining (ECM).
Section 26.2/Electrochemical Machining Processes
633

And substituting this equation back into the equation defining Faraday’s law
V ¼ C EAt
ð
Þ
gr
ð26:4Þ
It is convenient to convert this equation into an expression for feed rate, the rate at which
the electrode (tool) can be advanced into the work. This conversion can be accomplished
in two steps. First, let us divide Eq. (26.4) by At (area  time) to convert volume of metal
removed into a linear travel rate
V
At ¼ f r ¼ CE
gr
ð26:5Þ
where fr ¼ feed rate, mm/s (in/min). Second, let us substitute I/A in place of E/(gr), as
provided by Eq. (26.3).
Thus, feed rate in ECM is
f r ¼ CI
A
ð26:6Þ
where A ¼ the frontal area of the electrode, mm2 (in2).
Thisis the projected area of the tool in the direction of the feed into the work. Values of
specificremovalrateCarepresentedinTable26.1forvariousworkmaterials.Weshouldnote
that this equation assumes 100% efficiency of metal removal. The actual efficiency is in the
range90%to100%anddependsontoolshape,voltageandcurrentdensity,andotherfactors.
Example 26.1
Electrochemical
Machining
An ECM operation is to be used to cut a hole into a plate of aluminum that is 12 mm
thick. The hole has a rectangular cross section, 10 mm  30 mm. The ECM operation will
be accomplished at a current ¼ 1200 amps. Efficiency is expected to be 95%. Determine
feed rate and time required to cut through the plate.
Solution:
FromTable26.1,specificremovalrateCforaluminum¼3.44102mm3/A-s.
The frontal area of the electrode A ¼ 10 mm  30 mm ¼ 300 mm2. At a current level of
1200 amps, feed rate is
f r ¼ 0:0344 mm3/A-s 1200
300 A/mm2


¼ 0:1376 mm/s
At an efficiency of 95%, the actual feed rate is
f r ¼ 0:1376 mm/s 0:95
ð
Þ ¼ 0:1307 mm/s
TABLE 26.1
Typical values of speciﬁc removal rate C for selected work materials in electrochemical machining.
Specific Removal Rate C
Specific Removal Rate C
Work Materiala
mm3/amp-sec
in3/amp-min
Work Materiala
mm3/amp-sec
in3/amp-min
Aluminum (3)
3.44  102
1.26  104
Steels:
Copper (1)
7.35  102
2.69  104
Low alloy
3.0  102
1.1  104
Iron (2)
3.69  102
1.35  104
High alloy
2.73  102
1.0  104
Nickel (2)
3.42  102
1.25  104
Stainless
2.46  102
0.9  104
Titanium (4)
2.73  102
1.0  104
Compiled from data in [8].
aMost common valence given in parentheses () is assumed in determining specific removal rate C. For different valence, multiply C by
most common valence and divide by actual valence.
634
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

Time to machine through the 12-mm plate is
Tm ¼ 12:0
0:1307 ¼ 91:8 s ¼ 1:53 min
n
The preceding equations indicate the important process parameters for determining
metal removal rate and feed rate in electrochemical machining: gap distance g, electrolyte
resistivityr,currentI,andelectrodefrontalareaA.Gapdistanceneedstobecontrolledclosely.
If g becomes too large, the electrochemical process slows down. However, if the electrode
touches the work, a short circuit occurs, which stops the process altogether. As a practical
matter, gap distance is usually maintained within a range 0.075 to 0.75 mm (0.003 to 0.030 in).
Water is used as the base for the electrolyte in ECM. To reduce electrolyte resistivity,
salts such as NaCl or NaNO3 are added in solution. In addition to carrying off the material
that has been removed from the workpiece, the flowing electrolyte also serves the function
ofremovingheatandhydrogenbubblescreatedinthechemicalreactionsoftheprocess.The
removed work material is in the form of microscopic particles that must be separated from
the electrolyte through centrifuge, sedimentation, or other means. The separated particles
form a thick sludge whose disposal is an environmental problem associated with ECM.
Large amounts of electrical power are required to perform ECM. As the equations
indicate, rate of metal removal is determined by electrical power, specifically the current
density that can be supplied to the operation. The voltage in ECM is kept relatively low to
minimize arcing across the gap.
Electrochemical machining is generally used in applications in which the work metal
is very hard or difficult to machine, or the workpart geometry is difficult (or impossible) to
accomplish by conventional machining methods. Work hardness makes no difference
in ECM, because the metal removal is not mechanical. Typical ECM applications include:
(1) die sinking, which involves the machining of irregular shapes and contours into forging
dies, plastic molds, and other shaping tools; (2) multiple hole drilling, in which many holes
can be drilled simultaneously with ECM and conventional drilling would probably require
the holes to be made sequentially; (3) holes that are not round, because ECM does not use
a rotating drill; and (4) deburring (Section 26.2.2).
Advantages of ECM include: (1) little surface damage to the workpart, (2) no burrs
as in conventional machining, (3) low tool wear (the only tool wear results from the
flowing electrolyte), and (4) relatively high metal removal rates for hard and difficult-to-
machine metals. Disadvantages of ECM are: (1) significant cost of electrical power to
drive the operation and (2) problems of disposing of the electrolyte sludge.
26.2.2 ELECTROCHEMICAL DEBURRING AND GRINDING
Electrochemical deburring (ECD) is an adaptation of ECM designed to remove burrs or
to round sharp corners on metal workparts by anodic dissolution. One possible setup for
ECD is shown in Figure 26.5. The hole in the workpart has a sharp burr of the type that is
FIGURE 26.5
Electrochemical
deburring (ECD).
Section 26.2/Electrochemical Machining Processes
635

produced in a conventional through-hole drilling operation. The electrode tool is
designed to focus the metal removal action on the burr. Portions of the tool not being
used for machining are insulated. The electrolyte flows through the hole to carry away the
burr particles. The same ECM principles of operation also apply to ECD. However, since
much less material is removed in electrochemical deburring, cycle times are much
shorter. A typical cycle time in ECD is less than a minute. The time can be increased
if it is desired to round the corner in addition to removing the burr.
Electrochemical grinding (ECG) is a special form of ECM in which a rotating
grinding wheel with a conductive bond material is used to augment the anodic dissolution
of the metal workpart surface, as illustrated in Figure 26.6. Abrasives used in ECG
include aluminum oxide and diamond. The bond material is either metallic (for diamond
abrasives) or resin bond impregnated with metal particles to make it electrically
conductive (for aluminum oxide). The abrasive grits protruding from the grinding wheel
at the contact with the workpart establish the gap distance in ECG. The electrolyte flows
through the gap between the grains to play its role in electrolysis.
Deplating is responsible for 95% or more of the metal removal in ECG, and the
abrasive action of the grinding wheel removes the remaining 5% or less, mostly in the form
ofsaltfilmsthathavebeenformedduringtheelectrochemicalreactionsattheworksurface.
Because most of the machining is accomplished by electrochemical action, the grinding
wheel in ECG lasts much longer than a wheel in conventional grinding. The result is a much
higher grinding ratio. In addition, dressing of the grinding wheel is required much less
frequently. These are the significant advantages of the process. Applications of ECG
include sharpening of cemented carbide tools and grinding of surgical needles, other thin
wall tubes, and fragile parts.
26.3
THERMAL ENERGY PROCESSES
Material removal processes based on thermal energy are characterized by very high local
temperatures—hot enough to remove material by fusion or vaporization. Because of the
high temperatures, these processes cause physical and metallurgical damage to the new
work surface. In some cases, the resulting finish is so poor that subsequent processing is
required to smooth the surface. In this section we examine several thermal energy
processes that have commercial importance: (1) electric discharge machining and electric
discharge wire cutting, (2) electron beam machining, (3) laser beam machining, (4) arc
cutting processes, and (5) oxyfuel cutting processes.
FIGURE 26.6
Electrochemical grinding
(ECG).
636
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

26.3.1 ELECTRIC DISCHARGE PROCESSES
Electric discharge processes remove metal by a series of discrete electrical discharges
(sparks) that cause localized temperatures high enough to melt or vaporize the metal in
the immediate vicinity of the discharge. The two main processes in this category are (1)
electric discharge machining and (2) wire electric discharge machining. These processes
can be used only on electrically conducting work materials. The video clip on electric
discharge machining illustrates the various types of EDM.
VIDEO CLIP
Electric Discharge Machining. This clip contains three segments: (1) the EDM process,
(2) ram EDM, and (3) wire EDM.
Electric Discharge Machining
Electric discharge machining (EDM) is one of the most
widely used nontraditional processes. An EDM setup is illustrated in Figure 26.7. The
shape of the finished work surface is produced by a formed electrode tool. The sparks
occur across a small gap between tool and work surface. The EDM process must take
place in the presence of a dielectric fluid, which creates a path for each discharge as the
fluid becomes ionized in the gap. The discharges are generated by a pulsating direct
current power supply connected to the work and the tool.
Figure 26.7(b) shows a close-up view of the gap between the tool and the work. The
discharge occurs at the location where the two surfaces are closest. The dielectric fluid
ionizes at this location to create a path for the discharge. The region in which discharge
occurs is heated to extremely high temperatures, so that a small portion of the work
surface is suddenly melted and removed. The flowing dielectric then flushes away the
small particle (call it a ‘‘chip’’). Because the surface of the work at the location of the
previous discharge is now separated from the tool by a greater distance, this location is
less likely to be the site of another spark until the surrounding regions have been reduced
to the same level or below. Although the individual discharges remove metal at very
Work
Overcut
Dielectric
fluid
Gap
–
+
–
+
(a)
(b)
Tool
electrode
Tool feed
Electrode wear
Discharge
Flow of dielectric fluid
Recast metal
Cavity created
by discharge
Work
Tool
Ionized fluid
Metal
removed
from cavity
FIGURE 26.7
Electric discharge machining (EDM): (a) overall setup, and (b) close-up view of gap, showing
discharge and metal removal.
Section 26.3/Thermal Energy Processes
637

localized points, they occur hundreds or thousands of times per second so that a gradual
erosion of the entire surface occurs in the area of the gap.
Two important process parameters in EDM are discharge current and frequency of
discharges. As either of these parameters is increased, metal removal rate increases.
Surface roughness is also affected by current and frequency, as shown in Figure 26.8(a).
The best surface finish is obtained in EDM by operating at high frequencies and low
discharge currents. As the electrode tool penetrates into the work, overcutting occurs.
Overcut in EDM is the distance by which the machined cavity in the workpart exceeds
the size of the tool on each side of the tool, as illustrated in Figure 26.7(a). It is produced
because the electrical discharges occur at the sides of the tool as well as its frontal area.
Overcut is a function of current and frequency, as seen in Figure 26.8(b), and can amount
to several hundredths of a millimeter.
The high spark temperatures that melt the work also melt the tool, creating a small
cavity in the surface opposite the cavity produced in the work. Tool wear is usually
measured as the ratio of work material removed to tool material removed (similar to the
grinding ratio). This wear ratio ranges between 1.0 and 100 or slightly above, depending
on the combination of work and electrode materials. Electrodes are made of graphite,
copper, brass, copper tungsten, silver tungsten, and other materials. The selection
depends on the type of power supply circuit available on the EDM machine, the type
of work material that is to be machined, and whether roughing or finishing is to be done.
Graphite is preferred for many applications because of its melting characteristics. In fact,
graphite does not melt. It vaporizes at very high temperatures, and the cavity created by
the spark is generally smaller than for most other EDM electrode materials. Conse-
quently, a high ratio of work material removed to tool wear is usually obtained with
graphite tools.
The hardness and strength of the work material are not factors in EDM, because the
process is not a contest of hardness between tool and work. The melting point of the work
material is an important property, and metal removal rate can be related to melting point
approximately by the following empirical formula, based on an equation described in
Weller [17]:
RMR ¼
KI
T 1:23
m
ð26:7Þ
where RMR ¼ metal removal rate, mm3/s (in3/min); K ¼ constant of proportionality whose
value ¼ 664 in SI units (5.08 in U.S. customary units); I ¼ discharge current, amps; and Tm ¼
melting temperature of work metal, C (F).
Melting points of selected metals are listed in Table 4.1.
FIGURE 26.8
(a) Surface ﬁnish in EDM as
a function of discharge
current and frequency of
discharges. (b) Overcut in
EDM as a function of
discharge current and
frequency of discharges.
Low frequency
High frequency
Frequency
Rough
Smooth
Discharge current
Current
Discharge current, frequency
Surface finish
Overcut
(a)
(b)
638
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

Example 26.2
Electric Discharge
Machining
Copper is to be machined in an EDM operation. If discharge current ¼ 25 amps, what is
the expected metal removal rate?
Solution:
From Table 4.1, the melting point of copper is found to be 1083C. Using
Eq. (26.7), the anticipated metal removal rate is
RMR ¼ 664 25
ð
Þ
10831:23 ¼ 3:07 mm3/s
n
Dielectric fluids used in EDM include hydrocarbon oils, kerosene, and distilled or
deionized water. The dielectric fluid serves as an insulator in the gap except when
ionization occurs in the presence of a spark. Its other functions are to flush debris out of
the gap and remove heat from tool and workpart.
Applications of electric discharge machining include both tool fabrication and parts
production. The tooling for many of the mechanical processes discussed in this book are
often made by EDM, including molds for plastic injection molding, extrusion dies, wire
drawing dies, forging and heading dies, and sheet metal stamping dies. As in ECM, the term
die sinking is used for operations in which a mold cavity is produced, and the EDM process
is sometimes referred to as ram EDM. For many of the applications, the materials used to
fabricate the tooling are difficult (or impossible) to machine by conventional methods.
Certain production parts also call for application of EDM. Examples include delicate parts
that are not rigid enough to withstand conventional cutting forces, hole drilling where the
axis of the hole is at an acute angle to the surface so that a conventional drill would be
unable to start the hole, and production machining of hard and exotic metals.
Electric Discharge Wire Cutting
Electric discharge wire cutting (EDWC), commonly
called wire EDM, is a special form of electric discharge machining that uses a small
diameter wire as the electrode to cut a narrow kerf in the work. The cutting action in wire
EDM is achieved by thermal energy from electric discharges between the electrode wire
and the workpiece. Wire EDM is illustrated in Figure 26.9. The workpiece is fed past the
wire to achieve the desired cutting path, somewhat in the manner of a bandsaw operation.
Numerical control is used to control the workpart motions during cutting. As it cuts, the
wire is slowly and continuously advanced between a supply spool and a take-up spool to
present a fresh electrode of constant diameter to the work. This helps to maintain a
constant kerf width during cutting. As in EDM, wire EDM must be carried out in the
presence of a dielectric. This is applied by nozzles directed at the tool–work interface as in
our figure, or the workpart is submerged in a dielectric bath.
Wire diameters range from 0.076 to 0.30 mm (0.003 to 0.012 in), depending on
required kerf width. Materials used for the wire include brass, copper, tungsten, and
FIGURE 26.9
Electric
discharge wire cutting
(EDWC), also called wire
EDM.
Section 26.3/Thermal Energy Processes
639

molybdenum. Dielectric fluids include deionized water or oil. AsinEDM, an overcutexists
in wire EDM that makes the kerf larger than the wire diameter, as shown in Figure 26.10.
This overcut is in the range 0.020 to 0.050 mm (0.0008 to 0.002 in). Once cutting conditions
have been established for a given cut, the overcut remains fairly constant and predictable.
Although EDWC seems similar to a bandsaw operation, its precision far exceeds
that of a bandsaw. The kerf is much narrower, corners can be made much sharper, and
the cutting forces against the work are nil. In addition, hardness and toughness of the
work material do not affect cutting performance. The only requirement is that the work
material must be electrically conductive.
The special features of wire EDM make it ideal for making components for stamping
dies. Because the kerf is so narrow, it is often possible to fabricate punch and die in a single
cut, as suggested by Figure 26.11.Other toolsandparts with intricate outline shapes, such as
lathe form tools, extrusion dies, and flat templates, are made with electric discharge wire
cutting.
FIGURE 26.10
Deﬁnition of kerf and
overcut in electric
discharge wire cutting.
FIGURE 26.11
Irregular
outline cut from a solid
metal slab by wire EDM.
(Photo courtesy of
LeBlond Makino Machine
Tool Company, Amelia,
Ohio.)
640
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

26.3.2 ELECTRON BEAM MACHINING
Electron beam machining (EBM) is one of several industrial processes that use electron
beams. Besides machining, other applications of the technology include heat treating
(Section 27.5.2) and welding (Section 30.4). Electron beam machining uses a high
velocity stream of electrons focused on the workpiece surface to remove material by
melting and vaporization. A schematic of the EBM process is illustrated in Figure 26.12.
An electron beam gun generates a continuous stream of electrons that is accelerated to
approximately 75% of the speed of light and focused through an electromagnetic lens on
the work surface. The lens is capable of reducing the area of the beam to a diameter as
small as 0.025 mm (0.001 in). On impinging the surface, the kinetic energy of the electrons
is converted into thermal energy of extremely high density that melts or vaporizes the
material in a very localized area.
Electron beam machining is used for a variety of high-precision cutting applications
on any known material. Applications include drilling of extremely small diameter
holes—down to 0.05 mm (0.002 in) diameter, drilling of holes with very high depth-
to-diameter ratios—more than 100:1, and cutting of slots that are only about 0.001 in
(0.025 mm) wide. These cuts can be made to very close tolerances with no cutting forces
or tool wear. The process is ideal for micromachining and is generally limited to cutting
operations in thin parts—in the range 0.25 to 6.3 mm (0.010 to 0.250 in) thick. EBM must
be carried out in a vacuum chamber to eliminate collision of the electrons with gas
molecules. Other limitations include the high energy required and expensive equipment.
26.3.3 LASER BEAM MACHINING
Lasers are being used for a variety of industrial applications, including heat treatment
(Section 27.5.2), welding (Section 30.4), measurement (Section 42.6.2), as well as
scribing, cutting, and drilling (described here). The term laser stands for light amplifi-
cation by stimulated emission of radiation. A laser is an optical transducer that converts
electrical energy into a highly coherent light beam. A laser light beam has several pro-
perties that distinguish it from other forms of light. It is monochromatic (theoretically,
FIGURE 26.12
Electron
beam machining (EBM).
Section 26.3/Thermal Energy Processes
641

the light has a single wave length) and highly collimated (the light rays in the beam are
almost perfectly parallel). These properties allow the light generated by a laser to be
focused, using conventional optical lenses, onto a very small spot with resulting high
power densities. Depending on the amount of energy contained in the light beam, and its
degree of concentration at the spot, the various laser processes identified in the
preceding can be accomplished.
Laser beam machining (LBM) uses the light energy from a laser to remove material
by vaporization and ablation. The setup for LBM is illustrated in Figure 26.13. The types of
lasers used in LBM are carbon dioxide gas lasers and solid-state lasers (of which there are
several types). In laser beam machining, the energy of the coherent light beam is concen-
trated not only optically but also in terms of time. The light beam is pulsed so that the
released energy results in an impulse against the work surface that produces a combination
of evaporation and melting, with the melted material evacuating the surfaceathigh velocity.
LBM is used to perform various types of drilling, slitting, slotting, scribing, and
marking operations. Drilling small diameter holes ispossible—downto 0.025mm (0.001in).
For larger holes, above 0.50-mm (0.020-in) diameter, the laser beam is controlled to cut the
outlineofthehole. LBMisnotconsideredamassproductionprocess,anditisgenerallyused
on thin stock. The range of work materials that can be machined by LBM is virtually
unlimited. Ideal properties of a material for LBMinclude high light energy absorption,poor
reflectivity, good thermal conductivity, low specific heat, low heat of fusion, and low heat of
vaporization. Of course, no material has this ideal combination of properties. The actual list
of work materials processed by LBM includes metals with high hardness and strength, soft
metals, ceramics, glass and glass epoxy, plastics, rubber, cloth, and wood.
26.3.4 ARC-CUTTING PROCESSES
The intense heat from an electric arc can be used to melt virtually any metal for the
purpose of welding or cutting. Most arc-cutting processes use the heat generated by an
arc between an electrode and a metallic workpart (usually a flat plate or sheet) to melt a
FIGURE 26.13
Laser
beam machining (LBM).
642
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

kerf that separates the part. The most common arc-cutting processes are (1) plasma arc
cutting and (2) air carbon arc cutting [11].
Plasma Arc Cutting
A plasma is defined as a superheated, electrically ionized gas.
Plasma arc cutting (PAC) uses a plasma stream operating at temperatures in the range
10,000C to 14,000C (18,000F to 25,000F) to cut metal by melting, as shown in Fig-
ure 26.14. The cutting action operates by directing the high-velocity plasma stream at the
work, thus melting it and blowing the molten metal through the kerf. The plasma arc is
generated between an electrode inside the torchand the anode workpiece. The plasma flows
through a water-cooled nozzle that constricts and directs the stream to the desired location
on the work. The resulting plasma jet is a high-velocity, well-collimated stream with
extremely high temperatures at its center, hot enough to cut through metal in some cases
150 mm (6 in) thick.
Gases used to create the plasma in PAC include nitrogen, argon, hydrogen, or
mixtures of thesegases. These arereferred to as theprimarygases in the process. Secondary
gasesorwaterareoftendirectedtosurroundtheplasmajettohelpconfinethearcandclean
the kerf of molten metal as it forms.
Most applications of PAC involve cutting of flat metal sheets and plates. Operations
include hole piercing and cutting along a defined path. The desired path can be cut either by
use of a hand-held torch manipulated by a human operator, or by directing the cutting path
of the torch under numerical control (NC). For faster production and higher accuracy, NC is
preferred because of better control over the important process variables such as standoff
distance and feed rate. Plasma arc cutting can be used to cut nearly any electrically
conductive metal. Metals frequently cut by PAC include plain carbon steel, stainless steel,
and aluminum. The advantage of NC in these applications is high productivity. Feed rates
along the cutting path can be as high as 200 mm/s (450 in/min) for 6-mm (0.25-in) aluminum
plateand85mm/s(200 in/min)for6-mm (0.25-in)steelplate[8].Feedrates mustbereduced
for thicker stock. For example, the maximum feed rate for cutting 100-mm (4-in) thick
aluminum stock is around 8 mm/s (20 in/min) [8]. Disadvantages of PAC are (1) the cut
surface is rough, and (2) metallurgical damage at the surface is the most severe among the
nontraditional metalworking processes.
Air Carbon Arc Cutting
In this process, the arc is generated between a carbon electrode
and the metallic work, and a high-velocity air jet is used to blow away the melted portion of
FIGURE 26.14
Plasma
arc cutting (PAC).
Section 26.3/Thermal Energy Processes
643

the metal. This procedure can be used to form a kerf for severing the piece, or to gouge a
cavity in the part. Gouging is used to prepare the edges of plates for welding, for example to
create a U-grooveina butt joint (Section29.2.1). Air carbon arc cutting is usedona variety of
metals, includingcast iron,carbonsteel,low alloy, andstainless steels, and variousnonferrous
alloys. Spattering of the molten metal is a hazard and a disadvantage of the process.
Other Arc-Cutting Processes
Various other electric arc processes are used for cutting
applications, although not as widely as plasma arc and air carbon arc cutting. These other
processes include: (1) gas metal arc cutting, (2) shielded metal arc cutting, (3) gas tungsten
arc cutting, and (4) carbon arc cutting. The technologies are the same as those used in arc
welding (Section 30.1), except that the heat of the electric arc is used for cutting.
26.3.5 OXYFUEL-CUTTING PROCESSES
Awidely used family of thermal cutting processes, popularly known as flame cutting, use
the heat of combustion of certain fuel gases combined with the exothermic reaction of the
metal with oxygen. The cutting torch used in these processes is designed to deliver a
mixture of fuel gas and oxygen in the proper amounts, and to direct a stream of oxygen to
the cutting region. The primary mechanism of material removal in oxyfuel cutting (OFC)
is the chemical reaction of oxygen with the base metal. The purpose of the oxyfuel
combustion is to raise the temperature in the region of cutting to support the reaction.
These processes are commonly used to cut ferrous metal plates, in which the rapid
oxidation of iron occurs according to the following reactions [11]:
Fe þ O ! FeO þ heat
ð26:8aÞ
3Fe þ 2O2 ! Fe3O4 þ heat
ð26:8bÞ
2Fe þ 1:5O2 ! Fe2O3 þ heat
ð26:8cÞ
The second of these reactions, Eq. (26.8b), is the most significant in terms of heat generation.
The cutting mechanism for nonferrous metalsis somewhatdifferent. These metals are
generally characterized by lower melting temperatures than the ferrous metals, and they are
more oxidation resistant. In these cases, the heat of combustion of the oxyfuel mixture plays
a more important role in creating the kerf. Also, to promote the metal oxidation reaction,
chemical fluxes or metallic powders are often added to the oxygen stream.
Fuels used in OFC include acetylene (C2H2), MAPP (methylacetylene-propadiene—
C3H4),propylene(C3H6),andpropane(C3H8).Flametemperaturesandheatsofcombustion
forthesefuelsarelistedinTable30.2.Acetyleneburnsatthehighestflametemperatureandis
themostwidelyusedfuelforweldingandcutting.However,therearecertainhazardswiththe
storage and handling of acetylene that must be considered (Section 30.3.1).
OFC processes are performed either manually or by machine. Manually operated
torches are used for repair work, cutting of scrap metal, trimming of risers from sand
castings, and similar operations that generally require minimal accuracy. For production
work, machine flame cutting allows faster speeds and greater accuracies. This equipment
is often numerically controlled to allow profiled shapes to be cut.
26.4
CHEMICAL MACHINING
Chemical machining (CHM) is a nontraditional process in which material is removed by
means of a strong chemical etchant. Applications as an industrial process began shortly
after World War II in the aircraft industry. The use of chemicals to remove unwanted
644
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

material from a workpart can be accomplished in several ways, and different terms have
been developed to distinguish the applications. These terms include chemical milling,
chemical blanking, chemical engraving, and photochemical machining (PCM). They all
use the same mechanism of material removal, and it is appropriate to discuss the general
characteristics of chemical machining before defining the individual processes.
26.4.1 MECHANICS AND CHEMISTRY OF CHEMICAL MACHINING
The chemical machining process consists of several steps. Differences in applications and
the ways in which the steps are implemented account for the different forms of CHM. The
steps are:
1. Cleaning. The first step is a cleaning operation to ensure that material will be
removed uniformly from the surfaces to be etched.
2. Masking. A protective coating called a maskant is applied to certain portions of the
part surface. This maskant is made of a material that is chemically resistant to the
etchant (the term resist is used for this masking material). It is therefore applied to
those portions of the work surface that are not to be etched.
3. Etching. This is the material removal step. The part is immersed in an etchant that
chemically attacks those portions of the part surface that are not masked. The usual
method of attack is to convert the work material (e.g., a metal) into a salt that dissolves in
theetchantandistherebyremovedfromthesurface.Whenthedesiredamountofmaterial
has been removed, the part is withdrawn from the etchant and washed to stop the process.
4. Demasking. The maskant is removed from the part.
The two steps in chemical machining that involve significant variations in methods,
materials, and process parameters are masking and etching—steps 2 and 3.
Maskant materials include neoprene, polyvinylchloride, polyethylene, and other
polymers. Masking can be accomplished by any of three methods: (1) cut and peel,
(2) photographic resist, and (3) screen resist.
The cut and peel method applies the
maskant over the entire part by dipping, painting, or spraying. The resulting thickness of
the maskant is 0.025 to 0.125 mm (0.001 to 0.005 in). After the maskant has hardened, it is
cut using a scribing knife and peeled away in the areas of the work surface that are to be
etched. The maskant cutting operation is performed by hand, usually guiding the knife
with a template. The cut and peel method is generally used for large workparts, low
production quantities, and where accuracy is not a critical factor. This method cannot
hold tolerances tighter than 0.125 mm (0.005 in) except with extreme care.
As the name suggests, the photographic resist method (called the photoresist method
for short) uses photographic techniques to perform the masking step. The masking
materials contain photosensitive chemicals. They are applied to the work surface and
exposed to light through a negative image of the desired areas to be etched. These areas of
the maskant can then be removed from the surface using photographic developing
techniques. This procedure leaves the desired surfaces of the part protected by the maskant
and the remaining areas unprotected, vulnerable to chemical etching. Photoresist masking
techniquesarenormallyappliedwheresmallpartsareproducedinhighquantities,andclose
tolerances are required. Tolerances closer than 0.0125 mm (0.0005 in) can be held [17].
The screen resist method applies the maskant by means of silk screening methods.
In these methods, the maskant is painted onto the workpart surface through a silk or
stainless steel mesh. Embedded in the mesh is a stencil that protects those areas to be
etched from being painted. The maskant is thus painted onto the work areas that are not
to be etched. The screen resist method is generally used in applications that are between
Section 26.4/Chemical Machining
645

the other two masking methods in terms of accuracy, part size, and production quantities.
Tolerances of 0.075 mm (0.003 in) can be achieved with this masking method.
Selection of the etchant depends on work material to be etched, desired depth and rate
of material removal, and surface finish requirements. The etchant must also be matched with
thetypeofmaskantthatisusedtoensurethatthemaskantmaterialisnotchemicallyattacked
by the etchant. Table 26.2 lists some of the work materials machined by CHM together with
the etchants that are generally used on these materials. Also included in the table are
penetration rates and etch factors. These parameters are explained next.
Material removal rates in CHM are generally indicated as penetration rates, mm/
min (in/min), because rate of chemical attack of the work material by the etchant is
directed into the surface. The penetration rate is unaffected by surface area. Penetration
rates listed in Table 26.2 are typical values for the given material and etchant.
Depths of cut in chemical machining are as much as 12.5 mm (0.5 in) for aircraft
panels made out of metal plates. However, many applications require depths that are only
several hundredths of a millimeter. Along with the penetration into the work, etching
also occurs sideways under the maskant, as illustrated in Figure 26.15. The effect is
referred to as the undercut, and it must be accounted for in the design of the mask for the
resulting cut to have the specified dimensions. For a given work material, the undercut is
directly related to the depth of cut. The constant of proportionality for the material is
called the etch factor, defined as
Fe ¼ d
u
ð26:9Þ
where Fe ¼ etch factor; d ¼ depth of cut, mm (in); and u ¼ undercut, mm (in).
The dimensions u and d are defined in Figure 26.15. Different work materials have
differentetchfactorsinchemicalmachining.SometypicalvaluesarepresentedinTable26.2.
TABLE 26.2
Common work materials and etchants in CHM, with typical penetration
rates and etch factors.
Penetration Rates
Work Material
Etchant
mm/min
in/min
Etch Factor
Aluminum
and alloys
FeCl3
0.020
0.0008
1.75
NaOH
0.025
0.001
1.75
Copper and alloys
FeCl3
0.050
0.002
2.75
Magnesium and alloys
H2SO4
0.038
0.0015
1.0
Silicon
HNO3 : HF : H2O
very slow
NA
Mild steel
HCl : HNO3
0.025
0.001
2.0
FeCl3
0.025
0.001
2.0
Titanium
and alloys
HF
0.025
0.001
1.0
HF : HNO3
0.025
0.001
1.0
Compiled from [5], [8], and [17].
NA, Data not available.
FIGURE 26.15
Undercut in chemical
machining.
646
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

The etch factor can be used to determine the dimensions of the cutaway areas in the
maskant, so that the specified dimensions of the etched areas on the part can be achieved.
26.4.2 CHM PROCESSES
In this section, we describe the principle chemical machining processes: (1) chemical
milling, (2) chemical blanking, (3) chemical engraving, and (4) photochemical machining.
Chemical Milling
Chemical milling was the first CHM process to be commercialized.
During World War II, an aircraft company in the United States began to use chemical
milling to remove metal from aircraft components. They referred to their process as the
‘‘chem-mill’’ process. Today, chemical milling is still used largely in the aircraft industry,
to remove material from aircraft wing and fuselage panels for weight reduction. It is
applicable to large parts where substantial amounts of metal are removed during the
process. The cut and peel maskant method is employed. A template is generally used that
takes into account the undercut that will result during etching. The sequence of
processing steps is illustrated in Figure 26.16.
Chemical milling produces a surface finish that varies with different work materi-
als. Table 26.3 provides a sampling of the values. Surface finish depends on depth of
penetration. As depth increases, finish becomes worse, approaching the upper side of the
ranges given in the table. Metallurgical damage from chemical milling is very small,
perhaps around 0.005 mm (0.0002 in) into the work surface.
Chemical Blanking
Chemical blanking uses chemical erosion to cut very thin sheetmetal
parts—down to 0.025 mm (0.001 in) thick and/or for intricate cutting patterns. In both
FIGURE 26.16
Sequence of processing steps in chemical milling: (1) clean raw part, (2) apply maskant, (3) scribe,
cut, and peel the maskant from areas to be etched, (4) etch, and (5) remove maskant and clean to yield ﬁnished part.
TABLE 26.3
Surface ﬁnishes expected in chemical
milling.
Surface Finishes Range
Work Material
mm
m-in
Aluminum and alloys
1.8–4.1
70–160
Magnesium
0.8–1.8
30–70
Mild steel
0.8–6.4
30–250
Titanium and alloys
0.4–2.5
15–100
Compiled from [8] and [17].
Section 26.4/Chemical Machining
647

instances, conventional punch-and-die methods do not work because the stamping forces
damage the sheet metal, or the tooling cost would be prohibitive, or both. Chemical blanking
produces parts that are burr free, an advantage over conventional shearing operations.
Methods used for applying the maskant in chemical blanking are either the photo-
resist method or the screen resist method. For small and/or intricate cutting patterns and
close tolerances, the photoresist method is used. Tolerances as close as 0.0025 mm
(0.0001 in) can be held on 0.025 mm (0.001 in) thick stock using the photoresist method of
masking. As stock thickness increases, more generous tolerances must be allowed. Screen
resist masking methods are not nearly so accurate as photoresist. The small work size in
chemical blanking excludes the cut and peel maskant method.
Using the screen resist method to illustrate, the steps in chemical blanking are shown
in Figure 26.17. Because chemical etching takes place on both sides of the part in chemical
blanking,itisimportantthatthemaskingprocedureprovidesaccurateregistrationbetween
the two sides. Otherwise, the erosion into the part from opposite directions will not line up.
This is especially critical with small part sizes and intricate patterns.
Application of chemical blanking is generally limited to thin materials and/or
intricate patterns for reasons given in the preceding. Maximum stock thickness is around
0.75 mm (0.030 in). Also, hardened and brittle materials can be processed by chemical
blanking where mechanical methods would surely fracture the work. Figure 26.18
presents a sampling of parts produced by the chemical blanking process.
Chemical Engraving
Chemical engraving is a chemical machining process for making
name plates and other flat panels that have lettering and/or artwork on one side. These
plates and panels would otherwise be made using a conventional engraving machine or
similar process. Chemical engraving can be used to make panels with either recessed
lettering or raised lettering, simply by reversing the portions of the panel to be etched.
Masking is done by either the photoresist or screen resist methods. The sequence in
chemical engraving is similar to the other CHM processes, except that a filling operation
follows etching. The purpose of filling is to apply paint or other coating into the recessed
areas that have been created by etching. Then, the panel is immersed in a solution that
dissolves the resist but does not attack the coating material. Thus, when the resist is
removed, the coating remains in the etched areas but not in the areas that were masked.
The effect is to highlight the pattern.
Photochemical Machining
Photochemical machining (PCM) is chemical machining in
which the photoresist method of masking is used. The term can therefore be applied
correctly to chemical blanking and chemical engraving when these methods use the
photographic resist method. PCM is employed in metalworking when close tolerances
FIGURE 26.17
Sequence of processing
steps in chemical milling:
(1) clean raw part,
(2) apply maskant,
(3) scribe, cut, and peel
the maskant from areas
to be etched, (4) etch,
and (5) remove maskant
and clean to yield
ﬁnished part.
648
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

and/or intricate patterns are required on flat parts. Photochemical processes are also used
extensively in the electronics industry to produce intricate circuit designs on semi-
conductor wafers (Section 34.3).
Figure 26.19 shows the sequence of steps in photochemical machining as it is
applied to chemical blanking. There are various ways to photographically expose the
desired image onto the resist. The figure shows the negative in contact with the surface of
the resist during exposure. This is contact printing, but other photographic printing
methods are available that expose the negative through a lens system to enlarge or reduce
FIGURE 26.18
Parts
made by chemical
blanking. (Courtesy of
Buckbee-Mears, St. Paul.)
FIGURE 26.19
Sequence of processing
steps in photochemical
machining: (1) clean raw
part; (2) apply resist
(maskant) by dipping,
spraying, or painting;
(3) place negative on
resist; (4) expose to
ultraviolet light;
(5) develop to remove
resist from areas to be
etched; (6) etch (shown
partially etched); (7) etch
(completed); (8) remove
resist and clean to yield
ﬁnished part.
Section 26.4/Chemical Machining
649

the size of the pattern printed on the resist surface. Photoresist materials in current use
are sensitive to ultraviolet light but not to light of other wavelengths. Therefore, with
proper lighting in the factory, there is no need to carry out the processing steps in a dark
room environment. Once the masking operation is accomplished, the remaining steps in
the procedure are similar to the other chemical machining methods.
In photochemical machining, the term corresponding to etch factor is anisotropy,
which is defined as the depth of cut d divided by the undercut u (see Figure 26.17). This is
the same definition as in Eq. (26.9).
26.5
APPLICATION CONSIDERATIONS
Typical applications of nontraditional processes include special geometric features and
work materials that cannot be readily processed by conventional techniques. In this
section, we examine these issues. We also summarize the general performance character-
istics of nontraditional processes.
Workpart Geometry and Work Materials
Some of the special workpart shapes for
which nontraditional processes are well suited are listed in Table 26.4 along with the
nontraditional processes that are likely to be appropriate.
As a group, the nontraditional processes can be applied to nearly all work materials,
metals and nonmetals. However, certain processes are not suited to certain work
materials. Table 26.5 relates applicability of the nontraditional processes to various
types of materials. Several of the processes can be used on metals but not nonmetals. For
example, ECM, EDM, and PAM require work materials that are electrical conductors.
This generally limits their applicability to metal parts. Chemical machining depends on
the availability of an appropriate etchant for the given work material. Because metals are
more susceptible to chemical attack by various etchants, CHM is commonly used to
process metals. With some exceptions, USM, AJM, EBM, and LBM can be used on both
TABLE 26.4
Workpart geometric features and appropriate nontraditional processes.
Geometric Feature
Likely Process
Very small holes. Diameters less than 0.125 mm (0.005 in), in
some cases down to 0.025 mm (0.001 in), generally smaller
than the diameter range of conventional drill bits.
EBM, LBM
Holes with large depth-to-diameter ratios, e.g., d/D > 20.
Except for gun drilling, these holes cannot be machined in
conventional drilling operations.
ECM, EDM
Holes that are not round. Non-round holes cannot be drilled
with a rotating drill bit.
EDM, ECM
Narrow slots in slabs and plates of various materials. The
slots are not necessarily straight. In some cases, the slots have
extremely intricate shapes.
EBM, LBM, WJC,
wire EDM,
AWJC
Micromachining. In addition to cutting small holes and
narrow slits, there are other material removal applications in
which the workpart and/or areas to be cut are very small.
PCM, LBM, EBM
Shallow pockets and surface details in flat parts. There is a
significant range in the sizes of the parts in this category, from
microscopic integrated circuit chips to large aircraft panels.
CHM
Special contoured shapes for mold and die applications.
These applications are sometimes referred to as die-sinking.
EDM, ECM
650
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

metals and nonmetals. WJC is generally limited to the cutting of plastics, cardboards,
textiles, and other materials that do not possess the strength of metals.
Performance of Nontraditional Processes
The nontraditional processes are generally
characterized by low material removal rates and high specific energies relative to conven-
tional machining operations. The capabilities for dimensional control and surface finish of
the nontraditional processes vary widely, with some of the processes providing high
accuracies and good finishes, and others yielding poor accuracies and finishes. Surface
damage is also a consideration. Some of these processes produce very little metallurgical
damage at and immediately below the work surface, whereas others (mostly the thermal-
basedprocesses)doconsiderabledamagetothesurface.Table26.6comparesthesefeatures
TABLE 26.5
Applicability of selected nontraditional machining processes to various work materials. For
comparison, conventional milling and grinding are included in the compilation.
Nontraditional Processes
Conventional
Processes
Mech
Elec
Thermal
Chem
Work Material
USM
WJC
ECM
EDM
EBM
LBM
PAC
CHM
Milling
Grinding
Aluminum
C
C
B
B
B
B
A
A
A
A
Steel
B
D
A
A
B
B
A
A
A
A
Super alloys
C
D
A
A
B
B
A
B
B
B
Ceramic
A
D
D
D
A
A
D
C
D
C
Glass
A
D
D
D
B
B
D
B
D
C
Silicona
D
D
B
B
D
B
D
B
Plastics
B
B
D
D
B
B
D
C
B
C
Cardboardb
D
A
D
D
D
D
D
D
Textilesc
D
A
D
D
D
D
D
D
Compiled from [17] and other sources.
A, Good application; B, fair application, C, poor application; D, not applicable; and blank entries indicate no data available during
compilation.
aRefers to silicon used in fabricating integrated circuit chips.
bIncludes other paper products.
cIncludes felt, leather, and similar materials.
TABLE 26.6
Machining characteristics of the nontraditional machining processes
Nontraditional Processes
Conventional
Processes
Mech
Elec
Thermal
Chem
Work Material
USM
WJC
ECM
EDM
EBM
LBM
PAC
CHM
Milling
Grinding
Material removal rates
C
C
B
C
D
D
A
B–Da
A
B
Dimensional control
A
B
B
A–Db
A
A
D
A–Bb
B
A
Surface finish
A
A
B
B–Db
B
B
D
B
B–Cb
A
Surface damagec
B
B
A
D
D
D
D
A
B
B–Cb
Compiled from [17].
A, Excellent; B, good, C, fair, D, poor.
aRating depends on size of work and masking method.
bRating depends on cutting conditions.
cIn surface damage a good rating means low surface damage and poor rating means deep penetration of surface damage; thermal
processes can cause damage up to 0.020 in (0.50 mm) below the new work surface.
Section 26.5/Application Considerations
651

of the prominent nontraditional methods, using conventional milling and surface grinding
for comparison. Inspection of the data reveals wide differences in machining character-
istics. In comparing the characteristics of nontraditional and conventional machining, it
must be remembered that nontraditional processes are generally used where conventional
methods are not practical or economical.
REFERENCES
[1] Aronson, R. B.‘‘Spindles are the Key to HSM.’’
‘‘Waterjets Move into the Mainstream.’’ Manufac-
turing Engineering, April 2005, pp. 69–74.
[2] Bellows, G., and Kohls, J. B.‘‘Drilling without Drills,’’
Special Report 743, American Machinist, March
1982, pp. 173–188.
[3] Benedict, G. F. Nontraditional Manufacturing Pro-
cesses. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1987.
[4] Dini,J.W.‘‘FundamentalsofChemicalMilling.’’Special
Report768,AmericanMachinist,July1984,pp.99–114.
[5] Drozda, T. J., and C. Wick (eds.). Tool and Manu-
facturing Engineers Handbook. 4th ed. Vol. I,
Machining. Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
Dearborn, Michigan, 1983.
[6] El-Hofy, H. Advanced Machining Processes: Non-
traditional
and
Hybrid
Machining
Processes,
McGraw-Hill Professional, New York, 2005.
[7] Guitrau, E.‘‘Sparking Innovations.’’ Cutting Tool
Engineering. Vol. 52, No. 10, October 2000, pp. 36–43.
[8] Machining Data Handbook. 3rd ed., Vol. 2. Ma-
chinability Data Center, Metcut Research Associ-
ates Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio, 1980.
[9] Mason, F. ‘‘Water Jet Cuts Instrument Panels.’’
American Machinist & Automated Manufacturing,
July 1988, pp. 126–127.
[10] McGeough, J. A. Advanced Methods of Machining.
Chapman and Hall, London, England, 1988.
[11] O’Brien, R. L. Welding Handbook. 8th ed. Vol. 2,
Welding
Processes.
American
Welding
Society,
Miami, Florida, 1991.
[12] Pandey, P. C., and Shan, H. S. Modern Machining
Processes. Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, India,
1980.
[13] Vaccari, J. A.‘‘The Laser’s Edge in Metalworking.’’
Special Report 768, American Machinist. August
1984, pp. 99–114.
[14] Vaccari, J. A.‘‘Thermal Cutting.’’ Special Report
778, American Machinist, July 1988, pp. 111–126.
[15] Vaccari, J. A.‘‘Advances in Laser Cutting.’’ Ameri-
can Machinist & Automated Manufacturing, March
1988, pp. 59–61.
[16] Waurzyniak, P.‘‘EDM’s Cutting Edge.’’ Manufactur-
ing Engineering, Vol. 123, No. 5, November 1999,
pp. 38–44.
[17] Weller, E. J. (ed.). Nontraditional Machining Pro-
cesses. 2nd ed. Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
Dearborn, Michigan, 1984.
[18] www.engineershandbook.com/MfgMethods.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
26.1.
Why are the nontraditional material removal pro-
cesses important?
26.2.
There
are
four
categories
of
nontraditional
machining processes, based on principal energy
form. Name the four categories.
26.3.
How does the ultrasonic machining process work?
26.4.
Describe the water jet cutting process.
26.5.
What is the difference between water jet cutting,
abrasive water jet cutting, and abrasive jet cutting?
26.6.
Name the three main types of electrochemical
machining.
26.7.
Identify the two significant disadvantages of elec-
trochemical machining.
26.8.
How does increasing discharge current affect metal
removal rate and surface finish in electric discharge
machining?
26.9.
What is meant by the term overcut in electric
discharge machining?
26.10.
Identifytwomajordisadvantagesofplasmaarccutting.
26.11.
What are some of the fuels used in oxyfuel cutting?
26.12.
Name the four principal steps in chemical machining.
26.13.
What are the three methods of performing the
masking step in chemical machining?
26.14.
What is a photoresist in chemical machining?
26.15.
(Video) What are the three layers of a part’s
surface after undergoing EDM?
26.16.
(Video) What are two other names for ram type
EDMs?
26.17.
(Video) Name the four subsystems in a RAM
EDM process.
26.18.
(Video) Name the four subsystems in a wire EDM
process.
652
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 17 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
26.1.
Which of the following processes use mechanical
energy as the principal energy source (three correct
answers): (a) electrochemical grinding, (b) laser
beam machining, (c) conventional milling, (d) ul-
trasonic machining, (e) water jet cutting, and
(f) wire EDM?
26.2.
Ultrasonic machining can be used to machine both
metallic and nonmetallic materials: (a) true or
(b) false?
26.3.
Applications of electron beam machining are lim-
ited to metallic work materials because of the need
for the work to be electrically conductive: (a) true
or (b) false?
26.4.
Which one of the following is closest to the tem-
peratures used in plasma arc cutting: (a) 2750C
(5000F),
(b)
5500C
(10,000F),
(c)
8300C
(15,000F),
(d)
11,000C
(20,000F),
or
(e)
16,500C (30,000F)?
26.5.
Chemical milling is used in which of the following
applications (two best answers): (a) drilling holes
with high depth-to-diameter ratio, (b) making in-
tricate patterns in thin sheet metal, (c) removing
material to
make
shallow
pockets
in
metal,
(d) removing metal from aircraft wing panels,
and (e) cutting of plastic sheets?
26.6.
Etch factor is equal to which of the following in
chemical machining (more than one): (a) anisot-
ropy, (b) CIt, (c) d/u, and (d) u/d;
where C ¼
specific removal rate, d ¼ depth of cut, I ¼ current,
t ¼ time, and u ¼ undercut?
26.7.
Of the following processes, which one is noted for
the highest material removal rates: (a) electric
discharge machining, (b) electrochemical machin-
ing, (c) laser beam machining, (d) oxyfuel cutting,
(e) plasma arc cutting, (f) ultrasonic machining, or
(g) water jet cutting?
26.8.
Which one of the following processes would be
appropriate to drill a hole with a square cross
section, 0.25 inch on a side and 1-inch deep in a
steel
workpiece:
(a)
abrasive
jet
machining,
(b) chemical milling, (c) EDM, (d) laser beam
machining, (e) oxyfuel cutting, (f) water jet cutting,
or (g) wire EDM?
26.9.
Which of the following processes would be appro-
priate for cutting a narrow slot, less than 0.015 inch
wide, in a 3/8-in-thick sheet of fiber-reinforced
plastic (two best answers): (a) abrasive jet machin-
ing, (b) chemical milling, (c) EDM, (d) laser beam
machining, (e) oxyfuel cutting, (f) water jet cutting,
and (g) wire EDM?
26.10.
Which one of the following processes would be
appropriate for cutting a hole of 0.003 inch diame-
ter through a plate of aluminum that is 1/16 in
thick: (a) abrasive jet machining, (b) chemical mill-
ing, (c) EDM, (d) laser beam machining, (e) oxy-
fuel cutting, (f) water jet cutting, and (g) wire
EDM?
26.11.
Which of the following processes could be used to
cut a large piece of 1/2-inch plate steel into two
sections (two best answers): (a) abrasive jet
machining, (b) chemical milling, (c) EDM, (d) laser
beam machining, (e) oxyfuel cutting, (f) water jet
cutting, and (g) wire EDM?
PROBLEMS
Application Problems
26.1.
For the following application, identify one or more
nontraditional machining processes that might be
used, and present arguments to support your selec-
tion. Assume that either the part geometry or the
work material (or both) preclude the use of conven-
tional machining. The application is a matrix of
0.1 mm (0.004 in) diameter holes in a plate of
3.2 mm (0.125 in) thick hardened tool steel. The
matrix is rectangular, 75 by 125 mm (3.0 by 5.0 in)
withthe separationbetween holes in each direction¼
1.6 mm (0.0625 in).
26.2.
For the following application, identify one or more
nontraditional machining processes that might be
used, and present arguments to support your selec-
tion. Assume that either the part geometry or the
work material (or both) preclude the use of conven-
tional machining. The application is an engraved
aluminum printing plate to be used in an offset
Problems
653

printing press to make 275  350 mm (11  14 in)
posters of Lincoln’s Gettysburg address.
26.3.
For the following application, identify one or more
nontraditional machining processes that might be
used, and present arguments to support your selec-
tion. Assume that either the part geometry or the
work material (or both) preclude the use of conven-
tional machining. The application is a through-hole
in the shape of the letter L in a 12.5 mm (0.5 in) thick
plate of glass. The size of the ‘‘L’’ is 25  15 mm (1.0
 0.6 in) and the width of the hole is 3 mm (1/8 in).
26.4.
For the following application, identify one or more
nontraditional machining processes that might be
used, and present arguments to support your selec-
tion. Assume that either the part geometry or the
work material (or both) preclude the use of conven-
tional machining. The application is a blind-hole in
the shape of the letter G in a 50 mm (2.0 in) cube of
steel. The overall size of the ‘‘G’’ is 25  19 mm (1.0
 0.75 in), the depth of the hole is 3.8 mm (0.15 in),
and its width is 3 mm (1/8 in).
26.5.
Much of the work at the Cut-Anything Company
involves cutting and forming of flat sheets of fiber-
glass for the pleasure boat industry. Manual methods
basedonportable sawsarecurrently used toperform
the cutting operation, but production is slow and
scrap rates are high. The foreman says the company
shouldinvestina plasmaarccutting machine, butthe
plant manager thinks it would be too expensive.
What doyouthink?Justifyyouranswer byindicating
the characteristics of the process that make PAC
attractive or unattractive in this application.
26.6.
A furniture company that makes upholstered
chairs and sofas must cut large quantities of fabrics.
Many of these fabrics are strong and wear-resistant,
which properties make them difficult to cut. What
nontraditional process(es) would you recommend
to the company for this application? Justify your
answer by indicating the characteristics of the
process that make it attractive.
Electrochemical Machining
26.7.
Thefrontalworking area of the electrodein anECM
operation is 2000 mm2. The applied current ¼ 1800
amps and the voltage ¼ 12 volts. The material being
cut is nickel (valence ¼ 2), whose specific removal
rate is given in Table 26.1. (a) If the process is 90%
efficient, determine the rate of metal removal in
mm3/min. (b) If the resistivity of the electrolyte ¼
140 ohm-mm, determine the working gap.
26.8.
In an electrochemical machining operation, the fron-
talworkingareaoftheelectrodeis2.5in2.Theapplied
current ¼ 1500 amps, and the voltage ¼ 12 volts. The
material being cut is pure aluminum, whose specific
removal rate is given in Table 26.1. (a) If the ECM
process is 90% efficient, determine the rate of metal
removal in in3/hr. (b) If the resistivity of the electro-
lyte ¼ 6.2 ohm-in, determine the working gap.
26.9.
A square hole isto becut usingECM througha plate
ofpurecopper (valence ¼ 1)thatis20 mmthick.The
hole is 25 mm on each side, but the electrode used to
cut the hole is slightly less that 25 mm on its sides to
allow for overcut, and its shape includes a hole in its
center to permit the flow of electrolyte and reduce
the area of the cut. This tool design results in a
frontal area of 200 mm2. The applied current ¼ 1000
amps. Using an efficiency of 95%, determine how
long it will take to cut the hole.
26.10.
A 3.5 in diameter through hole is to be cut in a
block of pure iron (Valence ¼ 2) by electrochem-
ical machining. The block is 2.0 in thick. To speed
the cutting process, the electrode tool will have a
center hole of 3.0 in which will produce a center
core that can be removed after the tool breaks
through. The outside diameter of the electrode is
undersized to allow for overcut. The overcut is
expected to be 0.005 in on a side. If the efficiency
of the ECM operation is 90%, what current will
be required to complete the cutting operation in
20 minutes?
Electric Discharge Machining
26.11.
An electric discharge machining operation is being
performed on two work materials: tungsten and tin.
Determine the amount of metal removed in the
operation after 1 hour at a discharge current of
20 amps for each of these metals. Use metric units
and express the answers in mm3/hr. From Table 4.1,
the melting temperatures of tungsten and tin are
3410C and 232C, respectively.
26.12.
An electric discharge machining operation is being
performed on two work materials: tungsten and zinc.
Determine the amount of metal removed in the
operation after 1 hour at a discharge amperage ¼
20 amps for each of these metals. UseU.S. Customary
unitsandexpress the answer inin3/hr. From Table 4.1,
the melting temperatures of tungsten and zinc are
6170F and 420F, respectively.
654
Chapter 26/Nontraditional Machining and Thermal Cutting Processes

26.13.
SupposetheholeinProblem26.10weretobecutusing
EDM rather than ECM. Using a discharge current ¼
20 amps (which would be typical for EDM), how long
would it take to cut the hole? From Table 4.1, the
melting temperature of iron is 2802F.
26.14.
A metal removal rate of 0.01 in3/min is achieved in
a certain EDM operation on a pure iron workpart.
What metal removal rate would be achieved on
nickel in this EDM operation if the same discharge
current were used? The melting temperatures of
iron and nickel are 2802Fand 2651F, respectively.
26.15.
In a wire EDM operation performed on 7-mm-
thick C1080 steel using a tungsten wire electrode
whose diameter ¼ 0.125 mm, past experience sug-
gests that the overcut will be 0.02 mm, so that the
kerf width will be 0.165 mm. Using a discharge
current ¼ 10 amps, what is the allowable feed rate
that can be used in the operation? Estimate the
melting temperature of 0.80% carbon steel from
the phase diagram in Figure 6.4.
26.16.
Awire EDM operation is to be performed on a slab
of 3/4-in-thick aluminum using a brass wire elec-
trode whose diameter ¼ 0.005 in. It is anticipated
that the overcut will be 0.001 in, so that the kerf
width will be 0.007 in. Using a discharge current ¼
7 amps, what is the expected allowable feed rate
that can be used in the operation? The melting
temperature of aluminum is 1220F.
26.17.
A wire EDM operation is used to cut out punch-
and-die components from 25-mm-thick tool steel
plates. However, in preliminary cuts, the surface
finish on the cut edge is poor. What changes in
discharge current and frequency of discharges
should be made to improve the finish?
Chemical Machining
26.18.
Chemical milling is used in an aircraft plant to create
pockets in wing sections made of an aluminum alloy.
The starting thickness of one workpart of interest is
20 mm. A series of rectangular-shaped pockets
12 mm deep are to be etched with dimensions 200
mm by 400 mm. The corners of each rectangle are
radiused to 15 mm. The part is an aluminum alloy
and the etchant is NaOH. The penetration rate for
this combination is 0.024 mm/min and the etch factor
is 1.75. Determine (a) metal removal rate in mm3/
min, (b) time requiredto etch to the specified depth,
and (c) required dimensions of the opening in the
cut and peel maskant to achieve the desired pocket
size on the part.
26.19.
In a chemical milling operation on a flat mild steel
plate, it is desired to cut an ellipse-shaped pocket to
a depth of 0.4 in. The semiaxes of the ellipse are a ¼
9.0 in and b ¼ 6.0 in. A solution of hydrochloric and
nitric acids will be used as the etchant. Determine
(a) metal removal rate in in3/hr, (b) time required
to etch to depth, and (c) required dimensions of the
opening in the cut and peel maskant required to
achieve the desired pocket size on the part.
26.20.
Inacertainchemicalblankingoperation,asulfuricacid
etchant is used to remove material from a sheet of
magnesium alloy. The sheet is 0.25 mm thick. The
screen resist method of masking was used to permit
highproductionratestobeachieved.Asitturnsout,the
process is producing a large proportion of scrap. Speci-
fied tolerances of 0.025 mm are not being achieved.
The foreman in the CHM department complains that
there must be something wrong with the sulfuric acid.
‘‘Perhaps the concentration is incorrect,’’ he suggests.
Analyze the problem and recommend a solution.
26.21.
In a chemical blanking operation, stock thickness of
the aluminum sheet is 0.015 in. The pattern to be cut
out of the sheet is a hole pattern, consisting of a
matrix of 0.100-in diameter holes. If photochemical
machining is used to cut these holes, and contact
printing isusedtomake the resist(maskant)pattern,
determine the diameter of the holes that should be
used in the pattern.
Problems
655

Part VII
Property Enhancing
and Surface
Processing
Operations
27
HEAT TREATMENT
OF METALS
Chapter Contents
27.1
Annealing
27.2
Martensite Formation in Steel
27.2.1
The Time-Temperature-
Transformation Curve
27.2.2
The Heat Treatment Process
27.2.3
Hardenability
27.3
Precipitation Hardening
27.4
Surface Hardening
27.5
Heat Treatment Methods and Facilities
27.5.1
Furnaces for Heat Treatment
27.5.2
Selective Surface-Hardening Methods
The manufacturing processes covered in the preceding chap-
ters involve the creation of part geometry. We now consider
processes that either enhance the properties of the workpart
(Chapter 27) or apply some surface treatment to it, such as
cleaning or coating (Chapter 28). Property-enhancing oper-
ations are performed to improve mechanical or physical
properties of the work material. They do not alter part
geometry, at least not intentionally. The most important
property-enhancing operations are heat treatments. Heat
treatment involves various heating and cooling procedures
performed to effect microstructural changes in a material,
which in turn affect its mechanical properties. Its most
common applications are on metals, discussed in this chap-
ter. Similar treatments are performed on glass-ceramics
(Section 7.4.3), tempered glass (Section 12.3.1), and powder
metals and ceramics (Sections 16.3.3 and 17.2.3).
Heat treatment operations can be performed on a
metallic workpart at various times during its manufacturing
sequence. In some cases, the treatment is applied before
shaping (e.g., to soften the metal so that it can be more
easily formed while hot). In other cases, heat treatment is
used to relieve the effects of strain hardening that occur
656

during forming, so that the material can be subjected to further deformation. Heat
treatment can also be accomplished at or near the end of the sequence to achieve the final
strength and hardness required in the finished product. The principal heat treatments are
annealing, martensite formation in steel, precipitation hardening, and surface hardening.
27.1
ANNEALING
Annealing consists of heating the metal to a suitable temperature, holding at that
temperature for a certain time (called soaking), and slowly cooling. It is performed
on a metal for any of the following reasons: (1) to reduce hardness and brittleness, (2) to
alter microstructure so that desirable mechanical properties can be obtained, (3) to
soften metals for improved machinability or formability, (4) to recrystallize cold-worked
(strain-hardened) metals, and (5) to relieve residual stresses induced by prior processes.
Different terms are used in annealing, depending on the details of the process and the
temperature used relative to the recrystallization temperature of the metal being treated.
Full annealing is associated with ferrous metals (usually low and medium carbon
steels); it involves heating the alloy into the austenite region, followed by slow cooling in
the furnace to produce coarse pearlite. Normalizing involves similar heating and soaking
cycles, but the cooling rates are faster. The steel is allowed to cool in air to room
temperature. This results in fine pearlite, higher strength and hardness, but lower ductility
than the full anneal treatment.
Cold-worked parts are often annealed to reduce effects of strain hardening and
increase ductility. The treatment allows the strain-hardened metal to recrystallize
partially or completely, depending on temperatures, soaking periods, and cooling rates.
When annealing is performed to allow for further cold working of the part, it is called a
process anneal. When performed on the completed (cold-worked) part to remove the
effects of strain hardening and where no subsequent deformation will be accomplished, it
is simply called an anneal. The process itself is pretty much the same, but different terms
are used to indicate the purpose of the treatment.
If annealing conditions permit full recovery of the cold-worked metal to its original
grain structure, then recrystallization has occurred. After this type of anneal, the metal
has the new geometry created by the forming operation, but its grain structure and
associated properties are essentially the same as before cold working. The conditions that
tend to favor recrystallization are higher temperature, longer holding time, and slower
cooling rate. If the annealing process only permits partial return of the grain structure
toward its original state, it is termed a recovery anneal. Recovery allows the metal to
retain most of the strain hardening obtained in cold working, but the toughness of the
part is improved.
Theprecedingannealingoperationsareperformedprimarilytoaccomplishfunctions
other than stress relief. However, annealing is sometimes performed solely to relieve
residual stresses in the workpiece. Called stress-relief annealing, it helps to reduce
distortion and dimensional variations that might otherwise occur in the stressed parts.
27.2
MARTENSITE FORMATION IN STEEL
The iron–carbon phase diagram in Figure 6.4 indicates the phases of iron and iron carbide
(cementite) present under equilibrium conditions. It assumes that cooling from high
temperature is slow enough to permit austenite to decompose into a mixture of ferrite
and cementite (Fe3C) at room temperature. This decomposition reaction requires
Section 27.2/Martensite Formation in Steel
657

diffusion and other processes that depend on time and temperature to transform the
metal into its preferred final form. However, under conditions of rapid cooling, so that
the equilibrium reaction is inhibited, austenite transforms into a nonequilibrium phase
called martensite. Martensite is a hard, brittle phase that gives steel its unique ability to
be strengthened to very high levels. Our video clip on heat treatment gives an overview of
the heat treatment of steel.
VIDEO CLIP
Heat Treatment: View the segment on the iron–carbon phase diagram.
27.2.1 THE TIME-TEMPERATURE-TRANSFORMATION CURVE
The nature of the martensite transformation can best be understood using the time-
temperature-transformationcurve(TTTcurve)foreutectoidsteel,illustratedinFigure27.1.
The TTT curve shows how cooling rate affects the transformation of austenite into various
possible phases. The phases can be divided between (1) alternative forms of ferrite and
cementite and (2) martensite. Time is displayed (logarithmically for convenience) along
the horizontal axis, and temperature is scaled on the vertical axis. The curve is interpreted
by starting at time zero in the austenite region (somewhere above the A1 temperature line
for the given composition) and proceeding downward and to the right along a trajectory
representing how the metal is cooled as a function of time. The TTT curve shown in the
figure is for a specific composition of steel (0.80% carbon). The shape of the curve is
different for other compositions.
At slow cooling rates, the trajectory proceeds through the region indicating
transformation into pearlite or bainite, which are alternative forms of ferrite–carbide
mixtures. Because these transformations take time, the TTT diagram shows two lines—
the start and finish of the transformation as time passes, indicated for the different phase
regions by the subscripts s and f, respectively. Pearlite is a mixture of ferrite and carbide
FIGURE 27.1
The TTT
curve, showing the
transformation of
austenite into other
phases as a function of
time and temperature for
a composition of about
0.80% C steel. The cooling
trajectory shown here
yields martensite.
F
i
n
is
h 
S
t
a
rt
 
Pos
sible 
cooling tr
ajec
tory
 
800
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
Temperature, °F
Temperature, °C
A1 = 723°C (1333°F)
1.0
10
102
Time, s
103
104
Martensite, M
Mf
Ms
Bs
Ps
Pf
Bs
Bf
 + M
 + Fe3C
 + 
Pearlite, P
Bainite, B
Austenite, 
658
Chapter 27/Heat Treatment of Metals

phases in the form of thin parallel plates. It is obtained by slow cooling from austenite, so
that the cooling trajectory passes through Ps above the ‘‘nose’’ of the TTT curve. Bainite
is an alternative mixture of the same phases that can be produced by initial rapid cooling
to a temperature somewhat above Ms, so that the nose of the TTT curve is avoided; this is
followed by much slower cooling to pass through Bs and into the ferrite–carbide region.
Bainite has a needle-like or feather-like structure consisting of fine carbide regions.
If cooling occurs at a sufficiently rapid rate (indicated by the dashed line in Figure 27.1),
austenite is transformed into martensite. Martensite is a unique phase consisting of an
iron–carbon solution whose composition is the same as the austenite from which it was
derived. The face-centered cubic structure of austenite is transformed into the body-centered
tetragonal (BCT) structure of martensite almost instantly—without the time-dependent
diffusionprocessneededtoseparateferriteandironcarbideintheprecedingtransformations.
During cooling, the martensite transformation begins at a certain temperature Ms,
and finishes at a lower temperature Mf, as shown in our TTT diagram. At points between
these two levels, the steel is a mixture of austenite and martensite. If cooling is stopped at
a temperature between the Ms and Mf lines, the austenite will transform to bainite as the
time-temperature trajectory crosses the Bs threshold. The level of the Ms line is
influenced by alloying elements, including carbon. In some cases, the Ms line is depressed
below room temperature, making it impossible for these steels to form martensite by
traditional heat-treating methods.
The extreme hardness of martensite results from the lattice strain created by
carbon atoms trapped in the BCT structure, thus providing a barrier to slip. Figure 27.2
shows the significant effect that the martensite transformation has on the hardness of
steel for increasing carbon contents.
27.2.2 THE HEAT TREATMENT PROCESS
The heat treatment to form martensite consists of two steps: austenitizing and quenching.
These steps are often followed by tempering to produce tempered martensite. Austenitiz-
ing involves heating the steel to a sufficiently high temperature that it is converted
FIGURE 27.2
Hardness of
plain carbon steel as a
function of carbon content in
(hardened) martensite and
pearlite (annealed).
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.4
0.2
0.6
0.8
1.0
% Carbon
Martensite
Pearlite (annealed)
Hardness, Rockwell C (HRC)
Section 27.2/Martensite Formation in Steel
659

entirely or partially to austenite. This temperature can be determined from the phase
diagram for the particular alloy composition. The transformation to austenite involves a
phase change, which requires time as well as heat. Accordingly, the steel must be held at
the elevated temperature for a sufficient period of time to allow the new phase to form
and the required homogeneity of composition to be achieved.
The quenching step involves cooling the austenite rapidly enough to avoid passing
through the nose of the TTT curve, as indicated in the cooling trajectory shown in
Figure 27.1. The cooling rate depends on the quenching medium and the rate of heat
transfer within the steel workpiece. Various quenching media are used in commercial heat
treatment practice: (1) brine—salt water, usually agitated; (2) fresh water—still, not
agitated; (3) still oil;and (4)air. Quenchingin agitatedbrineprovidesthe fastestcoolingof
the heated part surface, whereas air quench is the slowest. Trouble is, the more effective
the quenching media is at cooling, the more likely it is to cause internal stresses, distortion,
and cracks in the product.
The rate of heat transfer within the part depends largely on its mass and geometry. A
large cubic shape will cool much more slowly than a small, thin sheet. The coefficient of
thermal conductivity k of theparticular composition is also a factor in the flow of heat inthe
metal. There is considerable variation in k for different grades of steel; for example, plain
lowcarbonsteelhasatypical kvalueequalto0.046J/sec-mm-C(2.2Btu/hr-in-F),whereasa
highly alloyed steel might have one-third that value.
Martensiteishardandbrittle.Temperingisaheattreatmentappliedtohardenedsteels
to reduce brittleness, increase ductility and toughness, and relieve stresses in the martensite
structure. It involves heating and soaking at a temperature below the austenitizing level for
about 1 hour, followed by slow cooling. This results in precipitation of very fine carbide
particles from the martensitic iron–carbon solution, and gradually transforms the crystal
structure from BCT to BCC. This new structure is called tempered martensite. A slight
reduction in strength and hardness accompanies the improvement in ductility and tough-
ness.Thetemperatureandtimeofthetemperingtreatmentcontrolthedegreeofsofteningin
the hardened steel, because the change from untempered to tempered martensite involves
diffusion.
Taken together, the three steps in the heat treatment of steel to form tempered
martensite can be pictured as in Figure 27.3. There are two heating and cooling cycles, the
first to produce martensite and the second to temper the martensite.
27.2.3 HARDENABILITY
Hardenability refers to the relative capacity of a steel to be hardened by transformation
to martensite. It is a property that determines the depth below the quenched surface to
FIGURE 27.3
Typical
heat treatment of steel:
austenitizing, quenching,
and tempering.
800
1500
1000
500
600
400
200
Time
Temperature, °F
Temperature, °C
Austenitizing
Quenching
Tempering
660
Chapter 27/Heat Treatment of Metals

which the steel is hardened, or the severity of the quench required to achieve a certain
hardness penetration. Steels with good hardenability can be hardened more deeply
below the surface and do not require high cooling rates. Hardenability does not refer to
the maximum hardness that can be attained in the steel; that depends on the carbon
content.
The hardenability of a steel is increased through alloying. Alloying elements having
the greatest effect are chromium, manganese, molybdenum (and nickel, to a lesser
extent). The mechanism by which these alloying ingredients operate is to extend the time
before the start of the austenite-to-pearlite transformation in the TTT diagram. In effect,
the TTT curve is moved to the right, thus permitting slower quenching rates during
quenching. Therefore, the cooling trajectory is able to follow a less hastened path to the
Ms line, more easily avoiding the nose of the TTT curve.
The most common method for measuring hardenability is the Jominy end-quench
test. The test involves heating a standard specimen of diameter ¼ 25.4 mm (1.0 in) and
length ¼ 102 mm (4.0 in) into the austenite range, and then quenching one end with a
stream of cold water while the specimen is supported vertically as shown in Figure 27.4
(a). The cooling rate in the test specimen decreases with increased distance from the
quenched end. Hardenability is indicated by the hardness of the specimen as a function of
distance from quenched end, as in Figure 27.4(b).
27.3
PRECIPITATION HARDENING
Precipitation hardening involves the formation of fine particles (precipitates) that act to
block the movement of dislocations and thus strengthen and harden the metal. It is the
principal heat treatment for strengthening alloys of aluminum, copper, magnesium,
nickel, and other nonferrous metals. Precipitation hardening can also be used to
strengthen certain steel alloys. When applied to steels, the process is called maraging
(an abbreviation of martensite and aging), and the steels are called maraging steels
(Section 6.2.3).
The necessary condition that determines whether an alloy system can be strength-
ened by precipitation hardening is the presence of a sloping solvus line, as shown in the
phase diagram of Figure 27.5(a). A composition that can be precipitation hardened is one
FIGURE 27.4
The
Jominy end-quench test:
(a) setup of the test,
showing end quench of
the test specimen; and
(b) typical pattern of
hardness readings as a
function of distance from
quenched end.
Test specimen
25.4-mm
diameter
102-mm
length
(a)
Water
24°C (75° F)
60
50
40
30
Hardness, Rockwell C
Distance from
quenched end
(b)
Section 27.3/Precipitation Hardening
661

that contains two phases at room temperature, but which can be heated to a temperature
that dissolves the second phase. Composition C satisfies this requirement. The heat
treatment process consists of three steps, illustrated in Figure 27.5(b): (1) solution
treatment, in which the alloy is heated to a temperature Ts above the solvus line into
the alpha phase region and held for a period sufficient to dissolve the beta phase;
(2) quenching to room temperature to create a supersaturated solid solution; and
(3) precipitation treatment, in which the alloy is heated to a temperature Tp, below
Ts, to cause precipitation of fine particles of the beta phase. This third step is called aging,
and for this reason the whole heat treatment is sometimes called age hardening. However,
aging can occur in some alloys at room temperature, and so the term precipitation
hardening seems more precise for the three-step heat treatment process under discussion
here. When the aging step is performed at room temperature, it is called natural aging.
When it is accomplished at an elevated temperature, as in our figure, the term artificial
aging is often used.
It is during the aging step that high strength and hardness are achieved in the alloy.
The combination of temperature and time during the precipitation treatment (aging) is
critical in bringing out the desired properties in the alloy. At higher precipitation
treatment temperatures, as in Figure 27.6(a), the hardness peaks in a relatively short
time; whereas at lower temperatures, as in Figure 27.6(b), more time is required to
harden the alloy but its maximum hardness is likely to be greater than in the first case. As
seen in the plot, continuation of the aging process results in a reduction in hardness and
strength properties, called overaging. Its overall effect is similar to annealing.
FIGURE 27.5
Precipitation hardening:
(a) phase diagram of an
alloy system consisting of
metals A and B that can be
precipitation hardened;
and (b) heat treatment:
(1) solution treatment,
(2) quenching, and (3)
precipitation treatment.
FIGURE 27.6
Effect of
temperature and time
during precipitation
treatment (aging): (a) high
precipitation tempera-
ture; and (b) lower pre-
cipitation temperature.
662
Chapter 27/Heat Treatment of Metals

27.4
SURFACE HARDENING
Surface hardening refers to any of several thermochemical treatments applied to steels in
which the composition of the part surface is altered by addition of carbon, nitrogen, or
other elements. The most common treatments are carburizing, nitriding, and carbon-
itriding. These processes are commonly applied to low carbon steel parts to achieve a
hard, wear-resistant outer shell while retaining a tough inner core. The term case
hardening is often used for these treatments.
Carburizing is the most common surface-hardening treatment. It involves heating a
part of low carbon steel in the presence of a carbon-rich environment so that C is diffused
into the surface. In effect the surface is converted to high carbon steel, capable of higher
hardness than the low-C core. The carbon-rich environment can be created in several
ways. One method involves the use of carbonaceous materials such as charcoal or coke
packed in a closed container with the parts. This process, called pack carburizing,
produces a relatively thick layer on the part surface, ranging from around 0.6 to 4 mm
(0.025 to 0.150 in). Another method, called gas carburizing, uses hydrocarbon fuels such
as propane (C3H8) inside a sealed furnace to diffuse carbon into the parts. The case
thickness in this treatment is thin, 0.13 to 0.75 mm (0.005 to 0.030 in). Another process is
liquid carburizing, which employs a molten salt bath containing sodium cyanide
(NaCN), barium chloride (BaCl2), and other compounds to diffuse carbon into the
steel. This process produces surface layer thicknesses generally between those of the
other two treatments. Typical carburizing temperatures are 875 to 925C (1600 to
1700F), well into the austenite range.
Carburizing followed by quenching produces a case hardness of around HRC=60.
However, because the internal regions of the part consist of low carbon steel, and its
hardenability is low, it is unaffected by the quench and remains relatively tough and
ductile to withstand impact and fatigue stresses.
Nitriding is a treatment in which nitrogen is diffused into the surfaces of special
alloy steels to produce a thin hard casing without quenching. To be most effective, the
steel must contain certain alloying ingredients such as aluminum (0.85% to 1.5%) or
chromium (5% or more). These elements form nitride compounds that precipitate as very
fine particles in the casing to harden the steel. Nitriding methods include: gas nitriding, in
which the steel parts are heated in an atmosphere of ammonia (NH3) or other nitrogen-
rich gas mixture; and liquid nitriding, in which the parts are dipped in molten cyanide salt
baths. Both processes are carried out at around 500C (950F). Case thicknesses range
as low as 0.025 mm (0.001 in) and up to around 0.5 mm (0.020 in), with hardnesses up to
HRC 70.
As its name suggests, carbonitriding is a treatment in which both carbon and
nitrogen are absorbed into the steel surface, usually by heating in a furnace containing
carbon and ammonia. Case thicknesses are usually 0.07 to 0.5 mm (0.003 to 0.020 in), with
hardnesses comparable with those of the other two treatments.
Two additional surface-hardening treatments diffuse chromium and boron, respec-
tively, into the steel to produce casings that are typically only 0.025 to 0.05 mm (0.001 to
0.002 in) thick. Chromizing requires higher temperatures and longer treatment times
than the preceding surface-hardening treatments, but the resulting casing is not only hard
and wear resistant, it is also heat and corrosion resistant. The process is usually applied to
low carbon steels. Techniques for diffusing chromium into the surface include: packing
the steel parts in chromium-rich powders or granules, dipping in a molten salt bath
containing Cr and Cr salts, and chemical vapor deposition (Section 28.5.2).
Boronizing is performed on tool steels, nickel- and cobalt-based alloys, and cast
irons, in addition to plain carbon steels, using powders, salts, or gas atmospheres
containing boron. The process results in a thin casing with high abrasion resistance
Section 27.4/Surface Hardening
663

and low coefficient of friction. Casing hardnesses reach 70 HRC. When boronizing is used
on low carbon and low alloy steels, corrosion resistance is also improved.
27.5
HEAT TREATMENT METHODS AND FACILITIES
Most heat treatment operations are performed in furnaces. In addition, other techniques
can be used to selectively heat only the work surface or a portion of the work surface.
Thus, we divide this section into two categories of methods and facilities for heat
treatment [11]: (1) furnaces and (2) selective surface-hardening methods.
It should be mentioned that some of the equipment described here is used for other
processes in addition to heat treatment; these include melting metals for casting (Section
11.4.1); heating before warm and hot working (Section 18.3); brazing, soldering, and
adhesive curing (Chapter 31); and semiconductor processing (Chapter 34).
27.5.1 FURNACES FOR HEAT TREATMENT
Furnaces vary greatly in heating technology, size and capacity, construction, and atmo-
sphere control. They usually heat the workparts by a combination of radiation, convection,
and conduction. Heating technologies divide between fuel-fired and electric heating. Fuel-
fired furnaces are normally direct-fired, which means that the work is exposed directly to
the combustion products. Fuels include gases (such as natural gas or propane) and oils that
can be atomized (such as diesel fuel andfuel oil). The chemistry of thecombustion products
can be controlled by adjusting the fuel-air or fuel-oxygen mixture to minimize scaling
(oxide formation) on the work surface. Electric furnaces use electric resistance for heating;
theyarecleaner,quieter,andprovidemoreuniformheating,buttheyaremoreexpensiveto
purchase and operate.
A conventional furnace is an enclosure designed to resist heat loss and accommodate
the size of the work to be processed. Furnaces are classified as batch or continuous. Batch
furnacesaresimpler,basicallyconsistingofa heatingsysteminaninsulatedchamber, witha
door for loading and unloading the work. Continuous furnaces are generally used for
higher production rates and provide a meansof moving thework through theinterior of the
heating chamber.
Special atmospheres are required in certain heat treatment operations, such as some
of the surface hardening treatments we have discussed. These atmospheres include carbon-
and nitrogen-rich environmentsfor diffusion of these elementsinto the surface of the work.
Atmosphere control is desirable in conventional heat treatment operations to avoid
excessive oxidation or decarburization.
Other furnace types include salt bath and fluidized bed. Salt bath furnaces consist of
vesselscontainingmoltensaltsofchloridesand/ornitrates.Partstobetreatedareimmersed
in the molten media. Fluidized bed furnaces have a container in which small inert particles
are suspended by a high-velocity stream of hot gas. Under proper conditions, the aggregate
behavior of the particles is fluid-like; thus, rapid heating of parts immersed in the particle
bed occurs.
27.5.2 SELECTIVE SURFACE-HARDENING METHODS
These methods heat only the surface of the work, or local areas of the work surface. They
differ from surface-hardening methods (Section 27.4) in that no chemical changes occur.
Here the treatments are only thermal. The selective surface hardening methods include
664
Chapter 27/Heat Treatment of Metals

flame hardening, induction hardening, high-frequency resistance heating, electron beam
heating, and laser beam heating.
Flame hardening involves heating the work surface by means of one or more
torches followed by rapid quenching. As a hardening process, it is applied to carbon and
alloy steels, tool steels, and cast irons. Fuels include acetylene (C2H2), propane (C3H8),
and other gases. The name flame hardening invokes images of a highly manual operation
with general lack of control over the results; however, the process can be set up to include
temperature control, fixtures for positioning the work relative to the flame, and indexing
devices that operate on a precise cycle time, all of which provide close control over the
resulting heat treatment. It is fast and versatile, lending itself to high production as well as
big components such as large gears that exceed the capacity of furnaces.
Induction heating involves application of electromagnetically induced energy
supplied by an induction coil to an electrically conductive workpart. Induction heating
is widely used in industry for processes such as brazing, soldering, adhesive curing, and
various heat treatments. When used for hardening steel, quenching follows heating. A
typical setup is illustrated in Figure 27.7. The induction heating coil carries a high-
frequency alternating current that induces a current in the encircled workpart to effect
heating. The surface, a portion of the surface, or the entire mass of the part can be heated
by the process. Induction heating provides a fast and efficient method of heating any
electrically conductive material. Heating cycle times are short, so the process lends itself
to high production as well as midrange production.
High-frequency (HF) resistance heating is used to harden specific areasof steel work
surfaces by application of localized resistance heating at high frequency (400 kHz typical).
A typical setup is shown in Figure 27.8. The apparatus consists of a water-cooled proximity
FIGURE 27.7
Typical
induction heating setup.
High-frequency
alternating current in a
coil induces current in
the workpart to effect
heating.
FIGURE 27.8
Typical
setup for high-frequency
resistance heating.
Section 27.5/Heat Treatment Methods and Facilities
665

conductor located over the area to be heated. Contacts are attached to the workpart at the
outer edges of the area. When the HF current is applied, the region beneath the proximity
conductor is heated rapidly to high temperature—heating to the austenite range typically
requires less than a second. When the power is turned off, the area, usually a narrow line as
in our figure, is quenched by heat transfer to the surrounding metal. Depth of the treated
area is around 0.63 mm (0.025 in); hardness depends on carbon content of the steel and can
range up to 60 HRC [11].
Electron beam (EB) heating involves localized surface hardening of steel in which
the electron beam is focused onto a small area, resulting in rapid heat buildup. Austenitiz-
ing temperatures can often be achieved in less than a second. When the directed beam is
removed, the heated area is immediately quenched and hardened by heat transfer to the
surrounding cold metal. A disadvantage of EB heating is that best results are achieved
when the process is performed in a vacuum. A special vacuum chamber is needed, and
time is required to draw the vacuum, thus slowing production rates.
Laser beam (LB) heating uses a high-intensity beam of coherent light focused on a
small area. The beam is usually moved along a defined path on the work surface, causing
heating of the steel into the austenite region. When the beam is moved, the area is
immediately quenched by heat conduction to the surrounding metal. Laser is an acronym
for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. The advantage of LB over EB
heating is that laser beams do not require a vacuum to achieve best results. Energy
density levels in EB and LB heating are lower than in cutting or welding.
REFERENCES
[1] ASM Handbook. Vol. 4, Heat Treating. ASM Inter-
national, Materials Park, Ohio, 1991.
[2] Babu, S. S., and Totten, G. E. Steel Heat Treatment
Handbook, 2nd ed. CRC Taylor & Francis, Boca
Raton, Florida, 2006.
[3] Brick, R. M., Pense, A. W., and Gordon, R. B.
Structure and Properties of Engineering Materials.
4th ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1977.
[4] Chandler, H. (ed.). Heat Treater’s Guide: Practices
and Procedures for Irons and Steels. ASM Interna-
tional, Materials Park, Ohio, 1995.
[5] Chandler, H. (ed.). Heat Treater’s Guide: Practices
and Procedures for Nonferrous Alloys. ASM Inter-
national, Materials Park, Ohio, 1996.
[6] Dossett, J. L., and Boyer, H. E. Practical Heat
Treating, 2nd ed. 2006.
[7] Flinn, R. A., and Trojan, P. K. Engineering Materials
and Their Applications. 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1995.
[8] Guy, A. G., and Hren, J. J. Elements of Physical Metal-
lurgy. 3rd ed. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachu-
setts, 1974.
[9] Ostwald, P. F., and Munoz, J. Manufacturing Pro-
cesses and Systems. 9th ed. John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 1997.
[10] Vaccari, J. A.‘‘Fundamentals of heat treating.’’ Spe-
cial Report 737, American Machinist. September
1981, pp. 185–200.
[11] Wick, C. and Veilleux, R. F. (eds.). Tool and Man-
ufacturing Engineers Handbook. 4th ed. Vol. 3,
Materials,
Finishing, and
Coating.
Section 2:
Heat Treatment. Society of Manufacturing Engi-
neers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1985.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
27.1.
Why are metals heat treated?
27.2.
Identify the important reasons why metals are
annealed.
27.3.
What is the most important heat treatment for
hardening steels?
27.4.
What is the mechanism by which carbon strength-
ens steel during heat treatment?
27.5.
What information is conveyed by the TTT curve?
27.6.
What function is served by tempering?
27.7.
Define hardenability.
666
Chapter 27/Heat Treatment of Metals

27.8.
Name some of the elements that have the greatest
effect on the hardenability of steel.
27.9.
Indicate how the hardenability alloying elements
in steel affect the TTT curve.
27.10.
Define precipitation hardening.
27.11.
How does carburizing work?
27.12.
Identify the selective surface-hardening methods.
27.13.
(Video) List three properties of ferrite at room
temperature.
27.14.
(Video) How does austenite differ from ferrite?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 12 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
27.1.
Whichofthefollowingaretheusualobjectivesofheat
treatment (three best answers): (a) increase hard-
ness, (b) increase melting temperature, (c) increase
recrystallization temperature, (d) reduce brittle-
ness, (e) reduce density, and (f) relieve stresses?
27.2.
Of the following quenching media, which one
produces the most rapid cooling rate: (a) air,
(b) brine, (c) oil, or (d) pure water?
27.3.
Onwhichoneofthefollowingmetalsisthetreatment
called austenitizing be performed: (a) aluminum
alloys, (b) brass, (c) copper alloys, or (d) steel?
27.4.
The treatment in which the brittleness of martens-
ite is reduced is called which one of the following:
(a) aging, (b) annealing, (c) austenitizing, (d) nor-
malizing, (e) quenching, or (f) tempering?
27.5.
The Jominy end-quench test is designed to indicate
which one of the following: (a) cooling rate,
(b) ductility, (c) hardenability, (d) hardness, or
(e) strength?
27.6.
In precipitation hardening, the hardening and
strengthening of the metal occurs in which one
of the following steps: (a) aging, (b) quenching, or
(c) solution treatment?
27.7.
Which one of the following surface-hardening
treatments is the most common: (a) boronizing,
(b) carbonitriding, (c) carburizing, (d) chromizing,
or (e) nitriding?
27.8.
Which of the following are selective surface-hard-
ening methods (three correct answers): (a) auste-
nitizing, (b) electron beam heating, (c) fluidized
bed furnaces, (d) induction heating, (e) laser beam
heating, and (f) vacuum furnaces?
Multiple Choice Quiz
667

28
SURFACE
PROCESSING
OPERATIONS
Chapter Contents
28.1
Industrial Cleaning Processes
28.1.1
Chemical Cleaning
28.1.2
Mechanical Cleaning and Surface
Treatments
28.2
Diffusion and Ion Implantation
28.2.1
Diffusion
28.2.2
Ion Implantation
28.3
Plating and Related Processes
28.3.1
Electroplating
28.3.2
Electroforming
28.3.3
Electroless Plating
28.3.4
Hot Dipping
28.4
Conversion Coating
28.4.1
Chemical Conversion Coatings
28.2.4
Anodizing
28.5
Vapor Deposition Processes
28.5.1
Physical Vapor Deposition
28.5.2
Chemical Vapor Deposition
28.6
Organic Coatings
28.6.1
Application Methods
28.6.2
Powder Coating
28.7
Porcelain Enameling and Other Ceramic
Coatings
28.8
Thermal and Mechanical Coating Processes
28.8.1
Thermal Surfacing Processes
28.8.2
Mechanical Plating
The processes discussed in this chapter operate on the
surfaces of parts and/or products. The major categories of
surface processing operations are (1) cleaning, (2) surface
treatments, and (3) coating and thin film deposition. Clean-
ing refers to industrial cleaning processes that remove soils
and contaminants that result from previous processing or
the factory environment. They include both chemical and
mechanical cleaning methods. Surface treatments are me-
chanical and physical operations that alter the part surface
in some way, such as improving its finish or impregnating it
with atoms of a foreign material to change its chemistry and
physical properties.
Coating and thin film deposition include various pro-
cesses that apply a layer of material to a surface. Products
madeofmetalarealmostalwayscoatedbyelectroplating(e.g.,
chrome plating), painting, or other process. Principal reasons
for coating a metal are to (1) provide corrosion protection,
(2) enhance product appearance (e.g., providing a specified
color or texture), (3) increase wear resistance and/or reduce
friction of the surface, (4) increase electrical conductivity,
(5) increase electrical resistance, (6) prepare a metallic
surface for subsequent processing, and (7) rebuild surfaces
worn or eroded during service. Nonmetallic materials are
also sometimes coated. Examples include (1) plastic parts
coated to givethema metallicappearance; (2)antireflection
coatings on optical glass lenses; and (3) certain coating and
deposition processes used in the fabrication of semi-
conductor chips (Chapter 34) and printed circuit boards
(Chapter 35). In all cases, good adhesion must be achieved
between coating and substrate, and for this to occur the
substrate surface must be very clean.
28.1
INDUSTRIAL CLEANING
PROCESSES
Most workparts must be cleaned one or more times during
their manufacturing sequence. Chemical and/or mechanical
668

processesareusedtoaccomplishthiscleaning.Chemicalcleaningmethodsusechemicalsto
remove unwanted oils and soils from the workpiece surface. Mechanical cleaning involves
removal of substances from a surface by mechanical operations of various kinds. These
operations often serve other functions such as removing burrs, improving smoothness,
adding luster, and enhancing surface properties.
28.1.1 CHEMICAL CLEANING
A typical surface is covered with various films, oils, dirt, and other contaminants (Section
5.3.1). Although some of these substances may operate in a beneficial way (such as the
oxide film on aluminum), it is usually desirable to remove contaminants from the surface.
In this section, we discuss some general considerations related to cleaning, and we survey
the principal chemical cleaning processes used in industry.
Some of the important reasons why manufactured parts (and products) must be
cleaned are (1) to prepare the surface for subsequent industrial processing, such as a
coating application or adhesive bonding; (2) to improve hygiene conditions for workers
and customers; (3) to remove contaminants that might chemically react with the surface;
and (4) to enhance appearance and performance of the product.
General Considerations in Cleaning
There is no single cleaning method that can be
used for all cleaning tasks. Just as various soaps and detergents are required for different
household jobs (laundry, dishwashing, pot scrubbing, bathtub cleaning, and so forth),
various cleaning methods are also needed to solve different cleaning problems in
industry. Important factors in selecting a cleaning method are (1) the contaminant to
be removed, (2) degree of cleanliness required, (3) substrate material to be cleaned,
(4) purpose of the cleaning, (5) environmental and safety factors, (6) size and geometry of
the part, and (7) production and cost requirements.
Various kinds of contaminants build up on part surfaces, either due to previous
processing or the factory environment. To select the best cleaning method, one must
first identify what must be cleaned. Surface contaminants found in the factory usually
divide into one of the following categories: (1) oil and grease, which includes lubricants
used in metalworking; (2) solid particles such as metal chips, abrasive grits, shop dirt,
dust, and similar materials; (3) buffing and polishing compounds; and (4) oxide films, rust,
and scale.
Degree of cleanliness refers to the amount of contaminant remaining after a given
cleaning operation. Parts being prepared to accept a coating (e.g., paint, metallic film) or
adhesive must be very clean; otherwise, adhesion of the coated material is jeopardized. In
other cases, it may be desirable for the cleaning operation to leave a residue on the part
surface for corrosion protection during storage, in effect replacing one contaminant on
the surface by another that is beneficial. Degree of cleanliness is often difficult to
measure in a quantifiable way. A simple test is a wiping method, in which the surface is
wiped with a clean white cloth, and the amount of soil absorbed by the cloth is observed.
It is a nonquantitative but easy test to use.
The substrate material must be considered in selecting a cleaning method, so that
damaging reactions are not caused by the cleaning chemicals. To cite several examples:
aluminum is dissolved by most acids and alkalis; magnesium is attacked by many acids;
copper is attacked by oxidizing acids (e.g., nitric acid); steels are resistant to alkalis but
react with virtually all acids.
Some cleaning methods are appropriate to prepare the surface for painting, while
others are better for plating. Environmental protection and worker safety are becoming
increasingly important in industrial processes. Cleaning methods and the associated
chemicals should be selected to avoid pollution and health hazards.
Section 28.1/Industrial Cleaning Processes
669

Chemical Cleaning Processes
Chemical cleaning uses various types of chemicals to
effect contaminant removal from the surface. The major chemical cleaning methods are
(1) alkaline cleaning, (2) emulsion cleaning, (3) solvent cleaning, (4) acid cleaning, and
(5) ultrasonic cleaning. In some cases, chemical action is augmented by other energy
forms; for example, ultrasonic cleaning uses high-frequency mechanical vibrations com-
bined with chemical cleaning. In the following paragraphs, we review these chemical
methods.
Alkaline cleaning is the most widely used industrial cleaning method. As its name
indicates, it employs an alkali to remove oils, grease, wax, and various types of particles
(metal chips, silica, carbon, and light scale) from a metallic surface. Alkaline cleaning
solutions consist of low-cost, water-soluble salts such as sodium and potassium hydroxide
(NaOH, KOH), sodium carbonate (Na2CO3), borax (Na2B4O7), phosphates and silicates
of sodium and potassium, combined with dispersants and surfactants in water. The
cleaning method is commonly by immersion or spraying, usually at temperatures of 50C
to 95C (120F–200F). Following application of the alkaline solution, a water rinse is
used to remove the alkali residue. Metal surfaces cleaned by alkaline solutions are
typically electroplated or conversion coated.
Electrolytic cleaning, also called electrocleaning, is a related process in which a
3-V to 12-V direct current is applied to an alkaline cleaning solution. The electrolytic
action results in the generation of gas bubbles at the part surface, causing a scrubbing
action that aids in removal of tenacious dirt films.
Emulsion cleaning uses organic solvents (oils) dispersed in an aqueous solution.
The use of suitable emulsifiers (soaps) results in a two-phase cleaning fluid (oil-in-water),
which functions by dissolving or emulsifying the soils on the part surface. The process can
be used on either metal or nonmetallic parts. Emulsion cleaning must be followed by
alkaline cleaning to eliminate all residues of the organic solvent prior to plating.
In solvent cleaning, organic soils such as oil and grease are removed from a metallic
surface by means of chemicals that dissolve the soils. Common application techniques
include hand-wiping, immersion, spraying, and vapor degreasing. Vapor degreasing uses
hot vapors of solvents to dissolve and remove oil and grease on part surfaces. The common
solvents include trichlorethylene (C2HCl3), methylene chloride (CH2Cl2), and perchlor-
ethylene (C2Cl4), all of which have relatively low boiling points.1 The vapor degreasing
process consists of heating the liquid solvent to its boiling point in a container to produce
hot vapors. Parts to be cleaned are then introduced into the vapor, which condenses on the
relatively cold part surfaces, dissolving the contaminants and dripping to the bottom of the
container. Condensing coils near the top of the container prevent any vapors from escaping
thecontainerintothesurroundingatmosphere.Thisisimportantbecausethesesolventsare
classified as hazardous air pollutants under the 1992 Clean Air Act [10].
Acid cleaning removes oils and light oxides from metal surfaces by soaking,
spraying, or manual brushing or wiping. The process is carried out at ambient or elevated
temperatures. Common cleaning fluids are acid solutions combined with water-miscible
solvents, wetting and emulsifying agents. Cleaning acids include hydrochloric (HCl),
nitric (HNO3), phosphoric (H3PO4), and sulfuric (H2SO4), the selection depending on
the base metal and purpose of the cleaning. For example, phosphoric acid produces a light
phosphate film on the metallic surface, which can be a useful preparation for painting. A
closely related cleaning process is acid pickling, which involves a more severe treatment
to remove thicker oxides, rusts, and scales; it generally results in some etching of the
metallic surface, which serves to improve organic paint adhesion.
Ultrasonic cleaning combines chemical cleaning and mechanical agitation of the
cleaning fluid to provide a highly effective method for removing surface contaminants.
The cleaning fluid is generally an aqueous solution containing alkaline detergents. The
1The highest boiling point of the three solvents is 121C (250F) for C2Cl4.
670
Chapter 28/Surface Processing Operations

mechanical agitation is produced by high-frequency vibrations of sufficient amplitude to
cause cavitation—formation of low-pressure vapor bubbles or cavities. As the vibration
wave passes a given point in the liquid, the low-pressure region is followed by a high-
pressure front that implodes the cavity, thereby producing a shock wave capable of
penetrating contaminant particles adhering to the work surface. This rapid cycle of
cavitation and implosion occurs throughout the liquid medium, thus making ultrasonic
cleaning effective even on complex and intricate internal shapes. The cleaning process is
performed at frequencies between 20 and 45 kHz, and the cleaning solution is usually at
an elevated temperature, typically 65C to 85C (150F–190F).
28.1.2 MECHANICAL CLEANING AND SURFACE TREATMENTS
Mechanical cleaning involves the physical removal of soils, scales, or films from the work
surface of the workpart by means of abrasives or similar mechanical action. The processes
used for mechanical cleaning often serve other functions in addition to cleaning, such as
deburring and improving surface finish.
Blast Finishing and Shot Peening
Blast finishing uses the high-velocity impact of
particulate media to clean and finish a surface. The most well known of these methods is
sand blasting, which uses grits of sand (SiO2) as the blasting media. Various other media
are also used in blast finishing, including hard abrasives such as aluminum oxide (Al2O3)
and silicon carbide (SiC), and soft media such as nylon beads and crushed nut shells. The
media is propelled at the target surface by pressurized air or centrifugal force. In some
applications, the process is performed wet, in which fine particles in a water slurry are
directed under hydraulic pressure at the surface.
In shot peening, a high-velocity stream of small cast steel pellets (called shot) is
directed at a metallic surface with the effect of cold working and inducing compressive
stresses into the surface layers. Shot peening is used primarily to improve fatigue strength
of metal parts. Its purpose is therefore different from blast finishing, although surface
cleaning is accomplished as a by-product of the operation.
Tumbling and Other Mass Finishing
Tumbling, vibratory finishing, and similar
operations comprise a group of finishing processes known as mass finishing methods.
Mass finishing involves the finishing of parts in bulk by a mixing action inside a container,
usually in the presence of an abrasive media. The mixing causes the parts to rub against the
media and each other to achieve the desired finishing action. Mass finishing methods are
used for deburring, descaling, deflashing, polishing, radiusing, burnishing, and cleaning.
The partsincludestampings, castings, forgings, extrusions, andmachined parts. Evenplastic
and ceramic parts are sometimes subjected to these mass finishing operations to achieve
desired finishing results. The parts processed by these methods are usually small and are
therefore uneconomical to finish individually.
Mass finishing methods include tumbling, vibratory finishing, and several tech-
niques that utilize centrifugal force. Tumbling (also called barrel finishing and tum-
bling barrel finishing) involves the use of a horizontally oriented barrel of hexagonal or
octagonal cross-section in which parts are mixed by rotating the barrel at speeds of 10 to
50 rev/min. Finishing is performed by a ‘‘landslide’’ action of the media and parts as the
barrel revolves. As pictured in Figure 28.1, the contents rise in the barrel due to
rotation, followed by a tumbling down of the top layer due to gravity. This cycle of rising
and tumbling occurs continuously and, over time, subjects all of the parts to the same
desired finishing action. However, because only the top layer of parts is being finished
at any moment, barrel finishing is a relatively slow process compared to other mass
finishing methods. It often takes several hours of tumbling to complete the processing.
Section 28.1/Industrial Cleaning Processes
671

Other drawbacks of barrel finishing include high noise levels and large floor space
requirements.
Vibratory finishing was introduced in the late 1950s as an alternative to tumbling.
The vibrating vessel subjects all parts to agitation with the abrasive media, as opposed to
only the top layer as in barrel finishing. Consequently, processing times for vibratory
finishing are significantly reduced. The open tubs used in this method permit inspection
of the parts during processing, and noise is reduced.
Most of the media in these operations are abrasive; however, some media perform
nonabrasive finishing operations such as burnishing and surface hardening. The media may
be natural or synthetic materials. Natural media include corundum, granite, limestone, and
even hardwood. The problem with these materials is that they are generally softer (and
therefore wear more rapidly) and nonuniform in size (and sometimes clog in the work-
parts). Synthetic media can be made with greater consistency, both in size and hardness.
These materials include Al2O3 and SiC, compacted into a desired shape and size using a
bonding material such as a polyester resin. The shapes for these media include spheres,
cones, angle-cut cylinders, and other regular geometric forms, as in Figure 28.2(a). Steel is
also used as a mass finishing medium in shapes such as those shown in Figure 28.2(b) for
burnishing, surface hardening, and light deburring operations. The shapes shown in
Figure 28.2 come in various sizes. Selection of media is based on part size and shape, as
well as finishing requirements.
In most mass finishing processes, a compound is used with the media. The mass
finishing compound is a combination of chemicals for specific functions such as cleaning,
cooling, rust inhibiting (of steel parts and steel media), and enhancing brightness and
color of the parts (especially in burnishing).
FIGURE 28.1
Diagram
of tumbling (barrel
ﬁnishing) operation
showing ‘‘landslide’’
action of parts and
abrasive media to ﬁnish
the parts.
Sphere
Star
Ball
Ball cone
Cone
Oval ball
Pin
Arrowhead
Cone
Pyramid
Angle-cut
cylinder
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 28.2
Typical preformed media shapes used in mass ﬁnishing operations: (a) abrasive
media for ﬁnishing, and (b) steel media for burnishing.
672
Chapter 28/Surface Processing Operations

28.2
DIFFUSION AND ION IMPLANTATION
In this section we discuss two processes in which the surface of a substrate is impregnated
with foreign atoms that alter its chemistry and properties.
28.2.1 DIFFUSION
Diffusion involves the alteration of surface layers of a material by diffusing atoms of a
different material (usually an element) into the surface (Section 4.3). The diffusion process
impregnatesthesurfacelayers of the substratewith theforeignelement,but the surfacestill
contains a high proportion of substrate material. A typical profile of composition as a
function of depth below the surface for a diffusion coated metal part is illustrated in
Figure 28.3. The characteristic of a diffusion impregnated surface is that the diffused
element has a maximum percentage at the surface and rapidly declines with distance below
the surface. The diffusion process has important applications in metallurgy and semi-
conductor manufacture.
In metallurgical applications, diffusion is used to alter the surface chemistry of
metals in a number of processes and treatments. One important example is surface
hardening, typified by carburizing, nitriding, carbonitriding, chromizing, and boroniz-
ing (Section 27.4). In these treatments, one or more elements (C and/or Ni, Cr, or Bo) are
diffused into the surface of iron or steel.
There are other diffusion processes in which corrosion resistance and/or high-
temperature oxidation resistance are main objectives. Aluminizing and siliconizing are
important examples. Aluminizing, also known as calorizing, involves diffusion of
aluminum into carbon steel, alloy steels, and alloys of nickel and cobalt. The treatment
is accomplished by either (1) pack diffusion, in which workparts are packed with Al
powders and baked at high temperature to create the diffusion layer; or (2) a slurry
method, in which the workparts are dipped or sprayed with a mixture of Al powders and
binders, then dried and baked.
Siliconizing is a treatment of steel in which silicon is diffused into the part surface to
create a layer with good corrosion and wear resistance and moderate heat resistance. The
treatment is carried out by heating the work in powders of silicon carbide (SiC) in an
atmosphere containing vapors of silicon tetrachloride (SiCl4). Siliconizing is less common
than aluminizing.
FIGURE 28.3
Characteristic
proﬁle of diffused element as a
function of distance below surface
in diffusion. The plot given here is
for carbon diffused into iron.
(Source: [6].)
Section 28.2/Diffusion and Ion Implantation
673

Semiconductor Applications
In semiconductor processing, diffusion of an impurity
element into the surface of a silicon chip is used to change the electrical properties at the
surfacetocreate devicessuch astransistors and diodes. We examinehow diffusionisused to
accomplish this doping, as it is called, and other semiconductor processes in Chapter 34.
28.2.2 ION IMPLANTATION
Ion implantation is an alternative to diffusion when the latter method is not feasible
because of the high temperatures required. The ion implantation process involves
embedding atoms of one (or more) foreign element(s) into a substrate surface using
a high-energy beam of ionized particles. The result is an alteration of the chemical and
physical properties of the layers near the substrate surface. Penetration of atoms
produces a much thinner altered layer than diffusion, as indicated by a comparison of
Figures 28.3 and 28.4. Also, the concentration profile of the impregnated element is quite
different from the characteristic diffusion profile.
Advantages of ion implantation include (1) low-temperature processing, (2) good
control and reproducibility of penetration depth of impurities, and (3) solubility limits can
be exceeded without precipitation of excess atoms. Ion implantation finds some of its
applications as a substitute for certain coating processes, where its advantages include
(4) no problems with waste disposal as in electroplating and many coating processes, and
(5) no discontinuity between coating and substrate.
Principal applications of ion
implantation are in modifying metal surfaces to improve properties and fabrication of
semiconductor devices.
28.3
PLATING AND RELATED PROCESSES
Plating involves the coating of a thin metallic layer onto the surface of a substrate
material. The substrate is usually metallic, although methods are available to plate plastic
and ceramic parts. The most familiar and widely used plating technology is electroplating.
FIGURE 28.4
Proﬁle of surface chemistry
as treated by ion implantation. (Source:
[17].) Shown here is a typical plot for boron
implanted in silicon. Note the difference in
proﬁle shape and depth of altered layer
compared to diffusion in Figure 28.3.
674
Chapter 28/Surface Processing Operations

28.3.1 ELECTROPLATING
Electroplating, also known as electrochemical plating, is an electrolytic process (Section
4.5) in which metal ions in an electrolyte solution are deposited onto a cathode workpart.
The setup is shown in Figure 28.5. The anode is generally made of the metal being plated
and thus serves as the source of the plate metal. Direct current from an external power
supply is passed between the anode and the cathode. The electrolyte is an aqueous
solution of acids, bases, or salts; it conducts electric current by the movement of plate
metal ions in solution. For optimum results, parts must be chemically cleaned just prior to
electroplating.
Principles of Electroplating
Electrochemical plating is based on Faraday’s two
physical laws. Briefly for our purposes, the laws state: (1) the mass of a substance liberated
in electrolysis is proportional to the quantity of electricity passed through the cell; and
(2) the mass of the material liberated is proportional to its electrochemical equivalent
(ratio of atomic weight to valence). The effects can be summarized in the equation
V ¼ CIt
ð28:1Þ
where V ¼ volume of metal plated, mm3 (in3); C ¼ plating constant, which depends on
electrochemical equivalent and density, mm3/amp-s (in3/amp-min); I ¼ current, amps;
and t ¼ time during which current is applied, s (min). The product It (current  time) is
the electrical charge passed in the cell, and the value of C indicates the amount of
plating material deposited onto the cathodic workpart per electrical charge.
For most plating metals, not all of the electrical energy in the process is used for
deposition; some energy may be consumed in other reactions, such as the liberation of
hydrogen at the cathode. This reduces the amount of metal plated. The actual amount of
metal deposited on the cathode (workpart) divided by the theoretical amount given by
Eq. (28.1) is called the cathode efficiency. Taking the cathode efficiency into account, a
more realistic equation for determining the volume of metal plated is
V ¼ ECIt
ð28:2Þ
where E ¼ cathode efficiency, andthe other terms are defined as before. Typical values
of cathode efficiency E and plating constant C for different metals are presented in
Table 28.1. The average plating thickness can be determined from the following:
d ¼ V
A
ð28:3Þ
FIGURE 28.5
Setup for
electroplating.
Section 28.3/Plating and Related Processes
675

where d ¼ plating depth or thickness, mm (in); V ¼ volume of plate metal from
Eq. (28.2); and A ¼ surface area of plated part, mm2 (in2).
Example 28.1
Electroplating
A steel part with surface area A ¼ 125 cm2 is to be nickel plated. What average plating
thickness will result if 12 amps are applied for 15 min in an acid sulfate electrolyte bath?
Solution:
From Table 28.1, the cathode efficiency for nickel is E ¼ 0.95 and the plating
constant C ¼ 3.42(102) mm3/amp-s. Using Eq. (28.2), the total amount of plating metal
deposited onto the part surface in 15 min is given by
V ¼ 0:95 3:42  102


12
ð
Þ 15
ð
Þ 60
ð
Þ ¼ 350:9 mm3
This is spread across an area A ¼ 125 cm2 ¼ 12,500 mm2, so the average plate thickness is
d ¼ 350:9
12500 ¼ 0:028 mm
n
Methods and Applications
Avariety of equipment are available for electroplating, the
choice depending on part size and geometry, throughput requirements, and plating metal.
The principal methods are (1) barrel plating, (2) rack plating, and (3) strip plating. Barrel
plating is performed in rotating barrels that are oriented either horizontally or at an
oblique angle (35). The method is suited to the plating of many small parts in a batch.
Electrical contact is maintained through the tumbling action of the parts themselves and
by means of an externally connected conductor that projects into the barrel. There are
limitations to barrel plating; the tumbling action inherent in the process may damage soft
metal parts, threaded components, parts requiring good finishes, and heavy parts with
sharp edges.
Rack plating is used for parts that are too large, heavy, or complex for barrel plating.
The racks are made of heavy-gauge copper wire, formed into suitable shapes for holding the
parts and conducting current to them. The racks are fabricated so that workparts can be hung
on hooks, or held by clips, or loaded into baskets. To avoid plating of the copper itself, the
racks are covered with insulation except in locations where part contact occurs. The racks
containing the parts are moved through a sequence of tanks that perform the electroplating
operation. Strip plating is a high-production method in which the work consists of a
TABLE 28.1
Typical cathode efﬁciencies in electroplating and values of plating
constant C.
Plate Metala
Electrolyte
Cathode
Efficiency (%)
Plating Constant C a
mm3/amp-s
in3/amp-min
Cadmium (2)
Cyanide
90
6.73  102
2.47  104
Chromium (3)
Chromium-acid-sulfate
15
2.50  102
0.92  104
Copper (1)
Cyanide
98
7.35  102
2.69  104
Gold (1)
Cyanide
80
10.6  102
3.87  104
Nickel (2)
Acid sulfate
95
3.42  102
1.25  104
Silver (1)
Cyanide
100
10.7  102
3.90  104
Tin (4)
Acid sulfate
90
4.21  102
1.54  104
Zinc (2)
Chloride
95
4.75  102
1.74  104
Compiled from [17].
aMost common valence given in parenthesis ( ); this is the value assumed in determining the plating
constant C. For a different valence, compute the new C by multiplying C value in the table by the most
common valence and then dividing by the new valence.
676
Chapter 28/Surface Processing Operations

continuous strip that is pulled through the plating solution by means of a take-up reel. Plated
wire is an example of a suitable application. Small sheet-metal parts held in a long strip can
also be plated by this method. The process can be set up so that only specific regions of the
parts are plated, for example, contact points plated with gold on electrical connectors.
Common coating metals in electroplating include zinc, nickel, tin, copper, and
chromium. Steel is the most common substrate metal. Precious metals (gold, silver,
platinum) are plated on jewelry. Gold is also used for electrical contacts.
Zinc-plated steel products include fasteners, wire goods, electric switch boxes, and
various sheet-metal parts. The zinc coating serves as a sacrificial barrier to the corrosion of
the steel beneath. An alternative process for coating zinc onto steel is galvanizing (Section
28.3.4). Nickel plating is used for corrosion resistance and decorative purposes over steel,
brass, zinc die castings, and other metals. Applications include automotive trim and other
consumer goods. Nickel is also used as a base coat under a much thinner chrome plate. Tin
plate is still widely used for corrosion protection in ‘‘tin cans’’ and other food containers.
Tin plate is also used to improve solderability of electrical components.
Copper has several important applications as a plating metal. It is widely used as a
decorative coating on steel and zinc, either alone or alloyed with zinc as brass plate. It also
has important plating applications in printed circuit boards (Section 35.2). Finally, copper is
often plated on steel as a base beneath nickel and/or chrome plate. Chromium plate
(popularly known as chrome plate) is valued for its decorative appearance and is widely
used in automotive products, office furniture, and kitchen appliances. It also produces one
of the hardest of all electroplated coatings, and so it is widely used for parts requiring wear
resistance (e.g., hydraulic pistons and cylinders, piston rings, aircraft engine components,
and thread guides in textile machinery).
28.3.2 ELECTROFORMING
This process is virtually the same as electroplating but its purpose is quite different.
Electroforming involves electrolytic deposition of metal onto a pattern until the required
thickness is achieved; the pattern is then removed to leave the formed part. Whereas
typical plating thickness is only about 0.05 mm (0.002 in) or less, electroformed parts are
often substantially thicker, so the production cycle is proportionally longer.
Patterns used in electroforming are either solid or expendable. Solid patterns have a
taper or other geometry that permits removal of the electroplated part. Expendable
patterns are destroyed during part removal; they are used when part shape precludes a
solid pattern. Expendable patterns are either fusible or soluble. The fusible type is made of
low-melting alloys, plastic, wax, or other material that can be removed by melting. When
nonconductive materials are used, the pattern must be metallized to accept the electro-
deposited coating. Soluble patterns are made of a material that can be readily dissolved by
chemicals; for example, aluminum can be dissolved in sodium hydroxide (NaOH).
Electroformed parts are commonly fabricated of copper, nickel, and nickel cobalt
alloys. Applications include fine molds for lenses, compact discs (CDs), and videodiscs
(DVDs); copper foil used to produce blank printed circuit boards; and plates for embossing
and printing. Molds for compact discs and videodiscs represent a demanding application
because the surface details that must be imprinted on the disc are measured in mm (1 mm ¼
106 m). These details are readily obtained in the mold by electroforming.
28.3.3 ELECTROLESS PLATING
Electroless plating is a plating process driven entirely by chemical reactions—no external
source of electric current is required. Deposition of metal onto a part surface occurs in an
Section 28.3/Plating and Related Processes
677

aqueous solution containing ions of the desired plating metal. The process uses a reducing
agent, and the workpart surface acts as a catalyst for the reaction.
The metals that can be electroless plated are limited; and for those that can be
processed by this technique, the cost is generally greater than electrochemical plating. The
most common electroless plating metal is nickel and certain of its alloys (Ni–Co, Ni–P, and
Ni–B). Copper and, to a lesser degree, goldarealso used as plating metals. Nickel plating by
this process is used for applications requiring high resistance to corrosion and wear.
Electroless copper plating is used to plate through holes of printed circuit boards (Section
35.2.4). Cu can also be plated onto plastic parts for decorative purposes. Advantages
sometimes cited forelectroless plating include (1) uniform plate thickness on complex part
geometries (a problem with electroplating); (2) the process can be used on both metallic
and nonmetallic substrates; and (3) no need for a DC power supply to drive the process.
28.3.4 HOT DIPPING
Hot dipping is a process in which a metal substrate is immersed in a molten bath of a
second metal; upon removal, the second metal is coated onto the first. Of course, the first
metal must possess a higher melting temperature than the second. The most common
substrate metals are steel and iron. Zinc, aluminum, tin, and lead are the common coating
metals. Hot dipping works by forming transition layers of varying alloy compositions.
Next to the substrate are normally intermetallic compounds of the two metals; at the
exterior are solid solution alloys consisting predominantly of the coating metal. The
transition layers provide excellent adhesion of the coating.
The primary purpose of hot dipping is corrosion protection. Two mechanisms
normally operate to provide this protection: (1) barrier protection—the coating simply
serves as a shield for the metal beneath; and (2) sacrificial protection—the coating
corrodes by a slow electrochemical process to preserve the substrate.
Hot dipping goes by different names, depending on coating metal: galvanizing is
when zinc (Zn) is coated onto steel or iron; aluminizing refers to coating of aluminum
(Al) onto a substrate; tinning is coating of tin (Sn); and terneplate describes the plating of
lead–tin alloy onto steel. Galvanizing is by far the most important hot dipping process,
dating back about 200 years. It is applied to finished steel and iron parts in a batch
process; and to sheet, strip, piping, tubing, and wire in an automated continuous process.
Coating thickness is typically 0.04 to 0.09 mm (0.0016–0.0035 in). Thickness is controlled
largely by immersion time. Bath temperature is maintained at around 450C (850F).
Commercial use of aluminizing is on the rise, gradually increasing in market share
relative to galvanizing. Hot-dipped aluminum coatings provide excellent corrosion
protection, in some cases five times more effective than galvanizing [17]. Tin plating
by hot dipping provides a nontoxic corrosion protection for steel in applications for food
containers, dairy equipment, and soldering applications. Hot dipping has gradually been
overtaken by electroplating as the preferred commercial method for plating of tin onto
steel. Terneplating involves hot dipping of a lead–tin alloy onto steel. The alloy is
predominantly lead (only 2%–15% Sn); however, tin is required to obtain satisfactory
adhesion of the coating. Terneplate is the lowest cost of the coating methods for steel, but
its corrosion protection is limited.
28.4
CONVERSION COATING
Conversion coating refers to a family of processes in which a thin film of oxide,
phosphate, or chromate is formed on a metallic surface by chemical or electrochemical
reaction. Immersion and spraying are the two common methods of exposing the metal
678
Chapter 28/Surface Processing Operations

surface to the reacting chemicals. The common metals treated by conversion coating are
steel (including galvanized steel), zinc, and aluminum. However, nearly any metal
product can benefit from the treatment. The important reasons for using a conversion
coating process are (1) to provide corrosion protection, (2) to prepare the surface for
painting, (3) to increase wear resistance, (4) to permit the surface to better hold lubricants
for metal forming processes, (5) to increase electrical resistance of surface, (6) to provide
a decorative finish, and (7) for part identification [17].
Conversion coating processes divide into two categories: (1) chemical treatments,
which involve a chemical reaction only, and (2) anodizing, which consists of an electro-
chemical reaction to produce an oxide coating (anodize is a contraction of anodic
oxidize).
28.4.1 CHEMICAL CONVERSION COATINGS
These processes expose the base metal to certain chemicals that form thin, nonmetallic
surface films. Similar reactions occur in nature; the oxidation of iron and aluminum are
examples. Whereas rusting is progressively destructive of iron, formation of a thin Al2O3
coating on aluminum protects the base metal. It is the purpose of these chemical
conversion treatments to accomplish the latter effect. The two main processes are
phosphate and chromate coating.
Phosphate coating transforms the base metal surface into a protective phosphate
film by exposure to solutions of certain phosphate salts (e.g., Zn, Mg, and Ca) together
with dilute phosphoric acid (H3PO4). The coatings range in thickness from 0.0025 to 0.05
mm (0.0001–0.002 in). The most common base metals are zinc and steel, including
galvanized steel. The phosphate coating serves as a useful preparation for painting in the
automotive and heavy appliance industries.
Chromate coating converts the base metal into various forms of chromate films
using aqueous solutions of chromic acid, chromate salts, and other chemicals. Metals
treated by this method include aluminum, cadmium, copper, magnesium, and zinc (and
their alloys). Immersion of the base part is the common method of application. Chromate
conversion coatings are somewhat thinner than phosphate, typically less than 0.0025 mm
(0.0001 in). Usual reasons for chromate coating are (1) corrosion protection, (2) base for
painting, and (3) decorative purposes.
Chromate coatings can be clear or colorful;
available colors include olive drab, bronze, yellow, or bright blue.
28.4.2 ANODIZING
Although the previous processes are normally performed without electrolysis, anodizing
is an electrolytic treatment that produces a stable oxide layer on a metallic surface. Its
most common applications are with aluminum and magnesium, but it is also applied to
zinc, titanium, and other less common metals. Anodized coatings are used primarily for
decorative purposes; they also provide corrosion protection.
It is instructive to compare anodizing to electroplating, since they are both electro-
lytic processes. Two differences stand out. (1) In electrochemical plating, the workpart to
be coated is the cathode in the reaction. By contrast, in anodizing, the work is the anode,
whereas the processing tank is cathodic. (2) In electroplating, the coating is grown by
adhesion of ions of a second metal to the base metal surface. In anodizing, the surface
coating is formed through chemical reaction of the substrate metal into an oxide layer.
Anodized coatings usually range in thickness between 0.0025 and 0.075 mm (0.0001
and 0.003 in). Dyes can be incorporated into the anodizing process to create a wide
variety of colors; this is especially common in aluminum anodizing. Very thick coatings up
Section 28.4/Conversion Coating
679

to 0.25 mm (0.010 in) can also be formed on aluminum by a special process called hard
anodizing; these coatings are noted for high resistance to wear and corrosion.
28.5
VAPOR DEPOSITION PROCESSES
The vapordeposition processes form a thin coating ona substrate by either condensation or
chemical reaction of a gas onto the surface of the substrate. The two categories of processes
that fall under this heading are physical vapor deposition and chemical vapor deposition.
28.5.1 PHYSICAL VAPOR DEPOSITION
Physical vapor deposition (PVD) is a group of thin film processes in which a material is
converted into its vapor phase in a vacuum chamber and condensed onto a substrate surface
as a very thin layer. PVD can be used to apply a wide variety of coating materials: metals,
alloys, ceramics and other inorganic compounds, and even certain polymers. Possible
substrates include metals, glass, and plastics. Thus, PVD represents a versatile coating techno-
logy, applicable to an almost unlimited combination of coating substances and substrate
materials.
Applications of PVD include thin decorative coatings on plastic and metal parts such
as trophies, toys, pens and pencils, watchcases, and interior trim in automobiles. The
coatingsarethinfilmsofaluminum(around150nm)coatedwithclearlacquertogiveahigh
gloss silver or chrome appearance. Another use of PVD is to apply antireflection coatings
of magnesium fluoride (MgF2) onto optical lenses. PVD is applied in the fabrication of
electronic devices, principally for depositing metal to form electrical connections in
integrated circuits. Finally, PVD is widely used to coat titanium nitride (TiN) onto cutting
tools and plastic injection molds for wear resistance.
All physical vapor deposition processes consist of the following steps: (1) synthesis
of the coating vapor, (2) vapor transport to the substrate, and (3) condensation of vapors
onto the substrate surface.
These steps are generally carried out inside a vacuum
chamber, so evacuation of the chamber must precede the actual PVD process.
Synthesis of the coating vapor can be accomplished by any of several methods, such
as electric resistance heating or ion bombardment to vaporize an existing solid (or liquid).
These and other variations result in several PVD processes. They are grouped into three
principal types: (1) vacuum evaporation, (2) sputtering, and (3) ion plating. Table 28.2
presents a summary of these processes.
TABLE 28.2
Summary of physical vapor deposition (PVD) processes.
PVD Process
Features and Comparisons
Coating Materials
Vacuum evaporation
Equipment is relatively low-cost and simple;
deposition of compounds is difficult; coating
adhesion not as good as other PVD processes
Ag, Al, Au, Cr, Cu, Mo, W
Sputtering
Better throwing power and coating adhesion
than vacuum evaporation, can coat
compounds, slower deposition rates and
more difficult process control than
vacuum evaporation
Al2O3, Au, Cr, Mo, SiO2, Si3N4, TiC, TiN
Ion plating
Best coverage and coating adhesion of PVD
processes, most complex process control,
higher deposition rates than sputtering
Ag, Au, Cr, Mo, Si3N4, TiC, TiN
Compiled from [2].
680
Chapter 28/Surface Processing Operations

Vacuum Evaporation
Certain materials (mostly pure metals) can be deposited onto a
substrate by first transforming them from solid to vapor state in a vacuum and then letting
them condense on the substrate surface. The setup for the vacuum evaporation process is
shown in Figure 28.6. The material to be deposited, called the source, is heated to a
sufficiently high temperature that it evaporates (or sublimes). Since heating is accom-
plished in a vacuum, the temperature required for vaporization is significantly below the
corresponding temperature required at atmospheric pressure. Also, the absence of air in
the chamber prevents oxidation of the source material at the heating temperatures.
Various methods can be used to heat and vaporize the material. A container must be
provided to hold the source material before vaporization. Among the important vaporiza-
tion methods are resistance heating and electron beam bombardment. Resistance heating
is the simplest technology. A refractory metal (e.g., W, Mo) is formed into a suitable
container to hold the source material. Current is applied to heat the container, which then
heats the material in contact with it. One problem with this heating method is possible
alloying between the holder and its contents, so that the deposited film becomes contami-
nated with the metal of the resistance heating container. In electron beam evaporation, a
streamofelectronsathighvelocityisdirectedtobombardthesurfaceofthesourcematerial
to cause vaporization. By contrast with resistance heating, very little energy acts to heat the
container, thus minimizing contamination of the container material with the coating.
Whatever the vaporization technique, evaporated atoms leave the source and follow
straight-line paths until they collide with other gas molecules or strike a solid surface. The
vacuum inside the chamber virtually eliminates other gas molecules, thus reducing the
probability of collisionswith source vapor atoms. The substrate surfaceto be coated is usually
positioned relative to the source so that it is the likely solid surface on which the vapor atoms
will be deposited. A mechanical manipulator is sometimes usedto rotate the substrate so that
all surfaces are coated. Upon contact with the relative cool substrate surface, the energy level
of the impinging atoms is suddenly reduced to the point where they cannot remain in a vapor
state; they condense and become attached to the solid surface, forming a deposited thin film.
Sputtering
If the surface of a solid (or liquid) is bombarded by atomic particles of
sufficiently high energy, individual atoms of the surface may acquire enough energy due to
the collision that they are ejected from the surface by transfer of momentum. This is the
process known as sputtering. The most convenient form of high energy particle is an ionized
gas,suchasargon,energizedbymeansofanelectricfieldtoformaplasma.AsaPVDprocess,
sputtering involves bombardment of the cathodic coating material with argon ions (Ar+),
causingsurfaceatomstoescapeandthenbedepositedontoasubstrate,formingathinfilmon
FIGURE 28.6
Setup for
vacuum evaporation
physical vapor
deposition.
Section 28.5/Vapor Deposition Processes
681

the substrate surface. The substrate must be placed close to the cathode and is usually heated
to improve bonding of the coating atoms. A typical arrangement is shown in Figure 28.7.
Whereas vacuum evaporation is generally limited to metals, sputtering can be
applied to nearly any material—metallic and nonmetallic elements; alloys, ceramics, and
polymers. Films of alloys and compounds can be sputtered without changing their
chemical compositions. Films of chemical compounds can also be deposited by employ-
ing reactive gases that form oxides, carbides, or nitrides with the sputtered metal.
Drawbacks of sputtering PVD include (1) slow deposition rates and (2) since the
ions bombarding the surface are a gas, traces of the gas can usually be found in the coated
films, and the entrapped gases sometimes affect mechanical properties adversely.
Ion Plating
Ion plating uses a combination of sputtering and vacuum evaporation to
deposit a thin film onto a substrate. The process works as follows. The substrate is set up
to be the cathode in the upper part of the chamber, and the source material is placed
below it. A vacuum is then established in the chamber. Argon gas is admitted and an
electric field is applied to ionize the gas (Ar+) and establish a plasma. This results in ion
bombardment (sputtering) of the substrate so that its surface is scrubbed to a condition of
atomic cleanliness (interpret this as ‘‘very clean’’). Next, the source material is heated
sufficiently to generate coating vapors. The heating methods used here are similar to
those used in vacuum evaporation: resistance heating, electron beam bombardment, and
so on. The vapor molecules pass through the plasma and coat the substrate. Sputtering is
continued during deposition, so that the ion bombardment consists not only of the
original argon ions but also source material ions that have been energized while being
subjected to the same energy field as the argon. The effect of these processing conditions
is to produce films of uniform thickness and excellent adherence to the substrate.
Ion plating is applicable to parts having irregular geometries, due to the scattering
effects that exist in the plasma field. An example of interest here is TiN coating of high-
speed steel cutting tools (e.g., drill bits). In addition to coating uniformity and good
adherence, other advantages of the process include high deposition rates, high film
densities, and the capability to coat the inside walls of holes and other hollow shapes.
28.5.2 CHEMICAL VAPOR DEPOSITION
Physical vapordeposition involvesdepositionofa coating bycondensation onto a substrate
from the vapor phase; it is strictly a physical process. By comparison, chemical vapor
deposition (CVD) involves the interaction between a mixture of gases and the surface of a
FIGURE 28.7
One
possible setup for
sputtering, a form of
physical vapor
deposition.
682
Chapter 28/Surface Processing Operations

heated substrate, causing chemical decomposition of some of the gas constituents and
formation of a solid film on the substrate. The reactions take place in an enclosed reaction
chamber. The reaction product (either a metal or a compound) nucleates and grows on the
substrate surface to form the coating. Most CVD reactions require heat. However,
depending on the chemicals involved, the reactions can be driven by other possible energy
sources, such as ultraviolet light or plasma. CVD includes a wide range of pressures and
temperatures; and it can be applied to a great variety of coating and substrate materials.
Industrial metallurgical processes based on chemical vapor deposition date back to
the 1800s (e.g., the Mond process in Table 28.3). Modern interest in CVD is focused on its
coating applications such as coated cemented carbide tools, solar cells, depositing
refractory metals on jet engine turbine blades, and other applications where resistance
to wear, corrosion, erosion, and thermal shock are important. In addition, CVD is an
important technology in integrated circuit fabrication.
Advantages typically cited for CVD include (1) capability to deposit refractory
materials at temperatures below their melting or sintering temperatures; (2) control of
grain size is possible; (3) the process is carried out at atmospheric pressure—it does not
TABLE 28.3
Some examples of reactions in chemical vapor deposition (CVD).
1. The Mond process includes a CVD process for decomposition of nickel from nickel
carbonyl(Ni(CO)4),whichisanintermediatecompoundformedinreducingnickelore:
Ni CO
ð
Þ4
200C 400F
ð
Þ
Ni þ 4CO
ð28:4Þ
2. Coating of titanium carbide (TiC) onto a substrate of cemented tungsten carbide
(WC–Co) to produce a high-performance cutting tool:
TiCl4 þ CH4
1000C 1800F
ð
Þ
excess H2
TiC þ 4HCl
ð28:5Þ
3. Coating of titanium nitride (TiN) onto a substrate of cemented tungsten carbide
(WC–Co) to produce a high-performance cutting tool:
TiCl4 þ 0:5N2 þ 2H2
900C 1650F
ð
Þ TiN þ 4HCl
ð28:6Þ
4. Coating of aluminum oxide (Al2O3) onto a substrate of cemented tungsten carbide
(WC–Co) to produce a high-performance cutting tool:
2AlCl3 þ 3CO2 þ 3H2
500C 900F
ð
Þ Al2O3 þ 3CO þ 6HCl
ð28:7Þ
5. Coating of silicon nitride (Si3N4) onto silicon (Si), a process in semiconductor
manufacturing:
3SiF4 þ 4NH3
1000C 1800F
ð
Þ
Si3N4 þ 12 HF
ð28:8Þ
6. Coating of silicon dioxide (SiO2) onto silicon (Si), a process in semiconductor
manufacturing:
2SiCl3 þ 3H2O þ 0:5O2
900C 1600F
ð
Þ 2SiO2 þ 6 HCl
ð28:9Þ
7. Coating of the refractory metal tungsten (W) onto a substrate, such as a jet engine
turbine blade:
WF6 þ 3H2
600C 1100F
ð
Þ
W þ 6HF
ð28:10Þ
Compiled from [6], [13], and [17].
———!
——!
———!
———
!
———
!
———!
———
!
Section 28.5/Vapor Deposition Processes
683

require vacuum equipment; and (4) good bonding of coating to substrate surface [1].
Disadvantages include (1) corrosive and/or toxic nature of chemicals generally necessi-
tates a closed chamber as well as special pumping and disposal equipment; (2) certain
reaction ingredients are relatively expensive; and (3) material utilization is low.
CVD Materials and Reactions
In general, metals that are readily electroplated are not
goodcandidatesforCVD, owingtothehazardouschemicals thatmustbeusedandthecosts
of safeguarding against them. Metals suitable for coating by CVD include tungsten,
molybdenum, titanium, vanadium, and tantalum. Chemical vapor deposition is especially
suited to the deposition of compounds, such as aluminum oxide (Al2O3), silicon dioxide
(SiO2), silicon nitride (Si3N4), titanium carbide (TiC), and titanium nitride (TiN). Fig-
ure 28.8 illustrates the application of both CVD and PVD to provide multiple wear-
resistant coatings on a cemented carbide cutting tool.
The commonly used reacting gases or vapors are metallic hydrides (MHx), chlorides
(MClx), fluorides (MFx), and carbonyls (M(CO)x), where M ¼ the metal to be deposited
and x is used to balance the valences in the compound. Other gases, such as hydrogen (H2),
nitrogen (N2), methane (CH4), carbon dioxide (CO2), and ammonia (NH3) are used in
some of the reactions. Table 28.3 presents some examples of CVD reactions that result in
deposition of a metal or ceramic coating onto a suitable substrate. Typical temperatures at
which these reactions are carried out are also given.
Processing Equipment
Chemical vapor deposition processes are carried out in a re-
actor, which consists of (1) reactant supply system, (2) deposition chamber, and (3) recycle/
disposal system. Although reactor configurations differ depending on the application,
one possible CVD reactor is illustrated in Figure 28.9. The purpose of the reactant supply
system is to deliver reactants to the deposition chamber in the proper proportions.
FIGURE 28.8
Photomicrograph of the
cross section of a coated
carbide cutting tool
(Kennametal Grade
KC792M); chemical vapor
deposition was used to
coat TiN and TiCN onto
the surface of a WC–Co
substrate, followed by a
TiN coating applied by
physical vapor
deposition. (Photo
courtesy of Kennametal
Inc., Latrobe,
Pennsylvania.)
684
Chapter 28/Surface Processing Operations

Different types of supply system are required, depending on whether the reactants are
delivered as gas, liquid, or solid (e.g., pellets, powders).
The deposition chamber contains the substrates and chemical reactions that lead to
deposition of reaction products onto the substrate surfaces. Deposition occurs at elevated
temperatures, and the substrate must be heated by induction heating, radiant heat, or other
means. Deposition temperatures for different CVD reactions range from 250C to 1950C
(500F–3500F), so the chamber must be designed to meet these temperature demands.
The third component of the reactor is the recycle/disposal system, whose function is to
render harmless the byproducts of the CVD reaction. This includes collection of materials
that are toxic, corrosive, and/or flammable, followed by proper processing and disposition.
Alternative Forms of CVD
What we have described is atmospheric pressure chemical
vapordeposition, inwhich the reactionsare carried out ator near atmosphericpressure. For
many reactions, there are advantages in performing the process at pressures well below
atmospheric. This is called low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD), in which the
reactions occur in a partial vacuum. Advantages of LPCVD include (1) uniform thickness,
(2) good control over composition and structure, (3) low-temperature processing, (4) fast
deposition rates, and (5) high throughput and lower processing costs [13]. The technical
problem in LPCVD is designing the vacuum pumps to create the partial vacuum when the
reactionproductsarenot onlyhotbutmayalsobecorrosive.Thesepumpsmustofteninclude
systems to cool and trap the corrosive gases before they reach the actual pumping unit.
Another variation of CVD is plasma-assisted chemical vapor deposition (PACVD),
in which deposition onto a substrate is accomplished by reacting the ingredients in a gas that
has been ionized by means of an electric discharge (i.e., a plasma). In effect, the energy
contained inthe plasma rather than thermal energy is used to activate the chemical reactions.
Advantages of PACVD include (1) lower substrate temperatures, (2) better covering
power, (3) better adhesion, and (4) faster deposition rates [6].
Applications include
deposition of silicon nitride (Si3N4) in semiconductor processing, TiN and TiC coatings for
tools, and polymer coatings. The process is also known as plasma-enhanced chemical
vapor deposition, plasma chemical vapor deposition, or just simply plasma deposition.
28.6
ORGANIC COATINGS
Organic coatings are polymers and resins, produced either naturally or synthetically,
usually formulated to be applied as liquids that dry or harden as thin surface films on
substrate materials. These coatings are valued for the variety of colors and textures
FIGURE 28.9
A typical
reactor used in chemical
vapor deposition.
Section 28.6/Organic Coatings
685

possible, their capacity to protect the substrate surface, low cost, and ease with which they
can be applied. In this section, we consider the compositions of organic coatings and the
methods to apply them. Although most organic coatings are applied in liquid form, some
are applied as powders; we consider this alternative in Section 28.6.2.
Organic coatings are formulated to contain the following: (1) binders, which
give the coating its properties; (2) dyes or pigments, which lend color to the coating;
(3) solvents, to dissolve the polymers and resins and add proper fluidity to the liquid; and
(4) additives.
Binders in organic coatings are polymers and resins that determine the solid-state
properties of the coating, such as strength, physical properties, and adhesion to the
substrate surface. The binder holds the pigments and other ingredients in the coating
during and after application to the surface. The most common binders in organic coatings
are natural oils (used to produce oil-based paints), and resins of polyesters, polyur-
ethanes, epoxies, acrylics, and cellulosics.
Dyesand pigmentsprovidecolortothe coating.Dyesaresoluble chemicalsthat color
the coating liquid but do not conceal the surface beneath. Thus, dye-colored coatings are
generally transparent or translucent. Pigments are solid particles of uniform, microscopic
size that are dispersed in the coating liquid but insoluble in it. They not only color the
coating; they also hide the surface below. Since pigments are particulate matter, they also
tend to strengthen the coating.
Solvents are used to dissolve the binder and certain other ingredients in the liquid
coating composition. Common solvents used in organic coatings are aliphatic and aromatic
hydrocarbons, alcohols, esters, ketones, and chlorinated solvents. Different solvents are
requiredfor different binders. Additives inorganic coatingsinclude surfactants (to facilitate
spreading on the surface), biocides and fungicides, thickeners, freeze/thaw stabilizers, heat
and light stabilizers, coalescing agents, plasticizers, defoamers, and catalysts to promote
cross-linking. These ingredients are formulated to obtain a wide variety of coatings, such as
paints, lacquers, and varnishes.
28.6.1 APPLICATION METHODS
The method of applying an organic coating to a surface depends on factors such as
composition of the coating liquid, required thickness of the coating, production rate and
cost considerations, part size, and environmental requirements. For any of the application
methods, it is of utmost importance that the surface be properly prepared. This includes
cleaning and possible treatment of the surface such as phosphate coating. In some cases,
metallic surfaces are plated prior to organic coating for maximum corrosion protection.
With any coating method, transfer efficiency is a critical measure. Transfer efficiency
is the proportion of paint supplied to the process that is actually deposited onto the work
surface. Some methods yield as low as a 30% transfer efficiency (meaning that 70% of the
paint is wasted and cannot be recovered).
Available methods of applying liquid organic coatings include brushing and rolling,
spray coating, immersion, and flow coating. In some cases, several successive coatings are
applied to the substrate surface to achieve the desired result. An automobile car body is
an important example; the following is a typical sequence applied to the sheet-metal car
body in a mass-production automobile: (1) phosphate coat applied by dipping, (2) primer
coat applied by dipping, (3) color paint coat applied by spray coating, and (4) clear coat
(for high gloss and added protection) applied by spraying.
Brushing and rolling are the two most familiar application methods to most people.
They have a high transfer efficiency—approaching 100%. Manual brushing and rolling
methods are suited to low production but not mass production. While brushing is quite versa-
tile, rolling is limited to flat surfaces.
686
Chapter 28/Surface Processing Operations

Spray coating is a widely used production method for applying organic coatings.
The process forces the coating liquid to atomize into a fine mist immediately prior to
deposition onto the part surface. When the droplets hit the surface, they spread and flow
together to form a uniform coating within the localized region of the spray. If done
properly, spray coating provides a uniform coating over the entire work surface.
Spray coating can be performed manually in spray painting booths, or it can be set up
as an automated process. Transfer efficiency is relatively low (as low as 30%) with these
methods. Efficiency can be improved by electrostatic spraying, in which the workpart is
grounded electrically and the atomized droplets are electrostatically charged. This causes
the droplets to be drawn to the part surfaces, increasing transfer efficiencies to values up to
90% [17]. Spraying is utilized extensively in the automotive industry for applying external
paint coats to car bodies. It is also used for coating appliances and other consumer products.
Immersion applies large amounts of liquid coating to the workpart and allows the
excess to drain off and be recycled. The simplest method is dip coating, in which a part is
immersed in an open tank of liquid coating material; when the part is withdrawn, the
excess liquid drains back into the tank. A variation of dip coating is electrocoating, in
which the part is electrically charged and then dipped into a paint bath that has been
given an opposite charge. This improves adhesion and permits use of water-based paints
(which reduce fire and pollution hazards).
In flow coating, workparts are moved through an enclosed paint booth, where a
series of nozzles shower the coating liquid onto the part surfaces. Excess liquid drains
back into a sump, which allows it to be reused.
Once applied, the organic coating must convert from liquid to solid. The term
drying is often used to describe this conversion process. Many organic coatings dry by
evaporation of their solvents. However, in order to form a durable film on the substrate
surface, a further conversion is necessary, called curing. Curing involves a chemical
change in the organic resin in which polymerization or cross-linking occurs to harden the
coating.
The type of resin determines the type of chemical reaction that takes place in
curing. The principal methods by which curing is effected in organic coatings are [17] (1)
ambient temperature curing, which involves evaporation of the solvent and oxidation of
the resin (most lacquers cure by this method); (2) elevated temperature curing, in which
elevated temperatures are used to accelerate solvent evaporation, as well as polymeri-
zation and cross-linking of the resin; (3) catalytic curing, in which the starting resins
require reactive agents mixed immediately prior to application to bring about polymeri-
zation and cross-linking (epoxy and polyurethane paints are examples); and (4) radiation
curing, in which various forms of radiation, such as microwaves, ultraviolet light, and
electron beams, are required to cure the resin.
28.6.2 POWDER COATING
The organic coatings discussed above are liquid systems consisting of resins that are
soluble (or at least miscible) in a suitable solvent. Powder coatings are different. They are
applied as dry, finely pulverized, solid particles that are melted on the surface to form a
uniform liquid film, after which they resolidify into a dry coating. Powder coating systems
have grown significantly in commercial importance among organic coatings since the
mid-1970s.
Powder coatings are classified as thermoplastic or thermosetting. Common
thermoplastic powders include polyvinylchloride, nylon, polyester, polyethylene,
and polypropylene. They are generally applied as relatively thick coatings, 0.08 to
0.30 mm (0.003–0.012 in). Common thermosetting coating powders are epoxy, poly-
ester, and acrylic. They are applied as uncured resins that polymerize and cross-link on
Section 28.6/Organic Coatings
687

heating or reaction with other ingredients. Coating thicknesses are typically 0.025 to
0.075 mm (0.001–0.003 in).
There are two principal application methods for powder coatings: spraying and
fluidized bed. In the spraying method, an electrostatic charge is given to each particle in
order to attract it to an electrically grounded part surface. Several spray gun designs are
available to impart the charge to the powders. The spray guns can be operated manually
or by industrial robots. Compressed air is used to propel the powders to the nozzle. The
powders are dry when sprayed, and any excess particles that do not attach to the surface
can be recycled (unless multiple paint colors are mixed in the same spray booth). Powders
can be sprayed onto a part at room temperature, followed by heating of the part to melt
the powders; or they can be sprayed onto a part that has been heated to above the melting
point of the powder, which usually provides a thicker coating.
The fluidized bed is a less commonly used alternative to electrostatic spraying. In
this method, the workpart to be coated is preheated and passed through a fluidized bed,
in which powders are suspended (fluidized) by an airstream. The powders attach
themselves to the part surface to form the coating. In some implementations of this
coating method, the powders are electrostatically charged to increase attraction to the
grounded part surface.
28.7
PORCELAIN ENAMELING AND OTHER CERAMIC COATINGS
Porcelain isa ceramic madefromkaolin,feldspar, andquartz(Chapter7). Itcanbe applied
to substrate metals such as steel, cast iron, and aluminum as a vitreous porcelain enamel.
Porcelain coatings are valued for their beauty, color, smoothness, ease of cleaning,
chemical inertness, and general durability. Porcelain enameling is the name given to
the technology of these ceramic coating materials and the processes by which they are
applied.
Porcelain enameling is used in a wide variety of products, including bathroom
fixtures (e.g., sinks, bathtubs, lavatories), household appliances (e.g., ranges, water heaters,
washing machines, dishwashers), kitchen ware, hospital utensils, jet engine components,
automotive mufflers, and electronic circuit boards. Compositions of the porcelains vary,
depending on product requirements. Some porcelains are formulated for color and beauty,
while others are designed for functions such as resistance to chemicals and weather, ability
to withstand high service temperatures, hardness and abrasion resistance, and electrical
resistance.
As a process, porcelain enameling consists of (1) preparing the coating material,
(2) applying to the surface, (3) drying, if needed, and (4) firing. Preparation involves
converting the glassy porcelain into fine particles, called frit, that are milled to proper and
consistent size. The methods for applying the frit are similar to methods used for applying
organic coatings, even though the starting material is entirely different. Some application
methods involve mixing frit with water as a carrier (the mixture is called a slip), while
other methods apply the porcelain as dry powder. The techniques include spraying,
electrostatic spraying, flow coating, dipping, and electrodeposition. Firing is accom-
plished at temperatures around 800C (1500F). Firing is a sintering process (Section
17.1.4) in which the frit is transformed into nonporous vitreous porcelain. Coating
thickness ranges from around 0.075 to 2 mm (0.08–0.003 in). The processing sequence
may be repeated several times to obtain the desired thickness.
In addition to porcelain, other ceramics are used as coatings for special purposes.
These coatings usually contain a high content of alumina, which makes them more suited to
refractory applications. Techniques for applying the coatings are similar to the preceding,
except firing temperatures are higher.
688
Chapter 28/Surface Processing Operations

28.8
THERMAL AND MECHANICAL COATING PROCESSES
These processes apply discrete coatings that are generally thicker than coatings deposited
by other processes considered in this chapter. They are based on either thermal or
mechanical energy.
28.8.1 THERMAL SURFACING PROCESSES
These methods use thermal energy in various forms to apply a coating whose function is to
provide resistance to corrosion, erosion, wear, and high temperature oxidation. The
processesinclude(1)thermal spraying, (2)hard facing, and (3) the flexibleoverlay process.
In thermal spraying, molten and semimolten coating materials are sprayed onto a
substrate, where they solidify and adhere to the surface. A wide variety of coating
materials can be applied; the categories are pure metals and metal alloys; ceramics
(oxides, carbides, and certain glasses); other metallic compounds (sulfides, silicides);
cermet composites; and certain plastics (epoxy, nylon, Teflon, and others). The substrates
include metals, ceramics, glass, some plastics, wood, and paper. Not all coatings can be
applied to all substrates. When the process is used to apply a metallic coating, the terms
metallizing or metal spraying are used.
Technologies used to heat the coating material are oxyfuel flame, electric arc, and
plasma arc. The starting coating material is in the form of wire or rod, or powders. When
wire (or rod) is used, the heating source melts the leading end of the wire, thereby
separating it from the solid stock. The molten material is then atomized by a high-velocity
gasstream(compressedairorothersource),andthedropletsarespatteredagainstthework
surface. When powder stock is used, a powder feeder dispenses the fine particles into a gas
stream, which transports them into the flame, where they are melted. The expanding gases
in the flame propel the molten (or semimolten) powders against the workpiece. Coating
thickness in thermal spraying is generally greater than in other deposition processes; the
typical range is 0.05 to 2.5 mm (0.002–0.100 in).
The first applications of thermal spray coating were to rebuild worn areas on used
machinery components and to salvage workparts that had been machined undersize.
Success of the technique has led to its use in manufacturing as a coating process
for corrosion resistance, high temperature protection, wear resistance, electrical
conductivity, electrical resistance, electromagnetic interference shielding, and other
functions.
Hard facing is a surfacing technique in which alloys are applied as welded deposits
to substrate metals. What distinguishes hard facing is that fusion occurs between the
coating and the substrate, as in fusion welding (Chapter 29), whereas the bond in thermal
spraying is typically mechanical interlocking that does not stand up as well to abrasive
wear. Thus, hard facing is especially suited to components requiring good wear resistance.
Applications include coating new parts and repairing used part surfaces that are heavily
worn, eroded, or corroded. An advantage of hard facing that should be mentioned is that
it is readily accomplished outside of the relatively controlled factory environment by
many of the common welding processes, such as oxyacetylene gas welding and arc
welding. Some of the common surfacing materials include steel and iron alloys, cobalt-
based alloys, and nickel-based alloys. Coating thickness is usually 0.75 to 2.5 mm (0.030–
0.125 in), although thicknesses as great as 9 mm (3/8 in) are possible.
The flexible overlay process is capable of depositing a very hard coating material,
such as tungsten carbide (WC), onto a substrate surface. This is an important advantage
of the process compared to other methods, permitting coating hardness up to about 70
Rockwell C. The process can also be used to apply coatings only to selected regions of a
Section 28.8/Thermal and Mechanical Coating Processes
689

workpart. In the flexible overlay process, a cloth impregnated with hard ceramic or
metal powders and another cloth impregnated with brazing alloy are laid onto a
substrate and heated to fuse the powders to the surface. Thickness of overlay coatings
is usually 0.25 to 2.5 mm (0.010–0.100 in). In addition to coatings of WC and WC–Co,
cobalt-based and nickel-based alloys are also applied. Applications include chain saw
teeth, rock drill bits, oil drill collars, extrusion dies, and similar parts requiring good
wear resistance.
28.8.2 MECHANICAL PLATING
In this coating process, mechanical energy is used to build a metallic coating onto the
surface. In mechanical plating, the parts to be coated, together with plating metal
powders, glass beads, and special chemicals to promote the plating action, are tumbled
in a barrel. The metallic powders are microscopic in size—5 mm (0.0002 in) in diameter;
while the glass beads are much larger—2.5 mm (0.10 in) in diameter. As the mixture is
tumbled, the mechanical energy from the rotating barrel is transmitted through the glass
beads to pound the metal powders against the part surface, causing a mechanical or
metallurgical bond to result. The deposited metals must be malleable in order to achieve
a satisfactory bond with the substrate. Plating metals include zinc, cadmium, tin, and lead.
The term mechanical galvanizing is used for parts that are zinc coated. Ferrous metals
are most commonly coated; other metals include brass and bronze. Typical applications
include fasteners such as screws, bolts, nuts, and nails. Plating thickness in mechanical
plating is usually 0.005 to 0.025 mm (0.0002–0.001 in). Zinc is mechanically plated to a
thickness of around 0.075 mm (0.003 in).
REFERENCES
[1] ASM Handbook, Vol. 5, Surface Engineering. ASM
International, Materials Park, Ohio, 1993.
[2] Budinski, K. G. Surface Engineering for Wear Re-
sistance. Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey, 1988.
[3] Durney, L. J. (ed.). The Graham’s Electroplating
Engineering Handbook, 4th ed. Chapman & Hall,
London, 1996.
[4] Freeman, N. B.‘‘A New Look at Mass Finishing,’’
Special Report 757, American Machinist, August
1983, pp. 93–104.
[5] George, J. Preparation of Thin Films. Marcel Dek-
ker, Inc., New York, 1992.
[6] Hocking, M. G., Vasantasree, V., and Sidky, P. S.
Metallic
and
Ceramic
Coatings.
Addison-
Wesley Longman, Ltd., Reading, Massachusetts,
1989.
[7] Metal Finishing; Guidebook and Directory Issue.
Metals and Plastics Publications, Inc., Hackensack,
New Jersey, 2000.
[8] Morosanu, C. E. Thin Films by Chemical Vapour
Deposition. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
1990.
[9] Murphy, J. A. (ed.). Surface Preparation and Fin-
ishes for Metals. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York, 1971.
[10] Sabatka, W.‘‘Vapor Degreasing.’’ Available at: www
.pfonline.com.
[11] Satas, D. (ed.). Coatings Technology Handbook, 2nd
ed. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, 2000.
[12] Stuart, R. V. Vacuum Technology, Thin Films, and
Sputtering. Academic Press, New York, 1983.
[13] Sze, S. M. VLSI Technology, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill
Book Company, New York, 1988.
[14] Tracton, A. A. (ed.) Coatings Technology Hand-
book, 3rd ed. CRC Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton,
Florida, 2006.
[15] Tucker, Jr., R. C.‘‘Surface Engineering Technologies,’’
AdvancedMaterials&Processes,April2002,pp.36–38.
[16] Tucker, Jr., R. C.‘‘Considerations in the Selection of
Coatings,’’ Advanced Materials & Processes, March
2004, pp. 25–28.
[17] Wick, C., and Veilleux, R. (eds.). Tool and Manu-
facturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol III,
Materials, Finishes, and Coating. Society of Man-
ufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1985.
690
Chapter 28/Surface Processing Operations

REVIEW QUESTIONS
28.1.
What are some of the important reasons why
manufactured parts must be cleaned?
28.2.
Mechanical surface treatments are often per-
formed for reasons other than or in addition to
cleaning. What are the reasons?
28.3.
What are the basic types of contaminants that
must
be
cleaned
from
metallic
surfaces
in
manufacturing?
28.4.
Name some of the important chemical cleaning
methods.
28.5.
In addition to surface cleaning, what is the main
function performed by shot peening?
28.6.
What is meant by the term mass finishing?
28.7.
What is the difference between diffusion and ion
implantation?
28.8.
What is calorizing?
28.9.
Why are metals coated?
28.10.
Identify the most
common types
of
coating
processes.
28.11.
What are the two basic mechanisms of corrosion
protection?
28.12.
What is the most commonly plated substrate
metal?
28.13.
One of the mandrel types in electroforming is a
solid mandrel. How is the part removed from a
solid mandrel?
28.14.
How does electroless plating differ from electro-
chemical plating?
28.15.
What is a conversion coating?
28.16.
How does anodizing differ from other conversion
coatings?
28.17.
What is physical vapor deposition?
28.18.
What is the difference between physical vapor
deposition and chemical vapor deposition?
28.19.
What are some of the applications of PVD?
28.20.
Name the commonly used coating materials depos-
ited by PVD onto cutting tools?
28.21.
What are some of the advantages of chemical vapor
deposition?
28.22.
What are the two most common titanium com-
pounds that are coated onto cutting tools by chem-
ical vapor deposition?
28.23.
Identify the four major types of ingredients in
organic coatings.
28.24.
What is meant by the term transfer efficiency in
organic coating technology?
28.25.
Describe the principal methods by which organic
coatings are applied to a surface.
28.26.
The terms drying and curing have different mean-
ings; indicate the distinction.
28.27.
In porcelain enameling, what is frit?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 20 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
28.1.
Which of the following are reasons why workparts
must be cleaned in industry (four best answers):
(a) to avoid air pollution, (b) to avoid water pollu-
tion, (c) to enhance appearance, (d) to enhance
mechanical properties of the surface, (e) to im-
prove hygiene conditions for workers, (f) to im-
prove surface finish, (g) to prepare the surface for
subsequent processing, and (h) to remove contam-
inants that might chemically attack the surface?
28.2.
Which of the following chemicals are associated
with alkaline cleaning (two correct answers):
(a) borax, (b) hydrochloric acid, (c) propane,
(d) sodium hydroxide, (e) sulfuric acid, and
(f) trichlorethylene?
28.3.
In sand blasting, which one of the following blast
media is used: (a) Al2O3, (b) crushed nut shells,
(c) nylon beads, (d) SiC, or (e) SiO2?
28.4.
Which ofthe following processes generally produces
a deeper penetration of atoms in the impregnated
surface: (a) diffusion or (b) ion implantation?
28.5.
Calorizing is the same as which one of the following
surface processes: (a) aluminizing, (b) doping,
(c) hot-sand blasting, or (d) siliconizing?
28.6.
Which one of the following plate metals produces the
hardest surface on a metallic substrate: (a) cadmium,
(b) chromium, (c) copper, (d) nickel, or (e) tin?
28.7.
Which one of the following plating metals is asso-
ciated with the term galvanizing: (a) iron, (b) lead,
(c) steel, (d) tin, or (e) zinc?
28.8.
Which of the following processes involves electro-
chemical reactions (two correct answers): (a) an-
odizing, (b) chromate coatings, (c) electroless
plating, (d) electroplating, and (e) phosphate
coatings?
Multiple Choice Quiz
691

28.9.
With which one of the following metals is anodizing
most commonly associated (one answer): (a) alu-
minum, (b) magnesium, (c) steel, (d) titanium, or
(e) zinc?
28.10.
Sputtering is a form of which one of the following:
(a) chemical vapor deposition, (b) defect in arc
welding, (c) diffusion, (d) ion implantation, or
(e) physical vapor deposition?
28.11.
Which one of the following gases is the most com-
monly used in sputtering and ion plating: (a) argon,
(b) chlorine, (c) neon, (d) nitrogen, or (e) oxygen?
28.12.
The principal methods of applying powder coatings
are which of the following (two best answers):
(a) brushing, (b) electrostatic spraying, (c) fluid-
ized bed, (d) immersion, and (e) roller coating?
28.13.
Porcelain enamel is applied to a surface in which
one of the following forms: (a) liquid emulsion, (b)
liquid solution, (c) molten liquid, or (d) powders?
28.14.
Hard facing utilizes which one of the following
basic processes: (a) arc welding, (b) brazing,
(c) dip coating, (d) electroplating, or (e) mechani-
cal deformation to work harden the surface?
PROBLEMS
Electroplating
28.1.
What volume (cm3) and weight (g) of zinc will be
deposited onto a cathodic workpart if 10 amps of
current are applied for 1 hour?
28.2.
A sheet metal steel part with surface area ¼ 100 cm2
is to be zinc plated. What average plating thickness
will result if 15 amps are applied for 12 minutes in a
chloride electrolyte solution?
28.3.
A sheet metal steel part with surface area ¼ 15.0 in2
is to be chrome plated. What average plating
thickness will result if 15 amps are applied for
10 minutes in a chromic acid-sulfate bath?
28.4.
Twenty-fivejewelry pieces,eachwitha surface area ¼
0.5 in2 are to be gold plated in a batch plating
operation. (a) What average plating thickness will
result if 8 amps are applied for 10 min in a cyanide
bath? (b) What is the value of the gold that will be
plated onto each piece if one ounce of gold is valued
at $900? The density of gold ¼ 0.698 lb/in3.
28.5.
A part made of sheet steel is to be nickel plated.
The part is a rectangular flat plate that is 0.075 cm
thick and whose face dimensions are 14 cm by
19 cm. The plating operation is carried out in an
acid sulfate electrolyte, using a current ¼ 20 amps
for a duration ¼ 30 min. Determine the average
thickness of the plated metal resulting from this
operation.
28.6.
A steel sheet metal part has total surface area ¼
36 in2. How long will it take to deposit a copper
plating (assume valence ¼ þ1) of thickness ¼ 0.001
in onto the surface if 15 amps of current are applied?
28.7.
Increasing current is applied to a workpart surface
in an electroplating process according to the rela-
tion I ¼ 12.0 þ 0.2t, where I ¼ current, amps; and
t ¼ time, min. The plating metal is chromium, and
the part is submersed in the plating solution for a
duration of 20 min. What volume of coating will be
applied in the process?
28.8.
A batch of 100 parts is to be nickel plated in a
barrel plating operation. The parts are identical,
each with a surface area A ¼ 7.8 in2. The plating
process applies a current I ¼ 120 amps, and the
batch takes 40 minutes to complete. Determine
the average plating thickness on the parts.
28.9.
A batch of 40 identical parts is to be chrome plated
usingracks.Eachparthasasurfaceare¼22.7cm2.Ifit
isdesiredtoplateanaveragethickness¼0.010mmon
the surface of each part, how long should the plating
operation be allowed to run at a current ¼ 80 amps?
692
Chapter 28/Surface Processing Operations

Part VIII Joining and
Assembly Processes
29
FUNDAMENTALS
OF WELDING
Chapter Contents
29.1
Overview of Welding Technology
29.1.1
Types of Welding Processes
29.1.2
Welding as a Commercial Operation
29.2
The Weld Joint
29.2.1
Types of Joints
29.2.2
Types of Welds
29.3
Physics of Welding
29.3.1
Power Density
29.3.2
Heat Balance in Fusion Welding
29.4
Features of a Fusion-Welded Joint
In this part of the book, we consider the processes that are
used to join two or more parts into an assembled entity.
These processes are labeled in the lower stem of Figure 1.4.
The term joining is generally used for welding, brazing,
soldering, and adhesive bonding, which form a permanent
joint between the parts—a joint that cannot easily be sepa-
rated. The term assembly usually refers to mechanical meth-
ods of fastening parts together. Some of these methods allow
for easy disassembly, while others do not. Mechanical as-
sembly is covered in Chapter 32. Brazing, soldering, and
adhesive bonding are discussed in Chapter 31. We begin our
coverageof the joining andassembly processes with welding,
covered in this chapter and the following.
Welding is a materials joining process in which two or
more parts are coalesced at their contacting surfaces by a
suitable application of heat and/or pressure. Many welding
processes are accomplished by heat alone, with no pressure
applied; others by a combination of heat and pressure; and
still others by pressure alone, with no external heat sup-
plied. In some welding processes a filler material is added
to facilitate coalescence. The assemblage of parts that are
joined by welding is called a weldment. Welding is most
commonly associated with metal parts, but the process is
also used for joining plastics. Our discussion of welding will
focus on metals.
Welding is a relatively new process (Historical Note
29.1). Its commercial and technological importance derives
from the following:
693


Welding provides a permanent joint. The welded parts become a single entity.

The welded joint can be stronger than the parent materials if a filler metal is used that
has strength properties superior to those of the parents, and if proper welding
techniques are used.

Welding is usually the most economical way to join components in terms of material
usage and fabrication costs. Alternative mechanical methods of assembly require
more complex shape alterations (e.g., drilling of holes) and addition of fasteners (e.g.,
rivets or bolts). The resulting mechanical assembly is usually heavier than a corre-
sponding weldment.

Welding is not restricted to the factory environment. It can be accomplished ‘‘in the
field.’’
Although welding has the advantages indicated above, it also has certain limita-
tions and drawbacks (or potential drawbacks):

Most welding operations are performed manually and are expensive in terms of labor
cost. Many welding operations are considered ‘‘skilled trades,’’ and the labor to
perform these operations may be scarce.

Most welding processes are inherently dangerous because they involve the use of
high energy.

Since welding accomplishes a permanent bond between the components, it does not
allow for convenient disassembly. If the product must occasionally be disassembled
(e.g., for repair or maintenance), then welding should not be used as the assembly
method.

The welded joint can suffer from certain quality defects that are difficult to detect.
The defects can reduce the strength of the joint.
Historical Note 29.1
Origins of welding
Although welding is considered a relatively new
process as practiced today, its origins can be traced to
ancient times. Around 1000 BCE, the Egyptians and others
in the eastern Mediterranean area learned to accomplish
forge welding (Section 30.5.2). It was a natural extension
of hot forging, which they used to make weapons, tools,
and other implements. Forge-welded articles of bronze
have been recovered by archeologists from the pyramids
of Egypt. From these early beginnings through the Middle
Ages, the blacksmith trade developed the art of welding
by hammering to a high level of maturity. Welded
objects of iron and other metals dating from these times
have been found in India and Europe.
It was not until the 1800s that the technological
foundations of modern welding were established. Two
important discoveries were made, both attributed to
English scientist Sir Humphrey Davy: (1) the electric arc,
and (2) acetylene gas.
Around 1801, Davy observed that an electric arc
could be struck between two carbon electrodes.
However, not until the mid-1800s, when the electric
generator was invented, did electrical power become
available in amounts sufﬁcient to sustain arc welding. It
was a Russian, Nikolai Benardos, working out of a
laboratory in France, who was granted a series of patents
for the carbon arc–welding process (one in England in
1885, and another in the United States in 1887). By the
turn of the century, carbon arc welding had become a
popular commercial process for joining metals.
Benardos’ inventions seem to have been limited to
carbon arc welding. In 1892, an American named
Charles Cofﬁn was awarded a U.S. patent for developing
an arc–welding process utilizing a metal electrode. The
unique feature was that the electrode added ﬁller metal
to the weld joint (the carbon arc process does not deposit
ﬁller). The idea of coating the metal electrode (to shield
the welding process from the atmosphere) was
developed later, with enhancements to the metal arc–
welding process being made in England and Sweden
starting around 1900.
Between 1885 and 1900, several forms of resistance
welding were developed by Elihu Thompson. These
694
Chapter 29/Fundamentals of Welding

29.1
OVERVIEW OF WELDING TECHNOLOGY
Welding involves localized coalescence or joining together of two metallic parts at their
faying surfaces. The faying surfaces are the part surfaces in contact or close proximity that
are to be joined. Welding is usually performed on parts made of the same metal, but some
welding operations can be used to join dissimilar metals.
29.1.1 TYPES OF WELDING PROCESSES
Some 50 different types of welding operations have been cataloged by the American
Welding Society. They use various types or combinations of energy to provide the
required power. We can divide the welding processes into two major groups: (1) fusion
welding and (2) solid-state welding.
Fusion Welding
Fusion-welding processes use heat to melt the base metals. In many
fusion welding operations, a filler metal is added to the molten pool to facilitate the process
and provide bulk and strength to the welded joint. A fusion-welding operation in which no
filler metal is added is referred to as an autogenous weld. The fusion category includes the
most widely used welding processes, which can be organized into the following general
groups (initials in parentheses are designations of the American Welding Society):

Arc welding (AW). Arc welding refers to a group of welding processes in which heating
of the metals is accomplished by an electric arc, as shown in Figure 29.1. Some arc-
welding operations also applypressure during the process and most utilize a filler metal.

Resistance welding (RW). Resistance welding achieves coalescence using heat from
electrical resistance to the flow of a current passing between the faying surfaces of
two parts held together under pressure.

Oxyfuel gas welding (OFW). These joining processes use an oxyfuel gas, such as a
mixture of oxygen and acetylene, to produce a hot flame for melting the base metal
and filler metal, if one is used.
included spot welding and seam welding, two joining
methods widely used today in sheet metalworking.
Although Davy discovered acetylene gas early in the
1800s, oxyfuel gas welding required the subsequent
development of torches for combining acetylene and
oxygen around 1900. During the 1890s, hydrogen and
natural gas were mixed with oxygen for welding, but the
oxyacetylene ﬂame achieved signiﬁcantly higher
temperatures.
These three welding processes—arc welding, resistance
welding, and oxyfuel gas welding—constitute by far the
majority of welding operations performed today.
FIGURE 29.1
Basics of
arc welding: (1) before the
weld; (2) during the weld
(the base metal is melted
and ﬁller metal is added to
the molten pool); and (3)
the completed weldment.
There are many variations
of the arc-welding
process.
Section 29.1/Overview of Welding Technology
695


Other fusion-welding processes. Other welding processes that produce fusion of the
metals joined include electron beam welding and laser beam welding.
Certain arc and oxyfuel processes are also used for cutting metals (Sections 26.3.4
and 26.3.5).
Solid-State Welding
Solid-state welding refers to joining processes in which coales-
cence results from application of pressure alone or a combination of heat and pressure. If
heat is used, the temperature in the process is below the melting point of the metals being
welded. No filler metal is utilized. Representative welding processes in this group
include:

Diffusion welding (DFW). Two surfaces are held together under pressure at an
elevated temperature and the parts coalesce by solid-state diffusion.

Friction welding (FRW). Coalescence is achieved by the heat of friction between two
surfaces.

Ultrasonic welding (USW). Moderate pressure is applied between the two parts and
an oscillating motion at ultrasonic frequencies is used in a direction parallel to the
contacting surfaces. The combination of normal and vibratory forces results in shear
stresses that remove surface films and achieve atomic bonding of the surfaces.
In Chapter 30, we describe the various welding processes in greater detail. The
preceding survey should provide a sufficient framework for our discussion of welding
terminology and principles in the present chapter.
29.1.2 WELDING AS A COMMERCIAL OPERATION
The principal applications of welding are (1) construction, such as buildings and bridges;
(2) piping, pressure vessels, boilers, and storage tanks; (3) shipbuilding; (4) aircraft and
aerospace; and (5) automotive and railroad [1]. Welding is performed in a variety of
locations and in a variety of industries. Owing to its versatility as an assembly technique for
commercial products, many welding operations are performed in factories. However,
several of the traditional processes, such as arc welding and oxyfuel gas welding, use
equipment that can be readily moved, so these operations are not limited to the factory.
They can be performed at construction sites, in shipyards, at customers’ plants, and in
automotive repair shops.
Most welding operations are labor intensive. For example, arc welding is usually
performedbyaskilledworker,calledawelder,whomanuallycontrolsthepathorplacement
of the weld to join individual parts into a larger unit. In factory operations in which arc
welding is manually performed, the welder often works with a second worker, called a fitter.
It is the fitter’s job to arrange the individual components for the welder prior to making the
weld.Weldingfixturesandpositionersareusedforthispurpose.Aweldingfixtureisadevice
for clamping and holding the components in fixed position for welding. It is custom-
fabricated for the particular geometry of the weldment and therefore must be economically
justifiedonthebasisofthequantitiesofassembliestobeproduced. Aweldingpositionerisa
device that holds the parts and also moves the assemblage to the desired position for
welding.Thisdiffersfromaweldingfixturethatonlyholdsthepartsinasinglefixedposition.
The desired position is usually one in which the weld path is flat and horizontal.
The Safety Issue
Welding is inherently dangerous to human workers. Strict safety
precautions must be practiced by those who perform these operations. The high tempera-
tures of the molten metals in welding are an obvious danger. In gas welding, the fuels
696
Chapter 29/Fundamentals of Welding

(e.g., acetylene) are a fire hazard. Most of the processes use high energy to cause melting of
the part surfaces to be joined. In many welding processes, electrical power is the source of
thermal energy, so there is the hazard of electrical shock to the worker. Certain welding
processes have their own particular perils. In arc welding, for example, ultraviolet radiation
is emitted that is injurious to human vision. A special helmet that includes a dark viewing
window must be worn by the welder. This window filters out the dangerous radiation but is
so dark that it renders the welder virtually blind, except when the arc is struck. Sparks,
spatters of molten metal, smoke, and fumes add to the risks associated with welding
operations. Ventilationfacilitiesmustbe usedto exhaustthedangerous fumesgenerated by
some of the fluxes and molten metals used in welding. If the operation is performed in an
enclosed area, special ventilation suits or hoods are required.
Automation in Welding
Because of the hazards of manual welding, and in efforts to
increase productivity and improve product quality, various forms of mechanization and
automation have been developed. The categories include machine welding, automatic
welding, and robotic welding.
Machine welding can be defined as mechanized welding with equipment that
performs the operation under the continuous supervision of an operator. It is normally
accomplished by a welding head that is moved by mechanical means relative to a stationary
work, or by moving thework relative to a stationarywelding head.The human worker must
continually observe and interact with the equipment to control the operation.
If the equipment is capable of performing the operation without control by a human
operator, it is referred to as automatic welding. A human worker is usually present to
oversee the process and detect variations from normal conditions. What distinguishes
automatic welding from machine welding is a weld cycle controller to regulate the arc
movement and workpiece positioning without continuous human attention. Automatic
welding requires a welding fixture and/or positioner to position the work relative to the
welding head.Italsorequiresa higherdegreeofconsistency andaccuracy inthecomponent
parts used in the weldment. For these reasons, automatic welding can be justified only for
large quantity production.
In robotic welding, an industrial robot or programmable manipulator is used to
automatically control the movement of the welding head relative to the work (Section
38.4.3). The versatile reach of the robot arm permits the use of relatively simple fixtures, and
the robot’s capacity to be reprogrammed for new part configurations allows this form of
automation to be justified for relatively low production quantities. A typical robotic arc-
welding cell consists of two welding fixtures and a human fitter to load and unload parts
while the robot welds. In addition to arc welding, industrial robots are also used in
automobilefinalassemblyplantstoperformresistancewelding oncarbodies(Figure39.11).
29.2
THE WELD JOINT
Welding produces a solid connection between two pieces, called a weld joint. Aweld joint
is the junction of the edges or surfaces of parts that have been joined by welding. This
section covers two classifications related to weld joints: (1) types of joints and (2) the
types of welds used to join the pieces that form the joints.
29.2.1 TYPES OF JOINTS
There are five basic types of joints for bringing two parts together for joining. The five
joint types are not limited to welding; they apply to other joining and fastening
Section 29.2/The Weld Joint
697

techniques as well. With reference to Figure 29.2, the five joint types can be defined as
follows:
(a) Butt joint. In this joint type, the parts lie in the same plane and are joined at their
edges.
(b) Corner joint. The parts in a corner joint form a right angle and are joined at the corner
of the angle.
(c) Lap joint. This joint consists of two overlapping parts.
(d) Tee joint. In a tee joint, one part is perpendicular to the other in the approximate
shape of the letter ‘‘T.’’
(e) Edge joint. The parts in an edge joint are parallel with at least one of their edges in
common, and the joint is made at the common edge(s).
29.2.2 TYPES OF WELDS
Each of the preceding joints can be made by welding. It is appropriate to distinguish
between the joint type and the way in which it is welded—the weld type. Differences
among weld types are in geometry (joint type) and welding process.
A fillet weld is used to fill in the edges of plates created by corner, lap, and tee
joints, as in Figure 29.3. Filler metal is used to provide a cross section approximately the
shape of a right triangle. It is the most common weld type in arc and oxyfuel welding
because it requires minimum edge preparation—the basic square edges of the parts are
used. Fillet welds can be single or double (i.e., welded on one side or both) and can be
continuous or intermittent (i.e., welded along the entire length of the joint or with
unwelded spaces along the length).
Groove welds usually require that the edges of the parts be shaped into a groove to
facilitate weld penetration. The grooved shapes include square, bevel, V, U, and J, in
FIGURE 29.2
Five basic types of joints: (a) butt, (b) corner, (c) lap, (d) tee, and (e) edge.
FIGURE 29.3
Various
forms of ﬁllet welds:
(a) inside single ﬁllet
corner joint; (b) outside
single ﬁllet corner joint;
(c) double ﬁllet lap joint;
and (d) double ﬁllet tee
joint. Dashed lines show
the original part edges.
698
Chapter 29/Fundamentals of Welding

single or double sides, as shown in Figure 29.4. Filler metal is used to fill in the joint,
usually by arc or oxyfuel welding. Preparation of the part edges beyond the basic square
edge, although requiring additional processing, is often done to increase the strength of
the welded joint or where thicker parts are to be welded. Although most closely
associated with a butt joint, groove welds are used on all joint types except lap.
Plug welds and slot welds are used for attaching flat plates, as shown in Figure 29.5,
using one or more holes or slots in the top part and then filling with filler metal to fuse the
two parts together.
Spot welds and seam welds, used for lap joints, are diagrammed in Figure 29.6. A
spot weld is a small fused section between the surfaces of two sheets or plates. Multiple
spot welds are typically required to join the parts. It is most closely associated with
resistance welding. A seam weld is similar to a spot weld except it consists of a more or
less continuously fused section between the two sheets or plates.
FIGURE 29.4
Some
typical groove welds:
(a) square groove weld,
one side; (b) single bevel
groove weld; (c) single
V-groove weld; (d) single
U-groove weld; (e) single
J-groove weld; (f) double
V-groove weld for thicker
sections. Dashed lines
show the original part
edges.
FIGURE 29.5
(a) Plug
weld; and (b) slot weld.
FIGURE 29.6
(a) Spot weld; and (b) seam weld.
Section 29.2/The Weld Joint
699

Flange welds and surfacing welds are shown in Figure 29.7. A flange weld is made
on the edges of two (or more) parts, usually sheet metal or thin plate, at least one of the
parts being flanged as in Figure 29.7(a). A surfacing weld is not used to join parts, but
rather to deposit filler metal onto the surface of a base part in one or more weld beads.
The weld beads can be made in a series of overlapping parallel passes, thereby covering
large areas of the base part. The purpose is to increase the thickness of the plate or to
provide a protective coating on the surface.
29.3
PHYSICS OF WELDING
Although several coalescing mechanisms are available for welding, fusion is by far the most
common means. In this section, we consider the physical relationships that allow fusion
welding to be performed. We first examine the issue of power density and its importance,
and then we define the heat and power equations that describe a welding process.
29.3.1 POWER DENSITY
To accomplishfusion, a source ofhigh-densityheatenergyissupplied to thefayingsurfaces,
andtheresultingtemperaturesaresufficienttocauselocalizedmeltingofthebasemetals.If
a filler metal is added, theheat density must be high enough to melt it also. Heat density can
be defined as the power transferred to thework perunit surfacearea, W/mm2 (Btu/sec-in2).
The time to melt the metal is inversely proportional to the power density. At low power
densities, a significant amount of time is required to cause melting. If power density is too
low, the heat is conducted into the work as rapidly as it is added at the surface, and melting
never occurs. It has been found that the minimum power density required to melt most
metals in welding is about 10 W/mm2 (6 Btu/sec-in2). As heat density increases, melting
time is reduced. If power density is too high—above around 105 W/mm2 (60,000 Btu/sec-
in2)—the localized temperatures vaporize the metal in the affected region. Thus, there is a
practical range of values for power density within which welding can be performed.
Differences among welding processes in this range are (1) the rate at which welding
can be performed and/or (2) the size of the region that can be welded. Table 29.1 provides a
comparison of power densities for the major fusion welding processes. Oxyfuel gas
welding is capable of developing large amounts of heat, but the heat density is relatively
low because it is spread over a large area. Oxyacetylene gas, the hottest of the OFW fuels,
burns at a top temperature of around 3500C (6300F). By comparison, arc welding
produces high energy over a smaller area, resulting in local temperatures of 5500C to
6600C (10,000F–12,000F). For metallurgical reasons, it is desirable to melt the metal
with minimum energy, and high power densities are generally preferable.
FIGURE 29.7
(a) Flange
weld; and (b) surfacing
weld.
700
Chapter 29/Fundamentals of Welding

Power density can be computed as the power entering the surface divided by the
corresponding surface area:
PD ¼ P
A
ð29:1Þ
where PD ¼ power density, W/mm2 (Btu/sec-in2); P ¼ power entering the surface,
W (Btu/sec); and A ¼ surface area over which the energy is entering, mm2 (in2). The issue
is more complicated than indicated by Eq. (29.1). One complication is that the power
source (e.g., the arc) is moving in many welding processes, which results in preheating
ahead of the operation and postheating behind it. Another complication is that power
density is not uniform throughout the affected surface; it is distributed as a function of
area, as demonstrated by the following example.
Example 29.1
Power Density in
Welding
A heat source transfers 3000 W to the surface of a metal part. The heat impinges the surface
ina circular area, withintensitiesvaryinginside the circle. The distributionisasfollows: 70%
of the power istransferred withina circle of diameter ¼ 5 mm, and 90% istransferred within
a concentric circle of diameter ¼ 12 mm. What are the power densities in (a) the 5-mm
diameter inner circle and (b) the 12-mm-diameter ring that lies around the inner circle?
Solution:
(a) The inner circle has an area A ¼ p 5
ð Þ2
4
¼ 19:63 mm2.
The power inside this area P ¼ 0.70  3000 ¼ 2100 W.
Thus the power density PD ¼ 2100
19:63 ¼ 107 W /mm2.
(b) The area of the ring outside the inner circle is A ¼ p 122  52


4
¼ 93:4 mm2.
The power in this region P ¼ 0.9 (3000)  2100 ¼ 600 W.
The power density is therefore PD600
93:4 ¼ 6:4 W/mm2.
Observation: The power density seems high enough for melting in the inner circle, but
probably not sufficient in the ring that lies outside this inner circle.
n
29.3.2 HEAT BALANCE IN FUSION WELDING
The quantity of heat required to melt a given volume of metal depends on (1) the heat to
raise the temperature of the solid metal to its melting point, which depends on the metal’s
volumetric specific heat, (2) the melting point of the metal, and (3) the heat to transform
the metal from solid to liquid phase at the melting point, which depends on the metal’s
heat of fusion. To a reasonable approximation, this quantity of heat can be estimated by
TABLE 29.1
Comparison of several fusion welding
processes on the basis of their power densities.
Approximate Power Density
Welding Process
W/mm2
Btu/sec-in2
Oxyfuel welding
10
6
Arc welding
50
30
Resistanc welding
1000
600
Laser beam welding
9000
5000
Electron beam welding
10,000
6000
Section 29.3/Physics of Welding
701

the following equation [5]:
Um ¼ KT2
m
ð29:2Þ
where Um ¼ the unit energy for melting (i.e., the quantity of heat required to melt a unit
volume of metal starting from room temperature), J/mm3 (Btu/in3); Tm ¼ melting point of
themetalonanabsolutetemperaturescale, K(R);andK¼ constantwhosevalueis3.33
106 when the Kelvin scale is used (and K ¼ 1.467  105 for the Rankine temperature
scale). Absolute melting temperatures for selected metals are presented in Table 29.2.
Not all of the energy generated at the heat source is used to melt the weld metal.
There are two heat transfer mechanisms at work, both of which reduce the amount of
generated heat that is used by the welding process. The situation is depicted in Figure 29.8.
Thefirstmechanisminvolvesthetransferofheatbetweentheheatsourceandthesurfaceof
the work. This process has a certain heat transfer factor f1, defined as the ratio of the actual
heat received by the workpiece divided by the total heat generated at the source. The
second mechanism involves the conduction of heat away from the weld area to be
dissipated throughout the work metal, so that only a portion of the heat transferred to
the surface is available for melting. This melting factor f2 is the proportion of heat received
at the work surface that can be used for melting. The combined effect of these two factors is
TABLE 29.2
Melting temperatures on the absolute temperature scale for
selected metals.
Melting
Temperature
Melting
Temperature
Metal
Ka
Rb
Metal
Ka
Rb
Aluminum alloys
930
1680
Steels
Cast iron
1530
2760
Low carbon
1760
3160
Copper and alloys
Medium carbon
1700
3060
Pure
1350
2440
High carbon
1650
2960
Brass, navy
1160
2090
Low alloy
1700
3060
Bronze (90 Cu–10 Sn)
1120
2010
Stainless steels
Inconel
1660
3000
Austenitic
1670
3010
Magnesium
940
1700
Martensitic
1700
3060
Nickel
1720
3110
Titanium
2070
3730
Based on values in [2].
aKelvin scale ¼ Centigrade (Celsius) temperature þ 273.
bRankine scale ¼ Fahrenheit temperature þ 460.
FIGURE 29.8
Heat
transfer mechanisms in
fusion welding.
Heat source for welding
Heat used for melting
(1-f1) Heat losses
Heat transferred to work surface
Work
surface
(1-f2) Heat dissipated
into work
f1
f2
702
Chapter 29/Fundamentals of Welding

to reduce the heat energy available for welding as follows:
Hw ¼ f 1f 2H
ð29:3Þ
where Hw ¼ net heat available for welding, J (Btu), f1 ¼ heat transfer factor, f2 ¼ the
melting factor, and H ¼ the total heat generated by the welding process, J (Btu).
The factors f1 and f2 range in value between zero and one. It is appropriate to
separate f1 and f2 in concept, even though they act in concert during the welding process.
The heat transfer factor f1 is determined largely by the welding process and the capacity
to convert the power source (e.g., electrical energy) into usable heat at the work surface.
Arc-welding processes are relatively efficient in this regard, while oxyfuel gas-welding
processes are relatively inefficient.
The melting factor f2 depends on the welding process, but it is also influenced by the
thermal properties of the metal, joint configuration, and work thickness. Metals with high
thermal conductivity, such as aluminum and copper, present a problem in welding because of
the rapid dissipation of heat away from the heat contact area. The problem is exacerbated by
weldingheatsourceswithlowenergydensities(e.g.,oxyfuelwelding)becausetheheatinputis
spread over a larger area, thus facilitating conduction into the work. In general, a high power
density combined with a low conductivity work material results in a high melting factor.
We can now write a balance equation between the energy input and the energy
needed for welding:
Hw ¼ UmV
ð29:4Þ
where Hw ¼ net heat energy used by the welding operation, J (Btu); Um ¼ unit energy
required to melt the metal, J/mm3 (Btu/in3); and V ¼ the volume of metal melted, mm3 (in3).
Most welding operations are rate processes; that is, the net heat energy Hw is
delivered at a given rate, and the weld bead is made at a certain travel velocity. This is
characteristic for example of most arc-welding, many oxyfuel gas-welding operations,
and even some resistance welding operations. It is therefore appropriate to express
Eq. (30) as a rate balance equation:
RHw ¼ UmRWV
ð29:5Þ
whereRHw¼rateofheatenergydeliveredtotheoperationforwelding,J/s¼W(Btu/min);and
RWV¼volumerateofmetalwelded,mm3/s(in3/min).Intheweldingofacontinuousbead,the
volume rate of metal welded is the product of weld area Aw and travel velocity v. Substituting
these terms into the above equation, the rate balance equation can now be expressed as
RHw ¼ f 1f 2RH ¼ UmAwv
ð29:6Þ
where f1 and f2 are the heat transfer and melting factors; RH ¼ rate of input energy
generated by the welding power source, W (Btu/min); Aw ¼ weld cross-sectional area,
mm2 (in2); and v ¼ the travel velocity of the welding operation, mm/s (in/min). In
Chapter 30, we examine how the power density in Eq. (29.1) and the input energy rate for
Eq. (29.6) are generated for some of the individual welding processes.
Example 29.2
Welding Travel
Speed
The power source in a particular welding setup generates 3500 W that can be transferred to
the work surface with a heat transfer factor ¼ 0.7. The metal to be welded is low carbon
steel, whose melting temperature, from Table 29.2, is 1760K. The melting factor in the
operationis0.5.Acontinuousfillet weld istobemade with a cross-sectionalarea ¼ 20mm2.
Determine the travel speed at which the welding operation can be accomplished.
Solution:
Let us first find the unit energy required to melt the metal Um from Eq. (29.2).
Um ¼ 3:33 106


 17602 ¼ 10:3 J/mm3
Section 29.3/Physics of Welding
703

Rearranging Eq. (29.6) to solve for travel velocity, we have v ¼ f 1f 2RH
UmAw
; and solving for
the conditions of the problem, v ¼ 0:7 (0:5) (3500)
10:3 (20)
¼ 5:95 mm/s:
n
29.4
FEATURES OF A FUSION-WELDED JOINT
Most weld joints are fusion welded. As illustrated in the cross-sectional view of Figure 29.9
(a), a typical fusion-weld joint inwhichfiller metal has been addedconsistsofseveral zones:
(1) fusion zone, (2) weld interface, (3) heat-affected zone, and (4) unaffected base metal
zone.
The fusion zone consists of a mixture of filler metal and base metal that have
completely melted. This zone is characterized by a high degree of homogeneity among
the component metals that have been melted during welding. The mixing of these compo-
nents is motivated largely by convection in the molten weld pool. Solidification in the fusion
zonehassimilaritiestoacastingprocess.Inweldingthemoldisformedbytheunmeltededges
orsurfacesofthecomponentsbeingwelded.Thesignificantdifferencebetweensolidification
in casting and in welding is that epitaxial grain growth occurs in welding. The reader may
recall that in casting, the metallic grains are formed from the melt by nucleation of solid
particles at the mold wall, followed by grain growth. In welding, by contrast, the nucleation
stage of solidification is avoided by the mechanism of epitaxial grain growth, in which atoms
from the molten pool solidify on preexisting lattice sites of the adjacent solid base metal.
Consequently, the grain structure in the fusion zone near the heat-affected zone tends to
mimic the crystallographic orientation of the surrounding heat-affected zone. Further into
the fusion zone, a preferred orientation develops in which the grains are roughly perpendic-
ular to the boundaries of the weld interface. The resulting structure in the solidified fusion
zone tends to feature coarse columnar grains, as depicted in Figure 29.9(b). The grain
structure depends on various factors, including welding process, metals being welded (e.g.,
identical metals vs. dissimilar metals welded), whether a filler metal is used, and the feed rate
at which welding is accomplished. A detailed discussion of welding metallurgy is beyond the
scope of this text, and interested readers can consult any of several references [1], [4], [5].
The second zone in the weld joint is the weld interface, a narrow boundary that
separates the fusion zone from the heat-affected zone. The interface consists of a thin band
ofbasemetalthatwasmeltedorpartiallymelted(localizedmeltingwithinthegrains)during
the welding process but then immediately solidified before any mixing with the metal in the
fusion zone. Its chemical composition is therefore identical to that of the base metal.
The third zone in the typical fusion weld is the heat-affected zone (HAZ). The
metal in this zone has experienced temperatures that are below its melting point, yet high
FIGURE 29.9
Cross section of a typical fusion-welded joint: (a) principal zones in the joint and (b) typical grain structure.
704
Chapter 29/Fundamentals of Welding

enough to cause microstructural changes in the solid metal. The chemical composition in
the heat-affected zone is the same as the base metal, but this region has been heat treated
due to the welding temperatures so that its properties and structure have been altered.
The amount of metallurgical damage in the HAZ depends on factors such as the amount
of heat input and peak temperatures reached, distance from the fusion zone, length of
time the metal has been subjected to the high temperatures, cooling rate, and the metal’s
thermal properties. The effect on mechanical properties in the heat-affected zone is
usually negative, and it is in this region of the weld joint that welding failures often occur.
As the distance from the fusion zone increases, the unaffected base metal zone is
finally reached, in which no metallurgical change has occurred. Nevertheless, the base
metal surrounding the HAZ is likely to be in a state of high residual stress, the result of
shrinkage in the fusion zone.
REFERENCES
[1] ASM Handbook, Vol. 6, Welding, Brazing, and
Soldering.
ASM
International,
Materials
Park,
Ohio, 1993.
[2] Cary, H. B., and Helzer, S. C. Modern Welding
Technology, 6th ed. Pearson/Prentice-Hall, Upper
Saddle River, New Jersey, 2005.
[3] Datsko, J. Material Properties and Manufacturing
Processes. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,
1966.
[4] Messler, R. W., Jr. Principles of Welding: Processes,
Physics, Chemistry, and Metallurgy. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., New York, 1999.
[5] Welding Handbook, 9th ed., Vol. 1, Welding Science
and Technology. American Welding Society, Miami,
Florida, 2007.
[6] Wick, C., and Veilleux, R. F. Tool and Manufactur-
ing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol. IV, Quality
Control and Assembly. Society of Manufacturing
Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1987.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
29.1.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of
welding compared to other types of assembly
operations?
29.2.
What were the two discoveries of Sir Humphrey
Davy that led to the development of modern weld-
ing technology?
29.3.
What is meant by the term faying surface?
29.4.
Define the term fusion weld.
29.5.
What is the fundamental difference between a
fusion weld and a solid state weld?
29.6.
What is an autogenous weld?
29.7.
Discuss the reasons why most welding operations
are inherently dangerous.
29.8.
What is the difference between machine welding
and automatic welding?
29.9.
Name and sketch the five joint types.
29.10.
Define and sketch a fillet weld.
29.11.
Define and sketch a groove weld.
29.12.
Why is a surfacing weld different from the other
weld types?
29.13.
Why is it desirable to use energy sources for weld-
ing that have high heat densities?
29.14.
What is the unit melting energy in welding, and
what are the factors on which it depends?
29.15.
Define and distinguish the two terms heat transfer
factor and melting factor in welding.
29.16.
What is the heat-affected zone in a fusion weld?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 14 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
Multiple Choice Quiz
705

omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
29.1.
Welding can only be performed on metals that
have the same melting point; otherwise, the metal
with the lower melting temperature always melts
while the other metal remains solid: (a) true,
(b) false?
29.2.
A fillet weld can be used to join which of the
following joint types (three correct answers):
(a) butt, (b) corner, (c) edge, (d) lap, and (e) tee?
29.3.
A fillet weld has a cross-sectional shape that is
approximately which one of the following: (a) rect-
angular, (b) round, (c) square, or (d) triangular?
29.4.
Groove welds are most closely associated with
which one of the following joint types: (a) butt,
(b) corner, (c) edge, (d) lap, or (e) tee?
29.5.
A flange weld is most closely associated with which
one of the following joint types: (a) butt, (b) corner,
(c) edge, (d) lap, or (e) tee?
29.6.
For metallurgical reasons, it is desirable to melt the
weld metal with minimum energy input. Which one
of the following heat sources is most consistent
with this objective: (a) high power, (b) high power
density, (c) low power, or (d) low power density?
29.7.
The amount of heat required to melt a given
volume of metal depends strongly on which of
the following properties (three best answers):
(a) coefficient of thermal expansion, (b) heat of
fusion, (c) melting temperature, (d) modulus of
elasticity, (e) specific heat, (f) thermal conductivity,
and (g) thermal diffusivity?
29.8.
The heat transfer factor in welding is correctly
defined by which one of the following descriptions:
(a) the proportion of the heat received at the work
surface that is used for melting, (b) the proportion
of the total heat generated at the source that is
received at the work surface, (c) the proportion of
the total heat generated at the source that is used
for melting, or (d) the proportion of the total heat
generated at the source that is used for welding?
29.9.
The melting factor in welding is correctly defined
by which one of the following descriptions: (a) the
proportion of the heat received at the work surface
that is used for melting, (b) the proportion of the
total heat generated at the source that is received at
the work surface, (c) the proportion of the total
heat generated at the source that is used for melt-
ing, or (d) the proportion of the total heat gener-
ated at the source that is used for welding?
29.10.
Weld failures always occur in the fusion zone of the
weld joint, since this is the part of the joint that has
been melted: (a) true, (b) false?
PROBLEMS
Power Density
29.1.
A heat source can transfer 3500 J/sec to a metal
part surface. The heated area is circular, and the
heat intensity decreases as the radius increases, as
follows: 70% of the heat is concentrated in a
circular area that is 3.75 mm in diameter. Is the
resulting power density enough to melt metal?
29.2.
In a laser beam welding process, what is the quan-
tity of heat per unit time (J/sec) that is transferred
to the material if the heat is concentrated in circle
with a diameter of 0.2 mm? Assume the power
density provided in Table 29.1.
29.3.
A welding heat source is capable of transferring
150 Btu/min to the surface of a metal part. The
heated area is approximately circular, and the heat
intensity decreases with increasing radius as fol-
lows: 50% of the power is transferred within a
circle of diameter ¼ 0.1 in and 75% is transferred
within a concentric circle of diameter ¼ 0.25 in.
What are the power densities in (a) the 0.1-in
diameter inner circle and (b) the 0.25-in diameter
ring that lies around the inner circle? (c) Are these
power densities sufficient for melting metal?
Unit Melting Energy
29.4.
Compute the unit energy for melting for the fol-
lowing metals: (a) aluminum and (b) plain low
carbon steel.
29.5.
Compute the unit energy for melting for the fol-
lowing metals: (a) copper and (b) titanium.
29.6.
Make the calculations and plot on linearly scaled
axes the relationship for unit melting energy as a
function of temperature. Use temperatures as fol-
lows to construct the plot: 200C, 400C, 600C,
800C, 1000C, 1200C, 1400C, 1600C, 1800C,
and 2000C. On the plot, mark the positions of
some of the welding metals in Table 29.2. Use of a
spreadsheet program is recommended for the
calculations.
706
Chapter 29/Fundamentals of Welding

29.7.
Make the calculations and plot on linearly scaled
axes the relationship for unit melting energy as a
function of temperature. Use temperatures as fol-
lows to construct the plot: 500F, 1000F, 1500F,
2000F, 2500F, 3000F, and 3500F. On the plot,
mark the positions of some of the welding metals in
Table 29.2. Use of a spreadsheet program is rec-
ommended for the calculations.
29.8.
A fillet weld has a cross-sectional area of 25.0 mm2
and is 300 mm long. (a) What quantity of heat (in J)
is required to accomplish the weld, if the metal to
be welded is low carbon steel? (b) How much heat
must be generated at the welding source, if the heat
transfer factor is 0.75 and the melting factor ¼
0.63?
29.9.
AU-groove weld is used to butt weld 2 pieces of 7.0-
mm-thick titanium plate. The U-groove is prepared
using a milling cutter so the radius of the groove is
3.0 mm. During welding, the penetration of the weld
causes an additional 1.5 mm of material to be
melted. The final cross-sectional area of the weld
can be approximated by a semicircle with a radius of
4.5 mm. The length of the weld is 200 mm. The
melting factor of the setup is 0.57 and the heat
transfer factor is 0.86. (a) What is the quantity of
heat (in J) required to melt the volume of metal in
this weld (filler metal plus base metal)? Assume the
resulting top surface of the weld bead is flush with
the top surface of the plates. (b) What is the re-
quired heat generated at the welding source?
29.10.
A groove weld has a cross-sectional area ¼ 0.045 in2
andis10inlong.(a)What quantity of heat (in Btu) is
required to accomplish the weld, if the metal to be
welded is medium carbon steel? (b) How much heat
must be generated at the welding source, if the heat
transfer factor ¼ 0.9 and the melting factor ¼ 0.7?
29.11.
Solve the previous problem, except that the metal
to be welded is aluminum, and the corresponding
melting factor is half the value for steel.
29.12.
In a controlled experiment, it takes 3700 J to melt
the amount of metal that is in a weld bead with a
cross-sectional area of 6.0 mm2 that is 150.0 mm
long. (a) Using Table 29.2, what is the most likely
metal? (b) If the heat transfer factor is 0.85 and the
melting factor is 0.55 for a welding process, how
much heat must be generated at the welding source
to accomplish the weld?
29.13.
Compute the unit melting energy for (a) aluminum
and (b) steel as the sum of: (1) the heat required to
raise the temperature of the metal from room
temperature to its melting point, which is the
volumetric specific heat multiplied by the temper-
ature rise; and (2) the heat of fusion, so that this
value can be compared to the unit melting energy
calculated by Eq. (29.2). Use either the SI units or
U.S. customary units. Find the values of the prop-
erties needed in these calculations either in this
text or in other references. Are the values close
enough to validate Eq. (29.2)?
Energy Balance in Welding
29.14.
The welding power generated in a particular arc-
welding operation ¼ 3000 W. This is transferred to
the work surface with a heat transfer factor ¼ 0.9.
The metal to be welded is copper whose melting
point is given in Table 29.2. Assume that the
melting factor ¼ 0.25. A continuous fillet weld is
to be made with a cross-sectional area ¼ 15.0 mm2.
Determine the travel speed at which the welding
operation can be accomplished.
29.15.
Solve the previous problem except that the metal
to be welded is high carbon steel, the cross-
sectional area of the weld ¼ 25.0 mm2, and the
melting factor ¼ 0.6.
29.16.
Awelding operation on an aluminum alloy makes a
groove weld. The cross-sectional area of the weld is
30.0 mm2. The welding velocity is 4.0 mm/sec. The
heat transfer factor is 0.92 and the melting factor is
0.48. The melting temperature of the aluminum
alloy is 650C. Determine the rate of heat genera-
tion required at the welding source to accomplish
this weld.
29.17.
The power source in a particular welding operation
generates 125 Btu/min, which is transferred to the
work surface with heat transfer factor ¼ 0.8. The
melting point for the metal to be welded ¼ 1800F
and its melting factor ¼ 0.5. A continuous fillet
weld is to be made with a cross-sectional area ¼
0.04 in2. Determine the travel speed at which the
welding operation can be accomplished.
29.18.
In a certain welding operation to make a fillet weld,
the cross-sectional area ¼ 0.025 in2 and the travel
speed ¼ 15 in/min. If the heat transfer factor ¼ 0.95
and melting factor ¼ 0.5, and the melting point ¼
2000F for the metal to be welded, determine the
rate of heat generation required at the heat source
to accomplish this weld.
29.19.
A fillet weld is used to join 2 medium carbon steel
plates each having a thickness of 5.0 mm. The
plates are joined at a 90 angle using an inside
fillet corner joint. The velocity of the welding head
is 6 mm/sec. Assume the cross section of the weld
bead approximates a right isosceles triangle with a
Problems
707

leg length of 4.5 mm, the heat transfer factor is 0.80,
and the melting factor is 0.58. Determine the rate
of heat generation required at the welding source
to accomplish the weld.
29.20.
A spot weld was made using an arc-welding pro-
cess. In a spot-welding operation, two 1/16-in thick
aluminum plates were joined. The melted metal
formed a nugget that had a diameter of 1/4 in. The
operation required the power to be on for 4 sec.
Assume the final nugget had the same thickness as
the two aluminum plates (1/8 in thick), the heat
transfer factor was 0.80 and the melting factor was
0.50. Determine the rate of heat generation that
was required at the source to accomplish this weld.
29.21.
A surfacing weld is to be applied to a rectangular low
carbon steel plate that is 200 mm by 350 mm. The
filler metal to be added is a harder (alloy) grade of
steel, whose melting point is assumed to be the same.
A thickness of 2.0 mm will be added to the plate, but
with penetration into the base metal, the total thick-
ness melted during welding ¼ 6.0 mm, on average.
The surface will be applied by making a series of
parallel, overlapped welding beads running length-
wise on the plate. The operation will be carried out
automatically with the beads laid down in one long
continuous operation at a travel speed ¼ 7.0 mm/s,
using welding passesseparated by5 mm. Assumethe
welding bead is rectangular in cross section: 5 mm by
6 mm. Ignore the minor complications of the turn-
arounds at the ends of the plate. Assuming the heat
transfer factor ¼ 0.8 and the melting factor ¼ 0.6,
determine (a) the rate of heat that must be gener-
ated at the welding source, and (b) how long will it
take to complete the surfacing operation.
29.22.
An axle-bearing surface made of high carbon steel
has worn beyond its useful life. When it was new,
the diameter was 4.00 in. In order to restore it, the
diameter was turned to 3.90 in to provide a uniform
surface. Next the axle was built up so that it was
oversized by the deposition of a surface weld bead,
which was deposited in a spiral pattern using a
single pass on a lathe. After the weld buildup, the
axle was turned again to achieve the original diam-
eter of 4.00 in. The weld metal deposited was a
similar composition to the steel in the axle. The
length of the bearing surface was 7.0 in. During the
welding operation, the welding apparatus was at-
tached to the tool holder, which was fed toward the
head of the lathe as the axle rotated. The axle
rotated at a speed of 4.0 rev/min. The weld bead
height was 3/32 in above the original surface. In
addition, the weld bead penetrated 1/16 in into the
surface of the axle. The width of the weld bead was
0.25 in, thus the feed on the lathe was set to 0.25 in/
rev. Assuming the heat transfer factor was 0.80 and
the melting factor was 0.65, determine (a) the
relative velocity between the workpiece and the
welding head, (b) the rate of heat generated at
the welding source, and (c) how long it took to
complete the welding portion of this operation.
708
Chapter 29/Fundamentals of Welding

30
WELDING
PROCESSES
Chapter Contents
30.1
Arc Welding
30.1.1
General Technology of Arc Welding
30.1.2
AW Processes—Consumable
Electrodes
30.1.3
AW Processes—Nonconsumable
Electrodes
30.2
Resistance Welding
30.2.1
Power Source in Resistance Welding
30.2.2
Resistance-Welding Processes
30.3
Oxyfuel Gas Welding
30.3.1
Oxyacetylene Welding
30.3.2
Alternative Gases for Oxyfuel
Welding
30.4
Other Fusion-Welding Processes
30.5
Solid-State Welding
30.5.1
General Considerations in Solid-State
Welding
30.5.2
Solid State-Welding Processes
30.6
Weld Quality
30.7
Weldability
30.8
Design Considerations in Welding
Welding processes divide into two major categories:
(1) fusion welding, in which coalescence is accomplished
by melting the two parts to be joined, in some cases adding
filler metal to the joint; and (2) solid-state welding, in
which heat and/or pressure are used to achieve coalescence,
but no melting of the base metals occurs and no filler metal
is added.
Fusion welding is by far the more important category.
It includes (1) arc welding, (2) resistance welding, (3) oxy-
fuel gas welding, and (4) other fusion welding processes—
ones that cannot be classified as any of the first three types.
Fusion welding processes are discussed in the first four
sections of this chapter. Section 30.5 covers solid-state
welding. And in the final three sections of the chapter,
we examine issues common to all welding operations:
weld quality, weldability, and design for welding.
30.1
ARC WELDING
Arc welding (AW) is a fusion-welding process in which
coalescence of the metals is achieved by the heat of an
electric arc between an electrode and the work. The same
basic process is also used in arc cutting (Section 26.3.4). A
generic AW process is shown in Figure 30.1. An electric arc is
a discharge of electric current across a gap in a circuit. It is
sustained by the presence of a thermally ionized column of
gas (called a plasma) through which current flows. To initiate
the arc in an AW process, the electrode is brought into
contact with the work and then quickly separated from it
by a short distance. The electric energy from the arc thus
formed produces temperatures of 5500C (10,000F) or
higher, sufficiently hot to melt any metal. A pool of molten
metal, consisting of base metal(s) and filler metal (if one is
used) is formed near the tip of the electrode. In most arc-
welding processes, filler metal is added during the operation
to increase the volume and strength of the weld joint. As the
709

electrode is moved along the joint, the molten weld pool solidifies in its wake. Our Video
Clip on welding illustrates the various forms of arc welding described in this section.
VIDEO CLIP
Welding: View the segment on arc welding.
Movement of the electrode relative to the work is accomplished by either a human
welder (manual welding) or by mechanical means (i.e., machine welding, automatic
welding, or robotic welding). One of the troublesome aspects of manual arc welding is
that the quality of the weld joint depends on the skill and work ethic of the human welder.
Productivity is also an issue. It is often measured as arc time (also called arc-on time)—
the proportion of hours worked that arc welding is being accomplished:
Arc time ¼ time arc is on
ð
Þ= hours worked
ð
Þ
ð30:1Þ
This definition can be applied to an individual welder or to a mechanized work-
station. For manual welding, arc time is usually around 20%. Frequent rest periods are
needed by the welder to overcome fatigue in manual arc welding, which requires hand-
eye coordination under stressful conditions. Arc time increases to about 50% (more or
less, depending on the operation) for machine, automatic, and robotic welding.
30.1.1 GENERAL TECHNOLOGY OF ARC WELDING
Before describing the individual AW processes, it is instructional to examine some of the
general technical issues that apply to these processes.
Electrodes
Electrodes used in AW processes are classified as consumable or non-
consumable. Consumable electrodes provide the source of the filler metal in arc welding.
These electrodes are available in two principal forms: rods (also called sticks) and wire.
Welding rods are typically 225 to 450 mm (9–18 in) long and 9.5 mm (3/8 in) or less in
diameter. The problem with consumable welding rods, at least in production welding
operations, is that they must be changed periodically, reducing arc time of the welder.
Consumable weld wire has the advantage that it can be continuously fed into the weld pool
from spools containing long lengths of wire, thus avoiding the frequent interruptions that
occur when using welding sticks. In both rod and wire forms, the electrode is consumed by
the arc during the welding process and added to the weld joint as filler metal.
Nonconsumable electrodes are made of tungsten (or carbon, rarely), which resists
melting by the arc. Despite its name, a nonconsumable electrode is gradually depleted
FIGURE 30.1
The basic
conﬁguration and
electrical circuit of an arc-
welding process.
710
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

during the welding process (vaporization is the principal mechanism), analogous to the
gradual wearing of a cutting tool in a machining operation. For AW processes that utilize
nonconsumable electrodes, any filler metal used in the operation must be supplied by
means of a separate wire that is fed into the weld pool.
Arc Shielding
At the high temperatures in arc welding, the metals being joined are
chemicallyreactivetooxygen,nitrogen,andhydrogenintheair.Themechanicalpropertiesof
theweldjointcanbeseriouslydegradedbythesereactions.Thus,somemeanstoshieldthearc
fromthesurroundingairisprovidedinnearlyallAWprocesses.Arcshieldingisaccomplished
by covering the electrode tip, arc, and molten weld pool with a blanket of gas or flux, or both,
which inhibit exposure of the weld metal to air.
Common shielding gases include argon and helium, both of which are inert. In the
welding of ferrous metals with certain AW processes, oxygen and carbon dioxide are used,
usuallyincombinationwithArand/orHe,toproduceanoxidizingatmosphereortocontrol
weld shape.
A flux is a substance used to prevent the formation of oxides and other unwanted
contaminants, or to dissolve them and facilitate removal. During welding, the flux melts
and becomes a liquid slag, covering the operation and protecting the molten weld metal.
The slag hardens upon cooling and must be removed later by chipping or brushing. Flux is
usually formulated to serve several additional functions: (1) provide a protective
atmosphere for welding, (2) stabilize the arc, and (3) reduce spattering.
The method of flux application differs for each process. The delivery techniques
include (1) pouring granular flux onto the welding operation, (2) using a stick electrode
coated with flux material in which the coating melts during welding to cover the operation,
and (3) using tubular electrodes in which flux is contained in the core and released as the
electrode is consumed. These techniques are discussed further in our descriptions of the
individual AW processes.
Power Source in Arc Welding
Both direct current (DC) and alternating current (AC)
are used in arc welding. AC machines are less expensive to purchase and operate, but are
generally restricted to welding of ferrous metals. DC equipment can be used on all metals
with good results and is generally noted for better arc control.
Inall arc-weldingprocesses, power to drive theoperation isthe productofthecurrent
I passing through the arc and the voltage E across it. This power is converted into heat, but
not all of the heat is transferred to the surface of the work. Convection, conduction,
radiation, andspatteraccountforlossesthatreducetheamountofusableheat.Theeffectof
the losses is expressed by the heat transfer factor f1 (Section 29.3). Some representative
values of f1 for several AW processes are given in Table 30.1. Heat transfer factors are
TABLE 30.1
Heat transfer factors for several
arc-welding processes.
Arc-Welding Processa
Typical Heat
Transfer Factor f1
Shielded metal arc welding
0.9
Gas metal arc welding
0.9
Flux-cored arc welding
0.9
Submerged arc welding
0.95
Gas tungsten arc welding
0.7
Compiled from [5].
aThe arc-welding processes are described in Sections 30.1.2 and
30.1.3.
Section 30.1/Arc Welding
711

greater for AW processes that use consumable electrodes because most of the heat
consumed in melting the electrode is subsequently transferred to the work as molten
metal. The process with the lowest f1 value in Table 30.1 is gas tungsten arc welding, which
uses a nonconsumable electrode. Melting factor f2 (Section 29.3) further reduces the
available heat for welding. The resulting power balance in arc welding is defined by
RHw ¼ f 1f 2IE ¼ UmAwv
ð30:2Þ
where E ¼ voltage, V; I ¼ current, A; and the other terms were defined in Section 29.3. The
units of RHw are watts (current multiplied by voltage), which equal J/sec. This can be
converted to Btu/sec by recalling that 1 Btu ¼ 1055 J, and thus 1 Btu/sec ¼ 1055 watts.
Example 30.1
Power in Arc
Welding
A gas tungsten arc-welding operation is performed at a current of 300 A and voltage of 20 V.
The melting factor f2 ¼ 0.5, and the unit melting energy for the metal Um ¼ 10 J/mm3.
Determine (a) power in the operation, (b) rate of heat generation at the weld, and (c) volume
rate of metal welded.
Solution:
(a) The power in this arc-welding operation is
P ¼ IE ¼ 300 A
ð
Þ 20 V
ð
Þ ¼ 6000 W
(b) From Table 30.1, the heat transfer factor f1 ¼ 0.7. The rate of heat used for welding is
given by
RHw ¼ f 1f 2IE ¼ 0:7
ð
Þ 0:5
ð
Þ 6000
ð
Þ ¼ 2100 W ¼ 2100 J/s
(c) The volume rate of metal welded is
RVW ¼ 2100 J/s
ð
Þ= 10 J/mm3


¼ 210 mm3/s
n
30.1.2 AW PROCESSES—CONSUMABLE ELECTRODES
A number of important arc-welding processes use consumable electrodes. These are
discussed in this section. Symbols for the welding processes are those used by the
American Welding Society.
Shielded Metal Arc Welding
Shielded metal arc welding (SMAW) is an AW process
that uses a consumable electrode consisting of a filler metal rod coated with chemicals that
provide flux and shielding. The process is illustrated in Figures 30.2 and 30.3. The welding
stick(SMAWissometimescalledstickwelding)istypically225to450mm(9–18in)longand
2.5 to 9.5 mm (3/32–3/8 in) in diameter. The filler metal used in the rod must be compatible
with the metal to be welded, the composition usually being very close to that of the base
metal. The coating consists of powdered cellulose (i.e., cotton and wood powders) mixed
with oxides, carbonates, and other ingredients, held together by a silicate binder. Metal
powders are also sometimes included in the coating to increase the amount of filler metal
and to add alloying elements. The heat of the welding process melts the coating to provide a
protective atmosphere and slag for the welding operation. It also helps to stabilize the arc
and regulate the rate at which the electrode melts.
During operation the bare metal end of the welding stick (opposite the welding tip)
is clamped in an electrode holder that is connected to the power source. The holder has an
insulated handle so that it can be held and manipulated by a human welder. Currents
typically used in SMAW range between 30 and 300 A at voltages from 15 to 45 V.
Selection of the proper power parameters depends on the metals being welded, electrode
type and length, and depth of weld penetration required. Power supply, connecting
cables, and electrode holder can be bought for a few thousand dollars.
712
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

Shielded metal arc welding is usually performed manually. Common applications
include construction, pipelines, machinery structures, shipbuilding, job shop fabrication,
and repair work. It is preferred over oxyfuel welding for thicker sections—above 5 mm
(3/16 in)—because of its higher power density. The equipment is portable and low cost,
making SMAW highly versatile and probably the most widely used of the AW processes.
Base metals include steels, stainless steels, cast irons, and certain nonferrous alloys. It is
not used or seldom used for aluminum and its alloys, copper alloys, and titanium.
A disadvantage of shielded metal arc welding as a production operation is the use
of the consumable electrode stick. As the sticks are used up, they must periodically be
changed. This reduces the arc time with this welding process. Another limitation is the
current level that can be used. Because the electrode length varies during the operation
and this length affects the resistance heating of the electrode, current levels must be
maintained within a safe range or the coating will overheat and melt prematurely when
starting a new welding stick. Some of the other AW processes overcome the limitations of
welding stick length in SMAW by using a continuously fed wire electrode.
Gas Metal Arc Welding
Gas metal arc welding (GMAW) is an AW process in which the
electrodeisaconsumablebaremetalwire,andshieldingisaccomplishedbyfloodingthearc
FIGURE 30.2
Shielded
metal arc welding (stick
welding) performed by a
(human) welder. (Photo
courtesy of Hobart
Brothers, Troy, Ohio.)
FIGURE 30.3
Shielded
metal arc welding
(SMAW).
Consumable electrode
Electrode coating
Molten weld metal
Base metal
Protective gas
from electrode
coating
Solidified
weld metal
Slag
Direction of travel
Section 30.1/Arc Welding
713

with a gas. The bare wire is fed continuously and automatically from a spool through the
welding gun, as illustrated in Figure 30.4. A welding gun is shown in Figure 30.5. Wire
diameters ranging from 0.8 to 6.5 mm (1/32–1/4 in) are used in GMAW, the size depending
on the thickness of the parts being joined and the desired deposition rate. Gases used for
shielding include inert gases such as argon and helium, and active gases such as carbon
dioxide. Selection of gases (and mixtures of gases) depends on the metal being welded, as
well as other factors. Inert gases are used for welding aluminum alloys and stainless steels,
FIGURE 30.4
Gas metal
arc welding (GMAW).
Shielding gas
Solidified weld metal
Direction of travel
Molten weld metal
Base metal
Shielding gas
Nozzle
Electrode wire
Feed from spool
FIGURE 30.5
Welding gun for gas metal arc welding. (Courtesy of Lincoln Electric Company,
Cleveland, Ohio.)
714
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

while CO2 is commonly used for welding low and medium carbon steels. The combination
ofbare electrodewire and shielding gases eliminatestheslagcovering ontheweldbead and
thusprecludes the needformanualgrindingandcleaningoftheslag. TheGMAW processis
therefore ideal for making multiple welding passes on the same joint.
The various metals on which GMAW is used and the variations of the process itself
have given rise to a variety of names for gas metal arc welding. When the process was first
introduced in the late 1940s, it was applied to the welding of aluminum using inert gas
(argon) for arc shielding. The name applied to this process was MIG welding (for metal
inert gas welding). When the same welding process was applied to steel, it was found that
inert gases were expensive and CO2 was used as a substitute. Hence the term CO2 welding
was applied. Refinements in GMAW for steel welding have led to the use of gas mixtures,
including CO2 and argon, and even oxygen and argon.
GMAW is widely used in fabrication operations in factories for welding a variety of
ferrous and nonferrous metals. Because it uses continuous weld wire rather than welding
sticks, it has a significant advantage over SMAW in terms of arc time when performed
manually. For the same reason, it also lends itself to automation of arc welding. The electrode
stubs remaining after stick welding also wastes filler metal, so the utilization of electrode
material is higher with GMAW. Other features of GMAW include elimination of slag
removal (since no flux is used), higher deposition rates than SMAW, and good versatility.
Flux-Cored Arc Welding
This arc-welding process was developed in the early 1950s as
an adaptation of shielded metal arc welding to overcome the limitations imposed by the use
of stick electrodes. Flux-cored arc welding (FCAW) is an arc-welding process in which the
electrode is a continuous consumable tubing that contains flux and other ingredients in its
core. Other ingredients may include deoxidizers and alloying elements. The tubular flux-
cored‘‘wire’’ isflexibleandcanthereforebesuppliedintheform ofcoilstobecontinuously
fed through the arc-welding gun. There are two versions of FCAW: (1) self-shielded and
(2) gas shielded. In the first version of FCAW to be developed, arc shielding was provided
by a flux core, thus leading to the name self-shielded flux-cored arc welding. The core in
this form of FCAW includes not only fluxes but also ingredients that generate shielding
gases for protecting thearc. Thesecond versionof FCAW, developedprimarily forwelding
steels, obtains arc shielding from externally supplied gases, similar to gas metal arc
welding. This version is called gas-shielded flux-cored arc welding. Because it utilizes an
electrode containing its own flux together with separate shielding gases, it might be
considered a hybrid of SMAW and GMAW. Shielding gases typically employed are
carbon dioxide for mild steels or mixtures of argon and carbon dioxide for stainless
steels. Figure 30.6 illustrates the FCAW process, with the gas (optional) distinguishing
between the two types.
FIGURE 30.6
Flux-
cored arc welding. The
presence or absence of
externally supplied
shielding gas
distinguishes the two
types: (1) self-shielded, in
which the core provides
the ingredients for shield-
ing;and(2)gasshielded,in
which external shielding
gases are supplied.
Shielding gas
Direction of travel
Shielding gas (optional)
Arc
Nozzle (optional)
Guide tube
Slag
Tubular electrode wire
Flux core
Feed from spool
Solidified weld metal
Molten weld metal
Base metal
Section 30.1/Arc Welding
715

FCAW has advantages similar to GMAW, due to continuous feeding of the electrode.
It is used primarily for welding steels and stainless steels over a wide stock thickness range.
It is noted for its capability to produce very-high-quality weld joints that are smooth and
uniform.
Electrogas Welding
Electrogas welding (EGW) is an AW process that uses a continuous
consumable electrode (either flux-cored wire or bare wire with externally supplied shielding
gases) and molding shoes to contain the molten metal. The process is primarily applied to
vertical butt welding, as pictured in Figure 30.7. When the flux-cored electrode wire is
employed, no external gases are supplied, and the process can be considered a special
application of self-shielded FCAW. When a bare electrode wire is used with shielding gases
fromanexternalsource,itisconsideredaspecialcaseofGMAW.Themoldingshoesarewater
cooledtopreventtheirbeingaddedtotheweldpool.Togetherwiththeedgesofthepartsbeing
welded,theshoesformacontainer,almostlikeamoldcavity,intowhichthemoltenmetalfrom
theelectrodeandbasepartsisgraduallyadded.Theprocessisperformedautomatically,witha
moving weld head traveling vertically upward to fill the cavity in a single pass.
Principal applications of electrogas welding are steels (low- and medium-carbon,
low-alloy, and certain stainless steels) in the construction of large storage tanks and in
shipbuilding. Stock thicknesses from 12 to 75 mm (0.5–3.0 in) are within the capacity of
EGW. In addition to butt welding, it can also be used for fillet and groove welds, always in
a vertical orientation. Specially designed molding shoes must sometimes be fabricated for
the joint shapes involved.
Submerged Arc Welding
This process, developed during the 1930s, was one of the first
AW processes to be automated. Submerged arc welding (SAW) is an arc-welding process
that uses a continuous, consumable bare wire electrode, and arc shielding is provided by a
cover of granular flux. The electrode wire is fed automatically from a coil into the arc. The
flux is introduced into the joint slightly ahead of the weld arc by gravity from a hopper, as
shown in Figure 30.8. The blanket of granular flux completely submerges the welding
operation, preventing sparks, spatter, and radiation that are so hazardous in other AW
processes. Thus, the welding operator in SAW need not wear the somewhat cumbersome
face shield required in the other operations (safety glasses and protective gloves, of course,
are required). The portion of the flux closest to the arc is melted, mixing with the molten
weldmetaltoremoveimpuritiesandthensolidifyingontopoftheweldjointtoformaglass-
like slag. The slag and unfused flux granules on top provide good protection from the
atmosphere and good thermal insulation for the weld area, resulting in relatively slow
cooling and a high-quality weld joint, noted for toughness and ductility. As depicted in our
FIGURE 30.7
Electrogas welding using
ﬂux-cored electrode wire:
(a)frontviewwithmolding
shoe removed for clarity,
and (b) side view showing
molding shoes on both
sides.
716
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

sketch, the unfused flux remaining after welding can be recovered and reused. The solid
slag covering the weld must be chipped away, usually by manual means.
Submerged arc welding is widely used in steel fabrication for structural shapes (e.g.,
welded I-beams); longitudinal and circumferential seams for large diameter pipes, tanks,
and pressure vessels; and welded components for heavy machinery. In these kinds of
applications, steel plates of 25-mm (1.0-in) thickness and heavier are routinely welded by
this process. Low-carbon, low-alloy, and stainless steels can be readily welded by SAW;
but not high-carbon steels, tool steels, and most nonferrous metals. Because of the gravity
feed of the granular flux, the parts must always be in a horizontal orientation, and a
backup plate is often required beneath the joint during the welding operation.
30.1.3 AW PROCESSES—NONCONSUMABLE ELECTRODES
The AW processes discussed above use consumable electrodes. Gas tungsten arc welding,
plasma arc welding, and several other processes use nonconsumable electrodes.
Gas Tungsten Arc Welding
Gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW) is an AW process that
uses a nonconsumable tungsten electrode and an inert gas for arc shielding. The term TIG
welding (tungsten inert gas welding) is often applied to this process (in Europe, WIG
welding is the term—the chemical symbol for tungsten is W, for Wolfram). GTAW can be
implemented with or without a filler metal. Figure 30.9 illustrates the latter case. When a
filler metal is used, it is added to the weld pool from a separate rod or wire, being melted by
theheat of the arc ratherthan transferred across thearc as in the consumable electrode AW
processes. Tungsten is a good electrode material due to its high melting point of 3410C
(6170F). Typical shielding gases include argon, helium, or a mixture of these gas elements.
GTAWisapplicabletonearlyallmetalsinawiderangeofstockthicknesses.Itcanalso
be used for joining various combinations of dissimilar metals. Its most common applications
FIGURE 30.9
Gas
tungsten arc welding
(GTAW).
Shielding gas
Gas nozzle
Electrode tip
Solidified weld metal
Direction of travel
Molten weld metal
Base metal
Shielding gas
Tungsten electrode
(nonconsumable)
FIGURE 30.8
Submerged arc welding
(SAW).
Consumable
electrode
Blanket of
granular flux
Vacuum system for
recovery of granular flux
Slag (solidified flux)
Solidified weld metal
Molten weld metal
Molten flux
Base metal
Direction of travel
Granular flux
from hopper
Section 30.1/Arc Welding
717

are for aluminum and stainless steel. Cast irons, wrought irons, and of course tungsten are
difficult to weld by GTAW. In steel welding applications, GTAW is generally slower and
more costly than the consumable electrode AW processes, except when thin sections are
involved and very-high-quality welds are required. When thin sheets are TIG welded to
close tolerances, filler metal isusually not added. The process can be performed manually or
by machine and automated methods for all joint types. Advantages of GTAW in the
applications to which it is suited include high-quality welds, no weld spatter because no filler
metal is transferred across the arc, and little or no postweld cleaning because no flux is used.
Plasma Arc Welding
Plasma arc welding (PAW) is a special form of gas tungsten arc
welding in which a constricted plasma arc is directed at the weld area. In PAW, a tungsten
electrode is contained in a specially designed nozzle that focuses a high-velocity stream of
inert gas (e.g., argon or argon–hydrogen mixtures) into the region of the arc to form a high-
velocity, intensely hot plasma arc stream, as in Figure 30.10. Argon, argon–hydrogen, and
helium are also used as the arc-shielding gases.
Temperatures in plasma arc welding reach 17,000C (30,000F) or greater, hot enough
to melt any known metal. The reason why temperatures are so high in PAW (significantly
higher than those in GTAW) derives from the constriction of the arc. Although the typical
powerlevelsusedinPAWarebelow thoseusedinGTAW,thepowerishighlyconcentratedto
produce a plasma jet of small diameter and very high power density.
Plasma arc welding was introduced around 1960 but was slow to catch on. In recent
years its use is increasing as a substitute for GTAW in applications such as automobile
subassemblies, metal cabinets, door and window frames, and home appliances. Owing to
the special features of PAW, its advantages in these applications include good arc stability,
better penetration control than most other AW processes, high travel speeds, and excellent
weld quality. The process can be used to weld almost any metal, including tungsten.
Difficult-to-weld metals with PAW include bronze, cast irons, lead, and magnesium. Other
limitations include high equipment cost and larger torch size than other AW operations,
which tends to restrict access in some joint configurations.
Other Arc-Welding and Related Processes
The preceding AW processes are the most
important commercially. There are several others that should be mentioned, which are
special cases or variations of the principal AW processes.
Carbon arc welding (CAW) is an arc-welding process in which a nonconsumable
carbon (graphite) electrode is used. It has historical importance because it was the first
arc-welding process to be developed, but its commercial importance today is practically
nil. The carbon arc process is used as a heat source for brazing and for repairing iron
castings. It can also be used in some applications for depositing wear-resistant materials
on surfaces. Graphite electrodes for welding have been largely superseded by tungsten
(in GTAW and PAW).
FIGURE 30.10
Plasma
arc welding (PAW).
Plasma gas
Shielding gas
Shielding gas
Solidified weld metal
Molten weld metal
Base metal
Plasma stream
Tungsten electrode
Direction of travel
718
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

Stud welding (SW) is a specialized AW process for joining studs or similar compo-
nents to base parts. A typical SWoperation is illustrated in Figure 30.11, in which shielding
is obtained by the use of a ceramic ferrule. To begin with, the stud is chucked in a special
weldgun that automatically controls thetiming and power parameters of the stepsshown in
thesequence. The worker must only position the gun at theproper location against the base
workpart to which the stud will be attached and pull the trigger. SW applications include
threadedfasteners forattaching handles to cookware, heat radiation fins onmachinery, and
similar assembly situations. In high-production operations, stud welding usually has
advantages over rivets, manually arc-welded attachments, and drilled and tapped holes.
30.2
RESISTANCE WELDING
Resistance welding (RW) is a group of fusion-welding processes that uses a combination of
heat and pressure to accomplish coalescence, the heat being generated by electrical
resistance to current flow at the junction to be welded. The principal components in
resistance welding are shown in Figure 30.12 for a resistance spot-welding operation, the
most widely used process in the group. The components include workparts to be welded
FIGURE 30.11
Stud arc welding (SW): (1) stud is positioned; (2) current ﬂows from the gun, and stud is pulled
from base to establish arc and create a molten pool; (3) stud is plunged into molten pool; and (4) ceramic ferrule is
removed after solidiﬁcation.
FIGURE 30.12
Resistance welding (RW),
showing the components
in spot welding, the
predominant process in
the RW group.
Section 30.2/Resistance Welding
719

(usually sheet metal parts), two opposing electrodes, a means of applying pressure to
squeeze the parts between the electrodes, and an AC power supply from which a controlled
current can be applied. The operation results in a fused zone between the two parts, called a
weld nugget in spot welding.
By comparison to arc welding, resistance welding uses no shielding gases, flux, or
filler metal; and the electrodes that conduct electrical power to the process are non-
consumable. RW is classified as fusion welding because the applied heat almost always
causes melting of the faying surfaces. However, there are exceptions. Some welding
operations based on resistance heating use temperatures below the melting points of the
base metals, so fusion does not occur.
30.2.1 POWER SOURCE IN RESISTANCE WELDING
The heat energy supplied to the welding operation depends on current flow, resistance of
the circuit, and length of time the current is applied. This can be expressed by the equation
H ¼ I2Rt
ð30:3Þ
where H ¼ heat generated, J (to convert to Btu divide by 1055); I ¼ current, A; R ¼
electrical resistance, V; and t ¼ time, s.
The current used in resistance welding operations is very high (5000 to 20,000 A,
typically),althoughvoltageisrelativelylow(usuallybelow10V).Thedurationtofthecurrent
is short in most processes, perhaps lasting 0.1 to 0.4 s in a typical spot-welding operation.
The reason why such a high current is used in RW is because (1) the squared term
in Eq. (30.3) amplifies the effect of current, and (2) the resistance is very low (around
0.0001 V). Resistance in the welding circuit is the sum of (1) resistance of the electrodes,
(2) resistances of the workparts, (3) contact resistances between electrodes and workparts,
and (4) contact resistance of the faying surfaces. Thus, heat is generated in all of these
regions of electrical resistance. The ideal situation is for the faying surfaces to be the largest
resistance in the sum, since this is the desired location of the weld. The resistance of the
electrodes is minimized by using metals with very low resistivities, such as copper. Also, the
electrodes are often water cooled to dissipate the heat that is generated there. The workpart
resistances are a function of the resistivities of the base metals and the part thicknesses. The
contactresistances between the electrodesand the partsare determined by the contactareas
(i.e.,sizeand shape of the electrode) and the condition of the surfaces (e.g., cleanliness of the
work surfaces and scale on the electrode). Finally, the resistance at the faying surfaces
depends on surface finish, cleanliness, contact area, and pressure. No paint, oil, dirt, or other
contaminants should be present to separate the contacting surfaces.
Example 30.2
Resistance
Welding
A resistance spot-welding operation is performed on two pieces of 1.5-mm-thick sheet
steel using 12,000 A for a 0.20 s duration. The electrodes are 6 mm in diameter at the
contacting surfaces. Resistance is assumed to be 0.0001 V, and the resulting weld nugget
is 6 mm in diameter and 2.5 mm thick. The unit melting energy for the metal Um ¼ 12.0 J/
mm3. What portion of the heat generated was used to form the weld nugget, and what
portion was dissipated into the work metal, electrodes, and surrounding air?
Solution:
The heat generated in the operation is given by Eq. (30.3) as.
H ¼ 12; 000
ð
Þ2 0:0001
ð
Þ 0:2
ð
Þ ¼ 2880 J
The volume of the weld nugget (assumed disc-shaped) is
v ¼ 2:5 p 6
ð Þ2
4
70:7 mm3:
720
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

The heat required to melt this volume of metal is Hw ¼ 70.7(12.0) ¼ 848 J. The remaining
heat, 2880  848 ¼ 2032 J (70.6% of the total), is lost into the work metal, electrodes, and
surrounding air. In effect, this loss represents the combined effect of the heat transfer
factor f1 and the melting factor f2 (Section 29.3).
n
Success in resistance welding depends on pressure as well as heat. The principal
functions of pressure in RW are to (1) force contact between the electrodes and the
workparts and between the two work surfaces prior to applying current, and (2) press the
faying surfaces together to accomplish coalescence when the proper welding temperature
has been reached.
General advantages of resistance welding include (1) no filler metal is required,
(2) high production rates are possible, (3) lends itself to mechanization and automation,
(4) operator skill level is lower than that required for arc welding, and (5) good
repeatability and reliability.
Drawbacks are (1) equipment cost is high—usually
much higher than most arc-welding operations, and (2) types of joints that can be
welded are limited to lap joints for most RW processes.
30.2.2 RESISTANCE-WELDING PROCESSES
The resistance-welding processes of most commercial importance are spot, seam, and
projection welding. These processes are illustrated in our Video Clip on welding.
VIDEO CLIP
Welding: View the segment titled Resistance Welding.
Resistance Spot Welding
Resistance spot welding is by far the predominant process in
this group. It is widely used in mass production of automobiles, appliances, metal
furniture, and other products made of sheet metal. If one considers that a typical car
body has approximately 10,000 individual spot welds, and that the annual production of
automobiles throughout the world is measured in tens of millions of units, the economic
importance of resistance spot welding can be appreciated.
Resistance spot welding (RSW) is an RW process in which fusion of the faying
surfaces of a lap joint is achieved at one location by opposing electrodes. The process is
used to join sheet-metal parts of thickness 3 mm (0.125 in) or less, using a series of spot
welds, in situations where an airtight assembly is not required. The size and shape of the
weld spot is determined by the electrode tip, the most common electrode shape being
round, but hexagonal, square, and other shapes are also used. The resulting weld nugget is
typically 5 to 10 mm (0.2–0.4 in) in diameter, with a heat-affected zone extending slightly
beyond the nugget into the base metals. If the weld is made properly, its strength will be
comparable to that of the surrounding metal. The steps in a spot welding cycle are depicted
in Figure 30.13.
MaterialsusedforRSWelectrodesconsistoftwomaingroups:(1) copper-based alloys
and (2) refractory metal compositions such as copper and tungsten combinations. The
second group is noted for superior wear resistance. As in most manufacturing processes,
the tooling in spot welding gradually wears out as it is used. Whenever practical, the
electrodes are designed with internal passageways for water cooling.
Because of its widespread industrial use, various machinesand methods are available
to perform spot-welding operations. The equipment includes rocker-arm and press-type
spot-welding machines, and portable spot-welding guns. Rocker-arm spot welders, shown
in Figure 30.14, have a stationary lower electrode and a movable upper electrode that can
be raised and lowered for loading and unloading the work. The upper electrode is mounted
Section 30.2/Resistance Welding
721

on a rocker arm (hence the name) whose movement is controlled by a foot pedal operated
by the worker. Modern machines can be programmed to control force and current during
the weld cycle.
Press-type spot welders are intended for larger work. The upper electrode has a
straight-line motion provided by a vertical press that is pneumatically or hydraulically
powered. The press action permits larger forces to be applied, and the controls usually
permit programming of complex weld cycles.
The previous two machine types are both stationary spot welders, in which the work
is brought to the machine. For large, heavy work it is difficult to move and position the
part into stationary machines. For these cases, portable spot-welding guns are available in
FIGURE 30.13
(a) Steps
in a spot-welding cycle,
and (b) plot of squeezing
force and current during
cycle. The sequence is:
(1) partsinserted between
open electrodes, (2) elec-
trodes close and force is
applied, (3) weld time—
current is switched on,
(4)currentisturnedoffbut
force is maintained or in-
creased (a reduced cur-
rent is sometimes applied
near the end of this step
for stress relief in the weld
region), and (5) electrodes
are opened, and the
welded assembly is
removed.
FIGURE 30.14
Rocker-
arm spot-welding
machine.
722
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

various sizes and configurations. These devices consist of two opposing electrodes
contained in a pincer mechanism. Each unit is lightweight so that it can be held and
manipulated by a human worker or an industrial robot. The gun is connected to its own
power and control source by means of flexible electrical cables and air hoses. Water
cooling for the electrodes, if needed, can also be provided through a water hose. Portable
spot-welding guns are widely used in automobile final assembly plants to spot weld car
bodies. Some of these guns are operated by people, but industrial robots have become the
preferred technology, illustrated in Figure 38.16.
Resistance Seam Welding
In resistance seam welding (RSEW), the stick-shaped
electrodes in spot welding are replaced by rotating wheels, as shown in Figure 30.15,
anda seriesofoverlappingspotweldsaremadealongthelap joint.Theprocessiscapable of
producing air-tight joints, and its industrial applications include the production of gasoline
tanks, automobile mufflers, and various other fabricated sheet metal containers. Techni-
cally, RSEWis the same as spot welding, except that the wheel electrodes introduce certain
complexities. Since the operation is usually carried out continuously, rather than discretely,
the seams should be along a straight or uniformly curved line. Sharp corners and similar
discontinuitiesare difficult todealwith.Also, warping ofthe partsbecomesmoreofa factor
in resistance seam welding, and fixtures are required to hold the work in position and
minimize distortion.
The spacing between the weld nuggets in resistance seam welding depends on the
motion of the electrode wheels relative to the application of the weld current. In the usual
method of operation, called continuous motion welding, the wheel is rotated continu-
ously at a constant velocity, and current is turned on at timing intervals consistent with the
desired spacing between spot welds along the seam. Frequency of the current discharges
is normally set so that overlapping weld spots are produced. But if the frequency is
reduced sufficiently, then there will be spaces between the weld spots, and this method is
termed roll spot welding. In another variation, the welding current remains on at a
constant level (rather than being pulsed) so that a truly continuous welding seam is
produced. These variations are depicted in Figure 30.16.
An alternative to continuous motion welding is intermittent motion welding, in
which the electrode wheel is periodically stopped to make the spot weld. The amount of
wheel rotation between stops determines the distance between weld spots along the
seam, yielding patterns similar to (a) and (b) in Figure 30.16.
Seam-welding machines are similar to press-type spot welders except that electrode
wheels are used rather than the usual stick-shaped electrodes. Cooling of the work and
wheels is often necessary in RSEW, and this is accomplished by directing water at the top
and underside of the workpart surfaces near the electrode wheels.
FIGURE 30.15
Resistance seam
welding (RSEW).
Section 30.2/Resistance Welding
723

Resistance Projection Welding
Resistance projection welding (RPW) is an RW
process in which coalescence occurs at one or more relatively small contact points on
the parts. These contact points are determined by the design of the parts to be joined, and
may consist of projections, embossments, or localized intersections of the parts. A typical
case in which two sheet-metal parts are welded together is described in Figure 30.17. The
part on top has been fabricated with two embossed points to contact the other part at the
start of the process. It might be argued that the embossing operation increases the cost of
the part, but this increase may be more than offset by savings in welding cost.
There are variations of resistance projection welding, two of which are shown in
Figure 30.18. In one variation, fasteners with machined or formed projections can be
permanently joined to sheet or plate by RPW, facilitating subsequent assembly operations.
Another variation, called cross-wire welding, is used to fabricate welded wire products
such as wire fence, shopping carts, and stove grills. In this process, the contacting surfaces of
the round wires serve as the projections to localize the resistance heat for welding.
Other Resistance-Welding Operations
In addition to the principal RW processes
described above, several additional processes in this group should be identified: flash,
upset, percussion, and high-frequency resistance welding.
In flash welding (FW), normally used for butt joints, the two surfaces to be joined are
brought into contact or near contact and electric current is applied to heat the surfaces to
the melting point, after which the surfaces are forced together to form the weld. The two
steps are outlined in Figure 30.19. In addition to resistance heating, some arcing occurs
(called flashing, hence the name of the welding process), depending on the extent of
FIGURE 30.16
Different types of seams produced by electrode wheels: (a) conventional resistance seam
welding, in which overlapping spots are produced; (b) roll spot welding; and (c) continuous resistance seam.
FIGURE 30.17
Resistance projection
welding (RPW): (1) at start
of operation, contact be-
tween parts is at projec-
tions;and(2)whencurrent
is applied, weld nuggets
similar to those in spot
welding are formed at the
projections.
724
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

contact between the faying surfaces, so flash welding is sometimes classified in the arc-
welding group. Current is usually stopped during upsetting. Some metal, as well as
contaminants on the surfaces, is squeezed out of the joint and must be subsequently
machined to provide a joint of uniform size.
Applications of flash welding include butt welding of steel strips in rolling-mill
operations, joining ends of wire in wire drawing, and welding of tubular parts. The ends to
be joined must have the same cross sections. For these kinds of high-production
applications, flash welding is fast and economical, but the equipment is expensive.
Upset welding (UW) is similar to flash welding except that in UW the faying
surfaces are pressed together during heating and upsetting. In flash welding, the heating
and pressing steps are separated during the cycle. Heating in UWis accomplished entirely
by electrical resistance at the contacting surfaces; no arcing occurs. When the faying
surfaces have been heated to a suitable temperature below the melting point, the force
pressing the parts together is increased to cause upsetting and coalescence in the contact
region. Thus, upset welding is not a fusion-welding process in the same sense as the other
welding processes we have discussed. Applications of UW are similar to those of flash
welding: joining ends of wire, pipes, tubes, and so on.
Percussion welding (PEW) is also similar to flash welding, except that the duration of
the weld cycle is extremely short, typically lasting only 1 to 10 ms. Fast heating is
accomplished by rapid discharge of electrical energy between the two surfaces to be
joined, followed immediately by percussion of one part against the other to form the weld.
The heating is very localized, making this process attractive for electronic applications in
which the dimensions are very small and nearby components may be sensitive to heat.
High-frequency resistance welding (HFRW) is a resistance-welding process in
which a high-frequency alternating current is used for heating, followed by the rapid
application of an upsetting force to cause coalescence, as in Figure 30.20(a). The
frequencies are 10 to 500 kHz, and the electrodes make contact with the work in the
immediate vicinity of the weld joint. In a variation of the process, called high-frequency
FIGURE 30.19
Flash
welding (FW): (1) heating
by electrical resistance;
and (2) upsetting—parts
are forced together.
FIGURE 30.18
Variations of resistance
projection welding:
(a) welding of a machined
or formed fastener onto a
sheet-metal part; and
(b) cross-wire welding.
Section 30.2/Resistance Welding
725

induction welding (HFIW), the heating current is induced in the parts by a high-
frequency induction coil, as in Figure 30.20(b). The coil does not make physical contact
with the work. The principal applications of both HFRW and HFIW are continuous butt
welding of the longitudinal seams of metal pipes and tubes.
30.3
OXYFUEL GAS WELDING
Oxyfuel gas welding (OFW) is the term used to describe the group of FWoperations that
burn various fuels mixed with oxygen to perform welding. The OFW processes employ
several types of gases, which is the primary distinction among the members of this group.
Oxyfuel gas is also commonly used in cutting torches to cut and separate metal plates and
other parts (Section 26.3.5). The most important OFW process is oxyacetylene welding.
30.3.1 OXYACETYLENE WELDING
Oxyacetylene welding (OAW) is a fusion-welding process performed by a high-tempera-
ture flame from combustion of acetylene and oxygen. The flame is directed by a welding
torch. A filler metal is sometimes added, and pressure is occasionally applied in OAW
between the contacting part surfaces. A typical OAWoperation is sketched in Figure 30.21.
FIGURE 30.20
Welding of tube seams by: (a) high-frequency resistance welding, and (b) high-frequency
induction welding.
FIGURE 30.21
A typical
oxyacetylene welding
operation (OAW).
726
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

When filler metal is used, it is typically in the form of a rod with diameters ranging from 1.6
to 9.5 mm (1/16–3/8 in). Composition of the filler must be similar to that of the base metals.
The filler is often coated with a flux that helps to clean the surfaces and prevent oxidation,
thus creating a better weld joint.
Acetylene (C2H2) is the most popular fuel among the OFW group because it is
capable of higher temperatures than any of the others—up to 3480C (6300F). The flame
in OAW is produced by the chemical reaction of acetylene and oxygen in two stages. The
first stage is defined by the reaction
C2H2 þ O2 ! 2CO þ H2 þ heat
ð30:4aÞ
the products of which are both combustible, which leads to the second-stage reaction
2CO þ H2 þ 1:5O2 ! 2CO2 þ H2O þ heat
ð30:4bÞ
The two stages of combustion are visible in the oxyacetylene flame emitted from
the torch. When the mixture of acetylene and oxygen is in the ratio 1:1, as described in
Eq. (30.4), the resulting neutral flame is shown in Figure 30.22. The first-stage reaction is
seen as the inner cone of the flame (which is bright white), while the second-stage
reaction is exhibited by the outer envelope (which is nearly colorless but with tinges
ranging from blue to orange). The maximum temperature of the flame is reached at the
tip of the inner cone; the second-stage temperatures are somewhat below those of the
inner cone. During welding, the outer envelope spreads out and covers the work surfaces
being joined, thus shielding them from the surrounding atmosphere.
Total heat liberated during the two stages of combustion is 55  106 J/m3 (1470 Btu/
ft3) of acetylene. However, because of the temperature distribution in the flame, the way
in which the flame spreads over the work surface, and losses to the air, power densities
and heat transfer factors in oxyacetylene welding are relatively low; f1 ¼ 0.10 to 0.30.
Example 30.3
Heat Generation
in Oxyacetylene
Welding
An oxyacetylene torch supplies 0.3 m3 of acetylene per hour and an equal volume rate of
oxygen for an OAW operation on 4.5-mm-thick steel. Heat generated by combustion is
transferred to the work surface with a heat transfer factor f1 ¼ 0.20. If 75% of the heat
from the flame is concentrated in a circular area on the work surface that is 9.0 mm in
diameter, find (a) rate of heat liberated during combustion, (b) rate of heat transferred to
the work surface, and (c) average power density in the circular area.
Solution:
(a) The rate of heat generated by the torch is the product of the volume rate of
acetylene times the heat of combustion:
RH ¼ 0:3 m3/hr


55  106 J/m3


¼ 16:5  106 J/hr or 4583 J/s
(b) With a heat transfer factor f1 ¼ 0.20, the rate of heat received at the work surface is
f 1 RH ¼ 0:20 4583
ð
Þ ¼ 917 J/s
(c) The area of the circle in which 75% of the heat of the flame is concentrated is
A ¼ p 9
ð Þ2
4
¼ 63:6 mm2
FIGURE 30.22
The
neutral ﬂame from an
oxyacetylene torch,
indicating temperatures
achieved.
Section 30.3/Oxyfuel Gas Welding
727

The power density in the circle is found by dividing the available heat by the area of the
circle:
PD ¼ 0:75 917
ð
Þ
63:6
¼ 10:8 W/mm2
n
The combination of acetylene and oxygen is highly flammable, and the environ-
ment in which OAW is performed is therefore hazardous. Some of the dangers relate
specifically to the acetylene. Pure C2H2 is a colorless, odorless gas. For safety reasons,
commercial acetylene is processed to have a characteristic garlic odor. One of the
physical limitations of the gas is that it is unstable at pressures much above 1 atm
(0.1 MPa or 15 lb/in2). Accordingly, acetylene storage cylinders are packed with a porous
filler material (such as asbestos, balsa wood, and other materials) saturated with acetone
(CH3COCH3). Acetylene dissolves in liquid acetone; in fact, acetone dissolves about
25 times its own volume of acetylene, thus providing a relatively safe means of storing this
welding gas. The welder wears eye and skin protection (goggles, gloves, and protective
clothing) as an additional safety precaution, and different screw threads are standard on
the acetylene and oxygen cylinders and hoses to avoid accidental connection of the wrong
gases. Proper maintenance of the equipment is imperative. OAW equipment is relatively
inexpensive and portable. It is therefore an economical, versatile process that is well
suited to low-quantity production and repair jobs. It is rarely used to weld sheet and plate
stock thicker than 6.4 mm (1/4 in) because of the advantages of arc welding in such
applications. Although OAW can be mechanized, it is usually performed manually and is
hence dependent on the skill of the welder to produce a high-quality weld joint.
30.3.2 ALTERNATIVE GASES FOR OXYFUEL WELDING
Several members of the OFW group are based on gases other than acetylene. Most of the
alternative fuels are listed in Table 30.2, together with their burning temperatures and
combustion heats. For comparison, acetylene is included in the list. Although oxy-
acetylene is the most common OFW fuel, each of the other gases can be used in certain
applications—typically limited to welding of sheet metal and metals with low melting
TABLE 30.2
Gases used in oxyfuel welding and/or cutting, with
ﬂame temperatures and heats of combustion.
Temperaturea
Heat of Combustion
Fuel
C
F
MJ/m3
Btu/ft3
Acetylene (C2H2)
3087
5589
54.8
1470
MAPPb (C3H4)
2927
5301
91.7
2460
Hydrogen (H2)
2660
4820
12.1
325
Propylenec (C3H6)
2900
5250
89.4
2400
Propane (C3H8)
2526
4579
93.1
2498
Natural gasd
2538
4600
37.3
1000
Compiled from [10].
aNeutral flame temperatures are compared since this is the flame that would most
commonly be used for welding.
bMAPP is the commercial abbreviation for methylacetylene-propadiene.
cPropylene is used primarily in flame cutting.
dData are based on methane gas (CH4); natural gas consists of ethane (C2H6) as
well as methane; flame temperature and heat of combustion vary with composition.
728
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

temperatures, and brazing (Section 31.1). In addition, some users prefer these alternative
gases for safety reasons.
The fuel that competes most closely with acetylene in burning temperature and
heating value is methylacetylene-propadiene. It is a fuel developed by the Dow Chemical
Company sold under the trade name MAPP (we are grateful to Dow for the abbreviation).
MAPP (C3H4) has heating characteristics similar to acetylene and can be stored under
pressure as a liquid, thus avoiding the special storage problems associated with C2H2.
When hydrogen is burned with oxygen as the fuel, the process is called oxy-
hydrogen welding (OHW). As shown in Table 30.2, the welding temperature in OHW is
below that possible in oxyacetylene welding. In addition, the color of the flame is not
affected by differences in the mixture of hydrogen and oxygen, and therefore it is more
difficult for the welder to adjust the torch.
Other fuels used in OFW include propane and natural gas. Propane (C3H8) is more
closelyassociated with brazing, soldering, andcutting operations thanwithwelding. Natural
gas consists mostly of ethane (C2H6) and methane (CH4). When mixed with oxygen it
achieves a high temperature flame and is becoming more common in small welding shops.
Pressure Gas Welding
This is a special OFW process, distinguished by type of
application rather than fuel gas. Pressure gas welding (PGW) is a fusion-welding process
in which coalescence is obtained over the entire contact surfaces of the two parts by
heating them with an appropriate fuel mixture (usually oxyacetylene gas) and then
applying pressure to bond the surfaces. A typical application is illustrated in Figure 30.23.
Parts are heated until melting begins on the surfaces. The heating torch is then
withdrawn, and the parts are pressed together and held at high pressure while solidifica-
tion occurs. No filler metal is used in PGW.
30.4
OTHER FUSION-WELDING PROCESSES
Some fusion-welding processes cannot be classified as arc, resistance, or oxyfuel welding.
Each of these other processes uses a unique technology to develop heat for melting; and
typically, the applications are unique.
Electron-Beam Welding
Electron-beam welding (EBW) is a fusion-welding process in
which the heat for welding is produced by a highly focused, high-intensity stream of
FIGURE 30.23
An application of pressure gas welding: (a) heating of the two parts, and (b) applying pressure to form
the weld.
Section 30.4/Other Fusion-Welding Processes
729

electrons impinging against the work surface. The equipment is similar to that used for
electron-beam machining (Section 26.3.2). The electron beam gun operates at high
voltage to accelerate the electrons (e.g., 10–150 kV typical), and beam currents are low
(measured in milliamps). The power in EBW is not exceptional, but power density is.
High power density is achieved by focusing the electron beam on a very small area of the
work surface, so that the power density PD is based on
PD ¼ f 1EI
A
ð30:5Þ
where PD ¼ power density, W/mm2 (W/in2, which can be converted to Btu/sec-in2 by
dividing by 1055.); f1 ¼ heat transfer factor (typical values for EBW range from 0.8–0.95
[9]); E ¼ accelerating voltage, V; I ¼ beam current, A; and A ¼ the work surface area on
which the electron beam is focused, mm2 (in2). Typical weld areas for EBW range from
13  103 to 2000  103 mm2 (20  106 to 3000  106 in2).
The process had its beginnings in the 1950s in the atomic power field. When first
developed, welding had to be carried out in a vacuum chamber to minimize the
disruption of the electron beam by air molecules. This requirement was, and still is, a
serious inconvenience in production, due to the time required to evacuate the chamber
prior to welding. The pump-down time, as it is called, can take as long as an hour,
depending on the size of the chamber and the level of vacuum required. Today, EBW
technology has progressed to where some operations are performed without a vacuum.
Three categories can be distinguished: (1) high-vacuum welding (EBW-HV), in which
welding is carried out in the same vacuum as beam generation; (2) medium-vacuum
welding (EBW-MV), in which the operation is performed in a separate chamber where
only a partial vacuum is achieved; and (3) nonvacuum welding (EBW-NV), in which
welding is accomplished at or near atmospheric pressure. The pump-down time during
workpart loading and unloading is reduced in medium-vacuum EBW and minimized in
nonvacuum EBW, but there is a price paid for this advantage. In the latter two operations,
the equipment must include one or more vacuum dividers (very small orifices that
impede air flow but permit passage of the electron beam) to separate the beam generator
(which requires a high vacuum) from the work chamber. Also, in nonvacuum EBW, the
work must be located close to the orifice of the electron beam gun, approximately 13 mm
(0.5 in) or less. Finally, the lower vacuum processes cannot achieve the high weld qualities
and depth-to-width ratios accomplished by EBW-HV.
Any metals that can be arc welded can be welded by EBW, as well as certain
refractory and difficult-to-weld metals that are not suited to AW. Work sizes range from
thin foil to thick plate. EBW is applied mostly in the automotive, aerospace, and nuclear
industries. In the automotive industry, EBW assembly includes aluminum manifolds,
steel torque converters, catalytic converters, and transmission components. In these and
other applications, electron-beam welding is noted for high-quality welds with deep and/
or narrow profiles, limited heat-affected zone, and low thermal distortion. Welding
speeds are high compared to other continuous welding operations. No filler metal is
used, and no flux or shielding gases are needed. Disadvantages of EBW include high
equipment cost, need for precise joint preparation and alignment, and the limitations
associated with performing the process in a vacuum, as we have already discussed. In
addition, there are safety concerns because EBW generates X-rays from which humans
must be shielded.
Laser-Beam Welding
Laser-beam welding (LBW) is a fusion-welding process in which
coalescence is achieved by the energy of a highly concentrated, coherent light beam
focused on the joint to be welded. The term laser is an acronym for light amplification
by stimulated emission of radiation. This same technology is used for laser-beam
machining (Section 26.3.3). LBW is normally performed with shielding gases (e.g.,
730
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

helium, argon, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide) to prevent oxidation. Filler metal is not
usually added.
LBW produces welds of high quality, deep penetration, and narrow heat-affected
zone. These features are similar to those achieved in electron-beam welding, and the two
processes are often compared. There are several advantages of LBW over EBW: no
vacuum chamber is required, no X-rays are emitted, and laser beams can be focused and
directed by optical lenses and mirrors. On the other hand, LBW does not possess the
capability for the deep welds and high depth-to-width ratios of EBW. Maximum depth in
laser welding is about 19 mm (0.75 in), whereas EBW can be used for weld depths of
50 mm (2 in) or more; and the depth-to-width ratios in LBW are typically limited to
around 5:1. Because of the highly concentrated energy in the small area of the laser beam,
the process is often used to join small parts.
Electroslag Welding
This process uses the same basic equipmentas in some arc-welding
operations, and it utilizes an arc to initiate welding. However, it is not an AW process
because an arc is not used during welding. Electroslag welding (ESW) is a fusion-welding
process in which coalescence is achieved by hot, electrically conductive molten slag acting
on the base parts and filler metal. As shown in Figure 30.24, the general configuration of
ESW is similar to electrogas welding. It is performed in a vertical orientation (shown here
for butt welding), using water-cooled molding shoes to contain the molten slag and weld
metal. At the start of the process, granulated conductive flux is put into the cavity. The
consumable electrodetip ispositionednearthebottomofthecavity, andanarcisgenerated
for a short while to start melting the flux. Once a pool of slag has been created, the arc is
extinguished and the current passes from the electrode to the base metal through the
conductive slag, so that its electrical resistance generates heat to maintain the welding
process.Sincethedensityoftheslagislessthanthatofthemoltenmetal,itremainsontopto
protect theweld pool. Solidification occurs from thebottom, whileadditional molten metal
is supplied from above by the electrode and the edges of the base parts. The process
gradually continues until it reaches the top of the joint.
Thermit Welding
Thermit is a trademark name for thermite, a mixture of aluminum
powder and iron oxide that produces an exothermic reaction when ignited. It is used in
incendiary bombs and for welding. As a welding process, the use of Thermit dates from
around 1900. Thermit welding (TW) is a fusion-welding process in which the heat for
coalescence is produced by superheated molten metal from the chemical reaction of
Thermit. Filler metal is obtained from the liquid metal; and although the process is used
for joining, it has more in common with casting than it does with welding.
Finely mixed powders of aluminum and iron oxide (in a 1:3 mixture), when
ignited at a temperature of around 1300C (2300F), produce the following chemical
FIGURE 30.24
Electroslag welding (ESW):
(a) front view with mold-
ing shoe removed for
clarity; (b) side view
showing schematic of
molding shoe. Setup is
similar to electrogas
welding (Figure 30.7)
except that resistance
heating of molten slag is
used to melt the base and
ﬁller metals.
Section 30.4/Other Fusion-Welding Processes
731

reaction:
8Al þ 3Fe3O4 ! 9Fe þ 4Al2O3 þ heat
ð30:6Þ
The temperature from the reaction is around 2500C (4500F), resulting in superheated
molten iron plus aluminum oxide that floats to the top as a slag and protects the iron from
the atmosphere. In Thermit welding, the superheated iron (or steel if the mixture of
powders is formulated accordingly) is contained in a crucible located above the joint to be
welded, as indicated by our diagram of the TW process in Figure 30.25. After the reaction
is complete (about 30 s, irrespective of the amount of Thermit involved), the crucible is
tapped and the liquid metal flows into a mold built specially to surround the weld joint.
Because the entering metal is so hot, it melts the edges of the base parts, causing
coalescence upon solidification. After cooling, the mold is broken away, and the gates and
risers are removed by oxyacetylene torch or other method.
Thermit welding has applications in joining of railroad rails (as pictured in our
figure), and repair of cracks in large steel castings and forgings such as ingot molds, large
diameter shafts, frames for machinery, and ship rudders. The surface of the weld in these
applications is often sufficiently smooth so that no subsequent finishing is required.
30.5
SOLID-STATE WELDING
In solid state-welding, coalescence of the part surfaces is achieved by (1) pressure alone, or
(2) heat and pressure. For some solid-state processes, time is also a factor. If both heat and
pressure are used, the amount of heat by itself is not sufficient to cause melting of the work
surfaces. In other words, fusion of the parts would not occur using only the heat that is
externally applied in these processes. In some cases, the combination of heat and pressure,
or the particular manner in which pressure alone is applied, generates sufficient energy to
cause localized melting of the faying surfaces. Filler metal is not added in solid-state
welding.
30.5.1 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS IN SOLID-STATE WELDING
In most of the solid-state processes, a metallurgical bond is created with little or no melting
of the base metals. To metallurgically bond two similar or dissimilar metals, the two metals
must be brought into intimate contact so that their cohesive atomic forces attract each
other. In normal physical contact between two surfaces, such intimate contact is prohibited
by the presence of chemical films, gases, oils, and so on. In order for atomic bonding to
succeed, these films and other substances must be removed. In fusion welding (as well as
other joining processes such as brazing and soldering), the films are dissolved or burned
FIGURE 30.25
Thermit
welding: (1) Thermit
ignited; (2) crucible
tapped, superheated
metal ﬂows into mold;
(3) metal solidiﬁes to
produce weld joint.
732
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

away by high temperatures, and atomic bonding is established by the melting and
solidification of the metals in these processes. But in solid-state welding, the films and
other contaminants must be removed by other means to allow metallurgical bonding to
takeplace. Insome cases, a thorough cleaningofthesurfaces isdone justbefore the welding
process; while in other cases, the cleaning action is accomplished as an integral part of
bringing the part surfaces together. To summarize, the essential ingredients for a successful
solid-state weld are that the two surfaces must be very clean, and they must be brought into
very close physical contact with each other to permit atomic bonding.
Welding processes that do not involve melting have several advantages over fusion-
welding processes. If no melting occurs, then there is no heat-affected zone, and so the
metal surrounding the joint retains its original properties. Many of these processes
produce welded joints that comprise the entire contact interface between the two parts,
rather than at distinct spots or seams, as in most fusion-welding operations. Also, some of
these processes are quite applicable to bonding dissimilar metals, without concerns about
relative thermal expansions, conductivities, and other problems that usually arise when
dissimilar metals are melted and then solidified during joining.
30.5.2 SOLID STATE-WELDING PROCESSES
The solid-state welding group includes the oldest joining process as well as some of the
most modern. Each process in this group has its own unique way of creating the bond at
the faying surfaces. We begin our coverage with forge welding, the first welding process.
Forge Welding
Forge welding is of historic significance in the development of
manufacturing technology. The process dates from about 1000 BCE, when blacksmiths
of the ancient world learned to join two pieces of metal (Historical Note 30.1). Forge
welding is a welding process in which the components to be joined are heated to hot
working temperatures and then forged together by hammer or other means. Considera-
ble skill was required by the craftsmen who practiced it in order to achieve a good weld by
present-day standards. The process may be of historic interest; however, it is of minor
commercial importance today except for its variants that are discussed below.
Cold Welding
Cold welding (CW) is a solid-state welding process accomplished by
applying high pressure between clean contacting surfaces at room temperature. The faying
surfaces must be exceptionally clean for CW to work, and cleaning is usually done by
degreasing and wire brushing immediately before joining. Also, at leastone of the metals to
be welded, and preferably both, must be very ductile and free of work hardening. Metals
such as soft aluminum and copper can be readily cold welded. The applied compression
forces inthe processresult incoldworkingofthemetal parts, reducingthickness byasmuch
as 50%; but they also cause localized plastic deformation at the contacting surfaces,
resultingincoalescence.Forsmallparts,theforcesmaybeappliedbysimplehand-operated
tools. For heavier work, powered presses are required to exert the necessary force. No heat
is applied from external sources in CW, but the deformation process raises the temperature
of the work somewhat. Applications of CW include making electrical connections.
Roll Welding
Roll welding is a variation of either forge welding or cold welding,
depending on whether external heating of the workparts is accomplished prior to the
process. Roll welding (ROW) is a solid-state welding process in which pressure sufficient
to cause coalescence is applied by means of rolls, either with or without external
application of heat. The process is illustrated in Figure 30.26. If no external heat is
supplied, the process is called cold-roll welding; if heat is supplied, the term hot-roll
welding is used. Applications of roll welding include cladding stainless steel to mild or
Section 30.5/Solid-State Welding
733

low alloy steel for corrosion resistance, making bimetallic strips for measuring tempera-
ture, and producing ‘‘sandwich’’ coins for the U.S. mint.
Hot Pressure Welding
Hotpressurewelding(HPW)isanothervariationofforgewelding
in which coalescence occurs from the application of heat and pressure sufficient to cause
considerabledeformationofthebasemetals.Thedeformationdisruptsthesurfaceoxidefilm,
thus leaving clean metal to establish a good bond between the two parts. Time must be
allowed for diffusion to occur across the faying surfaces. The operation is usually carried out
in a vacuum chamber or in the presence of a shielding medium. Principal applications of
HPW are in the aerospace industry.
Diffusion Welding
Diffusion welding (DFW) is a solid-state welding process that results
from the application of heat and pressure, usually in a controlled atmosphere, with
sufficient time allowed for diffusion and coalescence to occur. Temperatures are well
below the melting points of the metals (about 0.5 Tm is the maximum), and plastic
deformation at the surfaces is minimal. The primary mechanism of coalescence is solid-
state diffusion, which involves migration of atoms across the interface between contacting
surfaces. Applications of DFWinclude the joining of high-strength and refractory metals in
the aerospace and nuclear industries. The process is used to join both similar and dissimilar
metals, and in the latter case a filler layer of a different metal is often sandwiched between
thetwobasemetalstopromotediffusion.Thetimefordiffusiontooccurbetweenthefaying
surfaces can be significant, requiring more than an hour in some applications [10].
Explosion Welding
Explosion welding (EXW) is a solid-state welding process in which
rapid coalescence of two metallic surfaces is caused by the energy of a detonated explosive.
Itiscommonly usedtobondtwodissimilarmetals, inparticulartoclad one metal ontopofa
base metal over large areas. Applications include production of corrosion-resistant sheet
and plate stock for making processing equipment in the chemical and petroleum industries.
The term explosion cladding is used in this context. No filler metal is used in EXW, and no
external heat is applied. Also, no diffusion occurs during the process (the time is too short).
The nature of the bond is metallurgical, in many cases combined with a mechanical
interlocking that results from a rippled or wavy interface between the metals.
The process for cladding one metal plate on another can be described with
reference to Figure 30.27. In this setup, the two plates are in a parallel configuration,
separated by a certain gap distance, with the explosive charge above the upper plate,
called the flyer plate. A buffer layer (e.g., rubber, plastic) is often used between the
explosive and the flyer plate to protect its surface. The lower plate, called the backer
metal, rests on an anvil for support. When detonation is initiated, the explosive charge
propagates from one end of the flyer plate to the other, caught in the stop-action view
shown in Figure 30.27(2). One of the difficulties in comprehending what happens in EXW
is the common misconception that an explosion occurs instantaneously; it is actually a
progressive reaction, although admittedly very rapid—propagating at rates as high as
FIGURE 30.26
Roll
welding (ROW).
734
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

8500 m/s (28,000 ft/sec). The resulting high-pressure zone propels the flyer plate to collide
with the backer metal progressively at high velocity, so that it takes on an angular shape as
the explosion advances, as illustrated in our sketch. The upper plate remains in position in
the region where the explosive has not yet detonated. The high-speed collision, occurring
in a progressive and angular fashion as it does, causes the surfaces at the point of contact
to become fluid, and any surface films are expelled forward from the apex of the angle.
The colliding surfaces are thus chemically clean, and the fluid behavior of the metal,
which involves some interfacial melting, provides intimate contact between the surfaces,
leading to metallurgical bonding. Variations in collision velocity and impact angle during
the process can result in a wavy or rippled interface between the two metals. This kind of
interface strengthens the bond because it increases the contact area and tends to
mechanically interlock the two surfaces.
Friction Welding
Friction welding is a widely used commercial process, amenable to
automated production methods. The process was developed in the (former) Soviet Union
and introduced into the United States around 1960. Friction welding (FRW) is a solid-
state welding process in which coalescence is achieved by frictional heat combined with
pressure. The friction is induced by mechanical rubbing between the two surfaces, usually
by rotation of one part relative to the other, to raise the temperature at the joint interface
to the hot working range for the metals involved. Then the parts are driven toward each
other with sufficient force to form a metallurgical bond. The sequence is portrayed in
Figure 30.28 for welding two cylindrical parts, the typical application. The axial com-
pression force upsets the parts, and a flash is produced by the material displaced. Any
surface films that may have been on the contacting surfaces are expunged during the
process. The flash must be subsequently trimmed (e.g., by turning) to provide a smooth
surface in the weld region. When properly carried out, no melting occurs at the faying
surfaces. No filler metal, flux, or shielding gases are normally used.
Nearly all FRW operations use rotation to develop the frictional heat for welding.
There are two principal drive systems, distinguishing two types of FRW: (1) continuous-
drive friction welding, and (2) inertia friction welding.
In continuous-drive friction
welding, one part is driven at a constant rotational speed and forced into contact with the
stationary part at a certain force level so that friction heat is generated at the interface.
When the proper hot working temperature has been reached, braking is applied to stop
the rotation abruptly, and simultaneously the pieces are forced together at forging
pressures. In inertia friction welding, the rotating part is connected to a flywheel, which
is brought up to a predetermined speed. Then the flywheel is disengaged from the drive
motor, and the parts are forced together. The kinetic energy stored in the flywheel is
FIGURE 30.27
Explosive welding (EXW): (1) setup in the parallel conﬁguration, and (2) during detonation of the
explosive charge.
Section 30.5/Solid-State Welding
735

dissipated in the form of friction heat to cause coalescence at the abutting surfaces. The
total cycle for these operations is about 20 seconds.
Machines used for friction welding have the appearance of an engine lathe. They
require a powered spindle to turn one part at high speed, and a means of applying an axial
force between the rotating part and the nonrotating part. With its short cycle times, the
process lends itself to mass production. It is applied in the welding of various shafts and
tubular parts in industries such as automotive, aircraft, farm equipment, petroleum, and
natural gas. Theprocessyieldsa narrowheat-affectedzone andcanbeusedtojoindissimilar
metals. However, at least one of the parts must be rotational, flash must usually be removed,
and upsetting reduces the part lengths (which must be taken into consideration in product
design).
The conventional friction welding operations discussed above utilize a rotary
motion to develop the required friction between faying surfaces. A more recent version
of the process is linear friction welding, in which a linear reciprocating motion is used to
generate friction heat between the parts. This eliminates the requirement for at least one
of the parts to be rotational (e.g., cylindrical, tubular).
Friction Stir Welding
Friction stir welding (FSW), illustrated in Figure 30.29, is a solid
state welding process in which a rotating tool is fed along the joint line between two
workpieces, generating friction heat and mechanically stirring the metal to form the weld
seam. The process derives its name from this stirring or mixing action. FSW is distin-
guished from conventional FRW by the fact that friction heat is generated by a separate
wear-resistant tool rather than by the parts themselves. FSW was developed in 1991 at
The Welding Institute in Cambridge, UK.
The rotating tool is stepped, consisting of a cylindrical shoulder and a smaller probe
projecting beneath it. During welding, the shoulder rubs against the top surfaces of the
two parts, developing much of the friction heat, while the probe generates additional heat
by mechanically mixing the metal along the butt surfaces. The probe has a geometry
designed to facilitate the mixing action. The heat produced by the combination of friction
FIGURE 30.28
Friction welding (FRW): (1) rotating part, no contact; (2) parts brought into contact to generate
friction heat; (3) rotation stopped and axial pressure applied; and (4) weld created.
736
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

and mixing does not melt the metal but softens it to a highly plastic condition. As the tool
is fed forward along the joint, the leading surface of the rotating probe forces the metal
around it and into its wake, developing forces that forge the metal into a weld seam. The
shoulder serves to constrain the plasticized metal flowing around the probe.
The FSW process is used in the aerospace, automotive, railway, and shipbuilding
industries. Typical applications are butt joints on large aluminum parts. Other metals,
including steel, copper, and titanium, as well as polymers and composites have also been
joined using FSW. Advantages in these applications include (1) good mechanical
properties of the weld joint, (2) avoidance of toxic fumes, warping, shielding issues,
and other problems associated with arc welding, (3) little distortion or shrinkage, and
(4) good weld appearance. Disadvantages include (1) an exit hole is produced when the
tool is withdrawn from the work, and (2) heavy-duty clamping of the parts is required.
Ultrasonic Welding
Ultrasonic welding (USW) is a solid-state welding process in
which two components are held together under modest clamping force, and oscillatory
shear stresses of ultrasonic frequency are applied to the interface to cause coalescence.
The operation is illustrated in Figure 30.30 for lap welding, the typical application. The
oscillatory motion between the two parts breaks down any surface films to allow
FIGURE 30.29
Friction
stir welding (FSW):
(1) rotating tool just prior
to feeding into joint and
(2) partially completed
weld seam. N ¼ tool
rotation, f ¼ tool feed.
Tool
Probe
Shoulder
N
f (Tool feed)
(Tool rotation)
(1)
Weld seam
N
f
(2)
FIGURE 30.30
Ultrasonic welding (USW):
(a) general setup for a lap
joint; and (b) close-up of
weld area.
Section 30.5/Solid-State Welding
737

intimate contact and strong metallurgical bonding between the surfaces. Although heating
of the contacting surfaces occurs due to interfacial rubbing and plastic deformation, the
resulting temperatures are well below the melting point. No filler metals, fluxes, or
shielding gases are required in USW.
The oscillatory motion is transmitted to the upper workpart by means of a sonotrode,
which is coupled to an ultrasonic transducer. This device converts electrical power into
high-frequency vibratory motion. Typical frequencies used in USW are 15 to 75 kHz, with
amplitudes of 0.018 to 0.13 mm (0.0007–0.005 in). Clamping pressures are well below those
used in cold welding and produce no significant plastic deformation between the surfaces.
Welding times under these conditions are less than 1 sec.
USWoperations are generally limited to lap joints on soft materials such as aluminum
and copper. Welding harder materials causes rapid wear of the sonotrode contacting the
upper workpart. Workparts should be relatively small, and welding thicknesses less than
3 mm (1/8 in) is the typical case. Applications include wire terminations and splicing in
electrical and electronics industries (eliminates the need for soldering), assembly of alumi-
num sheet-metal panels, welding of tubes to sheets in solar panels, and other tasks in small
parts assembly.
30.6
WELD QUALITY
The purpose of any welding process is to join two or more components into a single
structure. The physical integrity of the structure thus formed depends on the quality of the
weld. Our discussion of weld quality deals primarily with arc welding, the most widely used
welding process and the one for which the quality issue is the most critical and complex.
Residual Stresses and Distortion
The rapid heating and cooling in localized regions
of the work during fusion welding, especially arc welding, result in thermal expansion and
contraction that cause residual stresses in the weldment. These stresses, in turn, can cause
distortion and warping of the welded assembly.
The situation in welding is complicated because (1) heating is very localized,
(2) melting of the base metals occurs in these local regions, and (3) the location of heating
and melting is in motion (at least in arc welding). Consider, for example, butt welding of
two plates by arc-welding as shown in Figure 30.31(a). The operation begins at one end
and travels to the opposite end. As it proceeds, a molten pool is formed from the base
metal (and filler metal, if used) that quickly solidifies behind the moving arc. The portions
of the work immediately adjacent to the weld bead become extremely hot and expand,
while portions removed from the weld remain relatively cool. The weld pool quickly
solidifies in the cavity between the two parts, and as it and the surrounding metal cool and
contract, shrinkage occurs across the width of the weldment, as seen in Figure 30.31(b).
The weld seam is left in residual tension, and reactionary compressive stresses are set up
in regions of the parts away from the weld. Residual stresses and shrinkage also occurs
along the length of the weld bead. Since the outer regions of the base parts have remained
relatively cool and dimensionally unchanged, while the weld bead has solidified from
very high temperatures and then contracted, residual tensile stresses remain longitudi-
nally in the weld bead. These transverse and longitudinal stress patterns are depicted in
Figure 30.31(c). The net result of these residual stresses, transversely and longitudinally, is
likely to cause warping in the welded assembly as shown in Figure 30.31(d).
The arc-welded butt joint in our example is only one of a variety of joint types and
welding operations. Thermally induced residual stresses and the accompanying distortion
are a potential problem in nearly all fusion-welding processes and in certain solid-state
welding operations in which significant heating takes place. Following are some
738
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

techniques to minimize warping in a weldment: (1) Welding fixtures can be used to
physically restrain movement of the parts during welding. (2) Heat sinks can be used to
rapidly remove heat from sections of the welded parts to reduce distortion. (3) Tack
welding at multiple points along the joint can create a rigid structure prior to continuous
seam welding. (4) Welding conditions (speed, amount of filler metal used, etc.) can be
selected to reduce warping. (5) The base parts can be preheated to reduce the level of
thermal stresses experienced by the parts. (6) Stress relief heat treatment can be
performed on the welded assembly, either in a furnace for small weldments, or using
methods that can be used in the field for large structures. (7) Proper design of the
weldment itself can reduce the degree of warping.
Welding Defects
In addition to residual stresses and distortion in the final assembly,
other defects can occur in welding. Following is a brief description of each of the major
categories, based on a classification in Cary [3]:

Cracks. Cracks are fracture-type interruptions either in the weld itself or in the base
metal adjacent to the weld. This is perhaps the most serious welding defect because it
constitutes a discontinuity in the metal that significant reduces weld strength. Several
forms are defined in Figure 30.32. Welding cracks are caused by embrittlement or low
ductility of the weld and/or base metal combined with high restraint during contrac-
tion. Generally, this defect must be repaired.

Cavities. These include various porosity and shrinkage voids. Porosity consists of
small voids in the weld metal formed by gases entrapped during solidification. The
shapes of the voids vary between spherical (blow holes) to elongated (worm holes).
Porosity usually results from inclusion of atmospheric gases, sulfur in the weld metal,
or contaminants on the surfaces. Shrinkage voids are cavities formed by shrinkage
during solidification. Both of these cavity-type defects are similar to defects found in
castings and emphasize the close kinship between casting and welding.

Solid inclusions. These are nonmetallic solid materials trapped inside the weld
metal. The most common form is slag inclusions generated during arc-welding
FIGURE 30.31
(a) Butt
welding two plates; (b)
shrinkage across the
width of the welded as-
sembly; (c) transverse and
longitudinal residual
stress pattern; and
(d) likely warping in the
welded assembly.
After welding
Original width
(b)
(d)
V
Welded joint
Welded rod
(a)
(c)
0
0
0
0
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
Transverse stress pattern
Longitudinal
stress pattern
Section 30.6/Weld Quality
739

processes that use flux. Instead of floating to the top of the weld pool, globules of slag
become encased during solidification of the metal. Another form of inclusion is
metallic oxides that form during the welding of metals such as aluminum, which
normally has a surface coating of Al2O3.

Incomplete fusion. Several forms of this defect are illustrated in Figure 30.33. Also
known as lack of fusion, it is simply a weld bead in which fusion has not occurred
throughout the entire cross section of the joint. A related defect is lack of penetration
which means that fusion has not penetrated deeply enough into the root of the joint.

Imperfect shape or unacceptable contour. The weld should have a certain desired
profile for maximum strength, as indicated in Figure 30.34(a) for a single V-groove
weld. This weld profile maximizes the strength of the welded joint and avoids
FIGURE 30.32
Various
forms of welding cracks.
FIGURE 30.33
Several
forms of incomplete
fusion.
FIGURE 30.34
(a) Desired weld proﬁle for single V-groove weld joint. Same joint but with
several weld defects: (b) undercut, in which a portion of the base metal part is melted away;
(c) underﬁll, a depression in the weld below the level of the adjacent base metal surface; and
(d)overlap,inwhichtheweldmetalspillsbeyondthejointontothesurfaceofthebasepartbut
no fusion occurs.
740
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

incomplete fusion and lack of penetration. Some of the common defects in weld
shape and contour are illustrated in Figure 30.34.

Miscellaneous defects. This category includes arc strikes, in which the welder
accidentally allows the electrode to touch the base metal next to the joint, leaving
a scar on the surface; and excessive spatter, in which drops of molten weld metal
splash onto the surface of the base parts.
Inspection and Testing Methods
A variety of inspection and testing methods are
available to check the quality of the welded joint. Standardized procedures have been
developed and specified over the years by engineering and trade societies such as the
American Welding Society (AWS). For purposes of discussion, these inspection and
testing procedures can be divided into three categories: (1) visual, (2) nondestructive, and
(3) destructive.
Visual inspection is no doubt the most widely used welding inspection method. An
inspectorvisuallyexaminestheweldmentfor(1)conformancetodimensionalspecifications
on the part drawing, (2) warping, and (3) cracks, cavities, incomplete fusion, and other
visible defects. The welding inspector also determines if additional tests are warranted,
usually in the nondestructive category. The limitation of visual inspection is that only
surface defects are detectable; internal defects cannot be discovered by visual methods.
Nondestructive evaluation (NDE) includes various methods that do not damage
the specimen being inspected. Dye-penetrant and fluorescent-penetrant tests are meth-
ods for detecting small defects such as cracks and cavities that are open to the surface.
Fluorescent penetrants are highly visible when exposed to ultraviolet light, and their use
is therefore more sensitive than dyes.
Several other NDE methods should be mentioned. Magnetic particle testing is
limited to ferromagnetic materials. A magnetic field is established in the subject part, and
magnetic particles (e.g., iron filings) are sprinkled on the surface. Subsurface defects such
as cracks and inclusions reveal themselves by distorting the magnetic field, causing the
particles to be concentrated in certain regions on the surface. Ultrasonic testing involves
the use of high-frequency sound waves (>20 kHz) directed through the specimen.
Discontinuities (e.g., cracks, inclusions, porosity) are detected by losses in sound
transmission. Radiographic testing uses X-rays or gamma radiation to detect flaws
internal to the weld metal. It provides a photographic film record of any defects.
Destructive testing methods in which theweld is destroyed either during the test or to
prepare the test specimen. They include mechanical and metallurgical tests. Mechanical
tests are similar in purpose to conventional testing methods such as tensile tests and shear
tests (Chapter 3). The difference is that the test specimen is a weld joint. Figure 30.35
presents a sampling of the mechanical tests used in welding. Metallurgical tests involve the
preparation of metallurgical specimens of the weldment to examine such features as
FIGURE 30.35
Mechanical tests used in welding: (a) tension–shear test of arc weldment, (b) ﬁllet break test,
(c) tension–shear test of spot weld, (d) peel test for spot weld.
Section 30.6/Weld Quality
741

metallic structure, defects, extent and condition of heat-affected zone, presence of other
elements, and similar phenomena.
30.7
WELDABILITY
Weldability is the capacity of a metal or combination of metals to be welded into a suitably
designed structure, and for the resulting weld joint(s) to possess the required metallurgical
properties to perform satisfactorily in the intended service. Good weldability is character-
ized by the ease with which the welding process is accomplished, absence of weld defects,
and acceptable strength, ductility, and toughness in the welded joint.
Factors that affect weldability include (1) welding process, (2) base metal propert-
ies, (3) filler metal, and (4) surface conditions. The welding process is significant. Some
metals or metal combinations that can be readily welded by one process are difficult to
weld by others. For example, stainless steel can be readily welded by most AW processes,
but is considered a difficult metal for oxyfuel welding.
Properties of the base metal affect welding performance. Important properties
include melting point, thermal conductivity, and coefficient of thermal expansion. One
might think that a lower melting point would mean easier welding. However, some metals
melt too easily for good welding (e.g., aluminum). Metals with high thermal conductivity
tend to transfer heat away from the weld zone, which can make them hard to weld (e.g.,
copper). High thermal expansion and contraction in the metal causes distortion problems
in the welded assembly.
Dissimilar metals pose special problems in welding when their physical and/or
mechanical properties are substantially different. Differences in melting temperature are
an obvious problem. Differences in strength or coefficient of thermal expansion may
result in high residual stresses that can lead to cracking. If a filler metal is used, it must be
compatible with the base metal(s). In general, elements mixed in the liquid state that
form a solid solution upon solidification will not cause a problem. Embrittlement in the
weld joint may occur if the solubility limits are exceeded.
Surface conditions of the base metals can adversely affect the operation. For
example, moisture can result in porosity in the fusion zone. Oxides and other solid films
on the metal surfaces can prevent adequate contact and fusion from occurring.
30.8
DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS IN WELDING
If an assembly is to be permanently welded, the designer should follow certain guidelines
(compiled from [2], [3], and other sources):

Design for welding. The most basic guideline is that the product should be designed
fromthe start as aweldedassembly, andnot asacastingor forging orother formedshape.

Minimum parts. Welded assemblies should consist of the fewest number of parts
possible. For example, it is usually more cost efficient to perform simple bending
operations on a part than to weld an assembly from flat plates and sheets.
The following guidelines apply to arc welding:

Good fit-up of parts to be welded is important to maintain dimensional control and
minimize distortion. Machining is sometimes required to achieve satisfactory fit-up.

The assembly must provide access room to allow the welding gun to reach the
welding area.
742
Chapter 30/Welding Processes


Whenever possible, design of the assembly should allow flat welding to be performed,
since this is the fastest and most convenient welding position. The possible welding
positions are defined in Figure 30.36. The overhead position is the most difficult.
The following design guidelines apply to resistance spot welding:

Low-carbon sheet steel up to 3.2 mm (0.125 in) is the ideal metal for resistance spot
welding.

Additional strength and stiffness can be obtained in large flat sheet metal compo-
nents by: (1) spot welding reinforcing parts into them, or (2) forming flanges and
embossments into them.

The spot-welded assembly must provide access for the electrodes to reach the
welding area.

Sufficient overlap of the sheet-metal parts is required for the electrode tip to make
proper contact in spot welding. For example, for low-carbon sheet steel, the overlap
distance should range from about six times stock thickness for thick sheets of 3.2 mm
(0.125 in) to about 20 times thickness for thin sheets, such as 0.5 mm (0.020 in).
REFERENCES
[1] ASM Handbook, Vol. 6, Welding, Brazing, and Sol-
dering.ASMInternational,MaterialsPark,Ohio,1993.
[2] Bralla, J. G. (Editor in Chief). Design for Manufac-
turability Handbook, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York, 1998.
[3] Cary, H. B., and Helzer S. C. Modern Welding
Technology, 6th ed. Pearson/Prentice-Hall, Upper
Saddle River, New Jersey, 2005.
[4] Galyen, J., Sear, G., and Tuttle, C. A. Welding,
Fundamentals and Procedures, 2nd ed. Prentice-
Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 1991.
[5] Jeffus, L. F. Welding: Principles and Applications,
6th ed. Delmar Cengage Learning, Clifton Park,
New York, 2007.
[6] Messler, R. W., Jr. Principles of Welding: Processes,
Physics, Chemistry, and Metallurgy. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., New York, 1999.
[7] Stotler, T., and Bernath, J. ‘‘Friction Stir Welding
Advances,’’ Advanced Materials and Processes,
March 2009, pp 35–37.
[8] Stout, R. D., and Ott, C. D. Weldability of Steels, 4th
ed. Welding Research Council, New York, 1987.
[9] Welding Handbook, 9th ed., Vol. 1, Welding Science
and Technology. American Welding Society, Miami,
Florida, 2007.
[10] Welding Handbook, 9th ed., Vol. 2, Welding Pro-
cesses. American Welding Society, Miami, Florida,
2007.
[11] Wick, C., and Veilleux, R. F. (eds.). Tool and
Manufacturing
Engineers
Handbook,
4th
ed.
Vol. IV, Quality Control and Assembly. Society
of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan,
1987.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
30.1.
Name the principal groups of processes included in
fusion welding.
30.2.
What is the fundamental feature that distinguishes
fusion welding from solid-state welding?
FIGURE 30.36
Welding
positions (deﬁned here
for groove welds): (a) ﬂat,
(b) horizontal, (c) vertical,
and (d) overhead.
Review Questions
743

30.3.
Define what an electrical arc is.
30.4.
What do the terms arc-on time and arc time mean?
30.5.
Electrodes in arc welding are divided into two
categories. Name and define the two types.
30.6.
What are the two basic methods of arc shielding?
30.7.
Why is the heat transfer factor in arc-welding pro-
cesses that utilize consumable electrodes greater
than in those that use nonconsumable electrodes?
30.8.
Describe the shielded metal arc-welding process.
30.9.
Why is the shielded metal arc-welding process
difficult to automate?
30.10.
Describe submerged arc welding.
30.11.
Why are the temperatures much higher in plasma
arc welding than in other arc-welding processes?
30.12.
Define resistance welding.
30.13.
What are the desirable properties of a metal that
would provide good weldability for resistance
welding?
30.14.
Describe the sequence of steps in the cycle of a
resistance spot-welding operation.
30.15.
What is resistance-projection welding?
30.16.
Describe cross-wire welding.
30.17.
Why is the oxyacetylene welding process favored
over the other oxyfuel welding processes?
30.18.
Define pressure gas welding.
30.19.
Electron-beam
welding
has
a
significant
dis-
advantage in high-production applications. What
is that disadvantage?
30.20.
Laser-beam welding and electron-beam welding
are often compared because they both produce
very high power densities. LBW has certain advan-
tages over EBW. What are they?
30.21.
There are several modern-day variations of forge
welding, the original welding process. Name
them.
30.22.
There are two basic types of friction welding.
Describe and distinguish the two types.
30.23.
What is friction stir welding, and how is it different
from friction welding?
30.24.
What is a sonotrode in ultrasonic welding?
30.25.
Distortion (warping) is a serious problem in fusion
welding, particularly arc welding. What are some of
the techniques that can be taken to reduce the
incidence and extent of distortion?
30.26.
What are some of the important welding defects?
30.27.
What are the three basic categories of inspection
and testing techniques used for weldments? Name
some typical inspections and/or tests in each
category.
30.28.
What are the factors that affect weldability?
30.29.
What are some of the design guidelines for weld-
ments that are fabricated by arc welding?
30.30.
(Video) According to the video, what are four
possible functions of the electrodes in resistance
spot welding?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 23 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
30.1.
The feature that distinguishes fusion welding from
solid-state welding is that melting of the faying
surfaces occurs during fusion welding but not in
solid-state welding: (a) true or (b) false?
30.2.
Which of the following processes are classified as
fusion welding (three correct answers): (a) electro-
gas welding, (b) electron-beam welding, (c) explo-
sion welding, (d) forge welding, (e) laser-beam
welding, and (f) ultrasonic welding?
30.3.
Which of the following processes are classified as
fusion welding (two correct answers): (a) diffusion
welding, (b) friction welding, (c) pressure gas weld-
ing, (d) resistance welding, and (e) roll welding?
30.4.
Which of the following processes are classified as
solid-state welding (three correct answers): (a) dif-
fusion welding, (b) friction stir welding, (c) resist-
ance spot welding, (d) roll welding, (e) Thermit
welding, and (f) upset welding?
30.5.
An electric arc is a discharge of current across a gap
in an electrical circuit. The arc is sustained in arc-
welding processes by the transfer of molten metal
across the gap between the electrode and the work:
(a) true or (b) false?
30.6.
Which one of the following arc-welding processes
uses a nonconsumable electrode: (a) FCAW,
(b) GMAW, (c) GTAW, or (d) SMAW?
30.7.
MIG welding is a term sometimes applied when
referring to which one of the following processes:
(a) FCAW, (b) GMAW, (c) GTAW, or (d) SMAW?
30.8.
‘‘Stick’’ welding is a term sometimes applied when
referring to which one of the following processes:
(a) FCAW, (b) GMAW, (c) GTAW, or (d) SMAW?
30.9.
Which one of the following arc-welding processes
uses an electrode consisting of continuous consum-
able tubing containing flux and other ingredients in
744
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

its core: (a) FCAW, (b) GMAW, (c) GTAW, or
(d) SMAW?
30.10.
Which one of the following arc-welding processes
produces the highest temperatures: (a) CAW,
(b) PAW, (c) SAW, or (d) TIG welding?
30.11.
Resistance-welding processes make use of the heat
generated by electrical resistance to achieve fusion
of the two parts to be joined; no pressure is used in
these processes, and no filler metal is added:
(a) true or (b) false?
30.12.
Metals that are easiest to weld in resistance weld-
ing are ones that have low resistivities since low
resistivity assists in the flow of electrical current:
(a) true or (b) false?
30.13.
Oxyacetylene welding is the most widely used oxy-
fuel welding process because acetylene mixed with
an equal volume of oxygen burns hotter than any
other commercially available fuel: (a) true or
(b) false?
30.14.
The term ‘‘laser’’ stands for ‘‘light actuated system
for effective reflection’’: (a) true or (b) false?
30.15.
Which of the following solid-state welding processes
applies heat from an external source (two best
answers): (a) diffusion welding, (b) forge welding,
(c) friction welding, and (d) ultrasonic welding?
30.16.
The term weldability takes into account not only
the ease with which a welding operation can be
performed, but also the quality of the resulting
weld: (a) true or (b) false?
30.17.
Copper is a relatively easy metal to weld because its
thermal conductivity is high: (a) true or (b) false?
PROBLEMS
Arc Welding
30.1.
A SMAW operation is accomplished in a work cell
using a fitter and a welder. The fitter takes 5.5 min to
place the unwelded components into the welding fix-
ture at the beginning of the work cycle, and 2.5 min to
unload the completed weldment at the end of the
cycle. The total length of the several weld seams to be
made is 2000 mm, and the travel speed used by the
welder averages 400 mm/min. Every 750 mm of weld
length,theweldingstickmustbechanged,whichtakes
0.8 min. While the fitter is working, the welder is idle
(resting); and while the welder is working, the fitter is
idle. (a) Determine the average arc time in this
welding cycle. (b) How much improvement in arc
time would result if the welder used FCAW (manu-
ally operated), given that the spool of flux-cored
weld wire must be changed every five weldments,
and it takes the welder 5.0 min to accomplish the
change? (c) What are the production rates for these
two cases (weldments completed per hour)?
30.2.
In the previous problem, suppose an industrial
robot cell were installed to replace the welder.
The cell consists of the robot (using GMAW in-
stead of SMAW or FCAW), two welding fixtures,
and the fitter who loads and unloads the parts. With
two fixtures, fitter and robot work simultaneously,
the robot welding at one fixture while the fitter
unloads and loads at the other. At the end of each
work cycle, they switch places. The electrode wire
spool must be changed every five workparts, which
task requires 5.0 minutes and is accomplished by
the fitter. Determine (a) arc time and (b) produc-
tion rate for this work cell.
30.3.
A shielded metal arc-welding operation is performed
onsteelatavoltage¼ 30Vandacurrent¼ 225A.The
heat transfer factor ¼ 0.85 and melting factor ¼ 0.75.
The unit melting energy for steel ¼ 10.2 J/mm3.
Determine (a) the rate of heat generation at the
weld and (b) the volume rate of metal welded.
30.4.
A GTAW operation is performed on low carbon
steel, whose unit melting energy is 10.3 J/mm3. The
welding voltage is 22 V and the current is 135 A.
The heat transfer factor is 0.7 and the melting
factor is 0.65. If filler metal wire of 3.5 mm diame-
ter is added to the operation, the final weld bead is
composed of 60% volume of filler and 40% volume
base metal. If the travel speed in the operation is
5 mm/s, determine (a) cross-sectional area of the
weld bead, and (b) the feed rate (mm/s) at which
the filler wire must be supplied.
30.5.
A flux-cored arc-welding operation is performed to
butt weld two austenitic stainless steel plates to-
gether. The welding voltage is 21 Vand the current is
185 A. The cross-sectional area of the weld seam ¼
75 mm2 and the melting factor of the stainless steel is
assumed to be 0.60. Using tabular data and equa-
tions given in this and the preceding chapter, deter-
mine the likely value for travel speed v in the
operation.
30.6.
A flux-cored arc-welding process is used to join two
low alloy steel plates at a 90 angle using an outside
fillet weld. The steel plates are 1/2 in thick. The
weld bead consists of 55% metal from the electrode
and the remaining 45% from the steel plates. The
melting factor of the steel is 0.65 and the heat
Problems
745

transfer factor is 0.90. The welding current is 75 A
and the voltage is 16 V. The velocity of the welding
head is 40 in/min. The diameter of the electrode is
0.10 in. There is a core of flux running through the
center of the electrode that has a diameter of 0.05
in and contains flux (compounds that do not be-
come part of the weld bead). (a) What is the cross-
sectional area of the weld bead? (b) How fast must
the electrode be fed into the workpiece?
30.7.
A gas metal arc-welding test is performed to de-
termine the value of melting factor f2 for a certain
metal and operation. The welding voltage ¼ 25 V,
current ¼ 125 A, and heat transfer factor is as-
sumed to be ¼ 0.90, a typical value for GMAW. The
rate at which the filler metal is added to the weld is
0.50 in3 per min, and measurements indicate that
the final weld bead consists of 57% filler metal and
43% base metal. The unit melting energy for the
metal is known to be 75 Btu/in3. (a) Find the
melting factor. (b) What is the travel speed if the
cross-sectional area of the weld bead ¼ 0.05 in2?
30.8.
A continuous weld is to be made around the circum-
ference of a round steel tube of diameter ¼ 6.0 ft,
using a submerged arc-welding operation under
automatic control at a voltage of 25 V and current
of 300 A. The tube is slowly rotated under a station-
ary welding head. The heat transfer factor for SAW
is ¼ 0.95 and the assumed melting factor ¼ 0.7. The
cross-sectionalareaoftheweldbeadis0.12in2.Ifthe
unit melting energy for the steel ¼ 150 Btu/in3,
determine (a) the rotational speed of the tube
and (b) the time required to complete the weld.
Resistance Welding
30.9.
An RSW operation is used to make a series of spot
welds between two pieces of aluminum, each 2.0 mm
thick. The unit melting energy for aluminum ¼ 2.90 J/
mm3. Welding current ¼ 6000 A, and time duration ¼
0.15 sec. Assume that the resistance ¼ 75 micro-V.
The resulting weld nugget measures 5.0 mm in diam-
eter by 2.5 mm thick. How much of the total energy
generated is used to form the weld nugget?
30.10.
An RSW operation is used to join two pieces of
sheet steel having a unit melting energy of 130 Btu/
in3. The sheet steel has a thickness of 1/8 in. The
weld duration will be set at 0.25 sec with a current
of 11,000 A. Based on the electrode diameter, the
weld nugget will have a diameter of 0.30 in. Expe-
rience has shown that 40% of the supplied heat
melts the nugget and the rest is dissipated by the
metal. If the electrical resistance between the sur-
faces is 130 micro-V, what is the thickness of the
weld nugget assuming it has a uniform thickness?
30.11.
The unit melting energy for a certain sheet metal is
9.5 J/mm3. The thickness of each of the two sheets
to be spot welded is 3.5 mm. To achieve required
strength, it is desired to form a weld nugget that is
5.5 mm in diameter and 5.0 mm thick. The weld
duration will be set at 0.3 sec. If it is assumed that
the electrical resistance between the surfaces is
140 micro-V, and that only one-third of the elec-
trical energy generated will be used to form the
weld nugget (the rest being dissipated), determine
the
minimum
current
level
required
in
this
operation.
30.12.
A resistance spot-welding operation is performed on
two pieces of 0.040-in thick sheet steel (low carbon).
The unit melting energy for steel ¼ 150 Btu/in3.
Process parameters are: current ¼ 9500 A and time
duration ¼ 0.17 sec. This results in a weld nugget of
diameter ¼ 0.19 in and thickness ¼ 0.060 in. Assume
the resistance ¼ 100 micro-V. Determine (a) the
average power density in the interface area defined
by the weld nugget, and (b) the proportion of
energy generated that went into formation of the
weld nugget.
30.13.
A resistance seam-welding operation is performed
on two pieces of 2.5-mm-thick austenitic stainless
steelto fabricate a container. Theweld current inthe
operation is 10,000 A, the weld duration ¼ 0.3 sec,
and the resistance at the interface is 75 micro-V.
Continuous motion welding is used, with 200-mm-
diameter electrode wheels. The individual weld
nuggets formed in this RSEW operation have
diameter ¼ 6 mm and thickness ¼ 3 mm (assume
the weld nuggets are disc-shaped). These weld
nuggets must be contiguous to form a sealed
seam. The power unit driving the process requires
an off-time between spot welds of 1.0 s. Given these
conditions, determine (a) the unit melting energy of
stainless steel using the methods of the previous
chapter, (b) the proportion of energy generated
that goes into the formation of each weld nugget,
and (c) the rotational speed of the electrode wheels.
30.14.
Suppose in the previous problem that a roll spot-
welding operation is performed instead of seam
welding. The interface resistance increases to
100 micro-V, and the center-to-center separation
between weld nuggets is 25 mm. Given the condi-
tions from the previous problem, with the changes
noted here, determine (a) the proportion of energy
generated that goes into the formation of each
weld nugget, and (b) the rotational speed of the
electrode wheels. (c) At this higher rotational
speed, how much does the wheel move during
the current on-time, and might this have the effect
746
Chapter 30/Welding Processes

of elongating the weld nugget (making it elliptical
rather than round)?
30.15.
Resistance projection welding is used to simulta-
neously weld two thin, steel plates together at four
locations. One of the pieces of steel plate is pre-
formed with projections that have a diameter of
0.25 in and a height of 0.20 in. The duration of
current flow during the weld is 0.30 sec and all four
projections are welded simultaneously. The plate
steel has a unit melting energy of 140 Btu/in3 and a
resistance between plates of 90.0 micro-V. Expe-
rience has shown that 55% of the heat is dissipated
by the metal and 45% melts the weld nugget.
Assume the volume of the nuggets will be twice
the volume of the projections because metal from
both plates is melted. How much current is re-
quired for the process?
30.16.
An experimental power source for spot welding is
designed to deliver current as a ramp function of
time: I ¼ 100,000 t, where I ¼ amp and t ¼ sec. At the
end of the power-on time, the current is stopped
abruptly. The sheet metal being spot welded is low
carbon steel whose unit melting energy ¼ 10 J/mm3.
The resistance R ¼ 85 micro-V. The desired weld
nugget diameter ¼ 4 mm and thickness ¼ 2 mm
(assume a disc-shaped nugget). It is assumed that 1/4
of the energy generated from the power source will
be used to form the weld nugget. Determine the
power-on time the current must be applied in order
to perform this spot-welding operation.
Oxyfuel Welding
30.17.
Suppose in Example 30.3 in the text that the fuel
used in the welding operation is MAPP instead of
acetylene, and the proportion of heat concentrated
in the 9 mm circle is 60% instead of 75 %. Compute
(a) rate of heat liberated during combustion,
(b) rate of heat transferred to the work surface,
and (c) average power density in the circular area.
30.18.
An oxyacetylene torch supplies 8.5 ft3 of acety-
lene per hour and an equal volume rate of oxygen
for an OAW operation on 1/4 in steel. Heat
generated by combustion is transferred to the
work surface with a heat transfer factor of 0.3.
If 80% of the heat from the flame is concentrated
in a circular area on the work surface whose
diameter ¼ 0.40 in, find: (a) rate of heat liberated
during combustion, (b) rate of heat transferred to
the work surface, and (c) average power density in
the circular area.
Electron Beam Welding
30.19.
The voltage in an EBW operation is 45 kV. The
beam current is 60 milliamp. The electron beam is
focused on a circular area that is 0.25 mm in
diameter. The heat transfer factor is 0.87. Calcu-
late the average power density in the area in watt/
mm2.
30.20.
An electron-beam welding operation is to be ac-
complished to butt weld two sheet-metal parts that
are 3.0 mm thick. The unit melting energy ¼ 5.0 J/
mm3. The weld joint is to be 0.35 mm wide, so that
the cross section of the fused metal is 0.35 mm by
3.0 mm. If accelerating voltage ¼ 25 kV, beam
current ¼ 30 milliamp, heat transfer factor f1 ¼
0.85, and melting factor f2 ¼ 0.75, determine the
travel speed at which this weld can be made along
the seam.
30.21.
An electron-beam welding operation will join two
pieces of steel plate together. The plates are 1.00 in
thick. The unit melting energy is 125 Btu/in3. The
diameter of the work area focus of the beam is
0.060 in, hence the width of the weld will be 0.060
in. The accelerating voltage is 30 kV and the beam
current is 35 milliamp. The heat transfer factor is 0.70
and the melting factor is 0.55. If the beam moves at a
speed of 50 in/min, will the beam penetrate the full
thickness of the plates?
30.22.
An electron-beam welding operation uses the fol-
lowing process parameters: accelerating voltage ¼
25 kV, beam current ¼ 100 milliamp, andthe circular
area on which the beam is focused has a diameter ¼
0.020in.Ifthe heattransferfactor¼ 90%,determine
the average power density in the area in Btu/sec in2.
Problems
747

31
BRAZING,
SOLDERING, AND
ADHESIVE BONDING
Chapter Contents
31.1
Brazing
31.1.1
Brazed Joints
31.1.2
Filler Metals and Fluxes
31.1.3
Brazing Methods
31.2
Soldering
31.2.1
Joint Designs in Soldering
31.2.2
Solders and Fluxes
31.2.3
Soldering Methods
31.3
Adhesive Bonding
31.3.1
Joint Design
31.3.2
Adhesive Types
31.3.3
Adhesive Application Technology
In this chapter, we consider three joining processes that are
similar to welding in certain respects: brazing, soldering, and
adhesive bonding. Brazing and soldering both use filler
metals to join and bond two (or more) metal parts to provide
a permanent joint. It is difficult, although not impossible, to
disassemble the parts after a brazed or soldered joint has
been made. In the spectrum of joining processes, brazing and
soldering lie between fusion welding and solid-state welding.
A filler metal is added in brazing and soldering as in most
fusion-welding operations; however, no melting of the base
metals occurs, whichis similar to solid-state welding. Despite
these anomalies, brazing and soldering are generally con-
sidered to be distinct from welding. Brazing and soldering
are attractive compared to welding under circumstances
where (1) the metals have poor weldability, (2) dissimilar
metals are to be joined, (3) the intense heat of welding may
damage the components being joined, (4) the geometry of
the joint does not lend itself to any of the welding methods,
and/or (5) high strength is not a requirement.
Adhesive bonding shares certain features in common
with brazing and soldering. It utilizes the forces of attach-
ment between a filler material and two closely spaced
surfaces to bond the parts. The differences are that the
filler material in adhesive bonding is not metallic, and the
joining process is carried out at room temperature or only
modestly above.
31.1
BRAZING
Brazing is a joining process in which a filler metal is melted
and distributed by capillary action between the faying
surfaces of the metal parts being joined. No melting of
the base metals occurs in brazing; only the filler melts. In
brazing the filler metal (also called the brazing metal), has
a melting temperature (liquidus) that is above 450C
(840F) but below the melting point (solidus) of the base
748

metal(s) to be joined. If the joint is properly designed and the brazing operation has been
properly performed, the brazed joint will be stronger than the filler metal out of which it
has been formed upon solidification. This rather remarkable result is due to the small part
clearances used in brazing, the metallurgical bonding that occurs between base and filler
metals, and the geometric constrictions that are imposed on the joint by the base parts.
Brazing has several advantages compared to welding: (1) any metals can be joined,
including dissimilar metals; (2) certain brazing methods can be performed quickly and
consistently, thus permitting high cycle rates and automated production; (3) some
methods allow multiple joints to be brazed simultaneously; (4) brazing can be applied
to join thin-walled parts that cannot be welded; (5) in general, less heat and power are
required than in fusion welding; (6) problems with the heat-affected zone in the base
metal near the joint are reduced; and (7) joint areas that are inaccessible by many welding
processes can be brazed, since capillary action draws the molten filler metal into the joint.
Disadvantages and limitations of brazing include (1) joint strength is generally less
than that of a welded joint; (2) although strength of a good brazed joint is greater than
that of the filler metal, it is likely to be less than that of the base metals; (3) high service
temperatures may weaken a brazed joint; and (4) the color of the metal in the brazed joint
may not match the color of the base metal parts, a possible aesthetic disadvantage.
Brazing as a production process is widely used in a variety of industries, including
automotive (e.g., joining tubes and pipes), electrical equipment (e.g., joining wires and
cables), cutting tools (e.g., brazing cemented carbide inserts to shanks), and jewelry
making. In addition, the chemical processing industry and plumbing and heating
contractors join metal pipes and tubes by brazing. The process is used extensively for
repair and maintenance work in nearly all industries.
31.1.1 BRAZED JOINTS
Brazed joints are commonly of two types: butt and lap (Section 29.2.1). However, the two
types have been adapted for the brazing process in several ways. The conventional butt
joint provides a limited area for brazing, thus jeopardizing the strength of the joint. To
increase the faying areas in brazed joints, the mating parts are often scarfed or stepped or
otherwise altered, as shown in Figure 31.1. Of course, additional processing is usually
required in the making of the parts for these special joints. One of the particular
difficulties associated with a scarfed joint is the problem of maintaining the alignment
of the parts before and during brazing.
Lap joints are more widely used in brazing, since they can provide a relatively large
interface area between the parts. An overlap of at least three times the thickness of the
thinner part is generally considered good design practice. Some adaptations of the lap
joint for brazing are illustrated in Figure 31.2. An advantage of brazing over welding in
FIGURE 31.1
(a) Conventional butt
joint, and adaptations of
the butt joint for brazing:
(b) scarf joint, (c) stepped
butt joint, (d) increased
cross section of the part
at the joint.
Section 31.1/Brazing
749

lap joints is that the filler metal is bonded to the base parts throughout the entire interface
area between the parts, rather than only at the edges (as in fillet welds made by arc
welding) or at discrete spots (as in resistance spot welding).
Clearance between mating surfaces of the base parts is important in brazing. The
clearance must be large enough so as not to restrict molten filler metal from flowing
throughouttheentire interface. Yetifthe joint clearanceistoo great, capillaryactionwillbe
reduced and there will be areas between the parts where no filler metal is present. Joint
strength is affected by clearance, as depicted in Figure 31.3. There is an optimum clearance
value at which joint strength is maximized. The issue is complicated by the fact that the
optimum depends on base and filler metals, joint configuration, and processing conditions.
Typical brazing clearances in practice are 0.025 to 0.25 mm (0.001 to 0.010 in). These values
represent thejoint clearance at the brazing temperature, which may be different from room
temperature clearance, depending on thermal expansion of the base metal(s).
Cleanliness of the joint surfaces prior to brazing is also important. Surfaces must be
free of oxides, oils, and other contaminants in order to promote wetting and capillary
attraction during the process, as well as bonding across the entire interface. Chemical
FIGURE 31.2
(a) Conventional lap joint, and adaptations of the lap joint for brazing: (b)
cylindrical parts, (c) sandwiched parts, and (d) use of sleeve to convert butt joint into lap joint.
FIGURE 31.3
Joint
strength as a function of
joint clearance.
750
Chapter 31/Brazing, Soldering, and Adhesive Bonding

treatments such as solvent cleaning (Section 28.1.1) and mechanical treatments such as
wire brushing and sand blasting (Section 28.1.2) are used to clean the surfaces. After
cleaning and during the brazing operation, fluxes are used to maintain surface cleanliness
and promote wetting for capillary action in the clearance between faying surfaces.
31.1.2 FILLER METALS AND FLUXES
Common filler metals used in brazing are listed in Table 31.1 along with the principal base
metals on which they are typically used. To qualify as a brazing metal, the following
characteristics are needed: (1) melting temperature must be compatible with the base
metal, (2) surface tension in the liquid phase must be low for good wettability, (3) fluidity
of the molten metal must be high for penetration into the interface, (4) the metal must be
capable of being brazed into a joint of adequate strength for the application, and
(5) chemical and physical interactions with base metal (e.g., galvanic reaction) must
be avoided. Filler metals are applied to the brazing operation in various ways, including
wire, rod, sheets and strips, powders, pastes, preformed parts made of braze metal designed
to fit a particular joint configuration, and cladding on one of the surfaces to be brazed.
Several of these techniques are illustrated in Figures 31.4 and 31.5. Braze metal pastes,
shown in Figure 31.5, consist of filler metal powders mixed with fluid fluxes and binders.
Brazing fluxes serve a similar purpose as in welding; they dissolve, combine with,
and otherwise inhibit the formation of oxides and other unwanted byproducts in the
brazing process. Use of a flux does not substitute for the cleaning steps described above.
Characteristics of a good flux include (1) low melting temperature, (2) low viscosity so
that it can be displaced by the filler metal, (3) facilitates wetting, and (4) protects the joint
until solidification of the filler metal. The flux should also be easy to remove after
brazing. Common ingredients for brazing fluxes include borax, borates, fluorides, and
chlorides. Wetting agents are also included in the mix to reduce surface tension of the
molten filler metal and to improve wettability. Forms of flux include powders, pastes, and
slurries. Alternatives to using a flux are to perform the operation in a vacuum or a
reducing atmosphere that inhibits oxide formation.
31.1.3 BRAZING METHODS
There are various methods used in brazing. Referred to as brazing processes, they are
differentiated by their heating sources.
TABLE 31.1
Common ﬁller metals used in brazing and the base metals on which they are used.
Approximate Brazing
Temperature
Filler Metal
Typical
Composition
C
F
Base Metals
Aluminum and silicon
90 Al, 10 Si
600
1100
Aluminum
Copper
99.9 Cu
1120
2050
Nickel copper
Copper and phosphorous
95 Cu, 5 P
850
1550
Copper
Copper and zinc
60 Cu, 40 Zn
925
1700
Steels, cast irons, nickel
Gold and silver
80 Au, 20 Ag
950
1750
Stainless steel, nickel alloys
Nickel alloys
Ni, Cr, others
1120
2050
Stainless steel, nickel alloys
Silver alloys
Ag, Cu, Zn, Cd
730
1350
Titanium, Monel, Inconel,
tool steel, nickel
Compiled from [5] and [7].
Section 31.1/Brazing
751

FIGURE 31.4
Several
techniques for applying
ﬁller metal in brazing:
(a) torch and ﬁller rod;
(b) ring of ﬁller metal at
entranceofgap;and(c)foil
of ﬁller metal between ﬂat
part surfaces. Sequence:
(1) before, and (2) after.
FIGURE 31.5
Application of brazing
paste to joint by
dispenser. (Courtesy of
Fusion, Inc., Willoughby,
Ohio.)
752
Chapter 31/Brazing, Soldering, and Adhesive Bonding

Torch Brazing
In torch brazing, flux is applied to the part surfaces and a torch is used to
direct aflameagainstthe workinthevicinityofthejoint. Areducing flameistypicallyusedto
inhibit oxidation. After the workpart joint areas have been heated to a suitable temperature,
filler wire is added to the joint, usually in wire or rod form. Fuels used in torch brazing include
acetylene, propane, and other gases, with air or oxygen. The selection of the mixture depends
on heating requirements of the job. Torch brazing is often performed manually, and skilled
workers must be employed to control the flame, manipulate the hand-held torches, and
properly judge the temperatures; repair work is a common application. The method can also
be used in mechanized production operations, in which parts and brazing metal are loaded
onto a conveyor or indexing table and passed under one or more torches.
Furnace Brazing
Furnace brazing uses a furnace to supply heat for brazing and is best
suited to medium and high production. In medium production, usually in batches, the
component parts and brazing metal are loaded into the furnace, heated to brazing tempera-
ture, and then cooled and removed. High-production operations use flow-through furnaces,
in which parts are placed on a conveyor and are transported through the various heating and
cooling sections. Temperature and atmosphere control are important in furnace brazing; the
atmosphere must be neutral or reducing. Vacuum furnaces are sometimes used. Depending
on the atmosphere and metals being brazed, the need for a flux may be eliminated.
Induction Brazing
Induction brazing utilizes heat from electrical resistance to a high-
frequency current induced in the work. The parts are preloaded with filler metal and
placed in a high-frequency AC field—the parts do not directly contact the induction coil.
Frequencies range from 5 kHz to 5 MHz. High-frequency power sources tend to provide
surface heating, while lower frequencies cause deeper heat penetration into the work and
are appropriate for heavier sections. The process can be used to meet low- to high-
production requirements.
Resistance Brazing
Heat to melt the filler metal in this process is obtained by
resistance to flow of electrical current through the parts. As distinguished from induction
brazing, the parts are directly connected to the electrical circuit in resistance brazing. The
equipment is similar to that used in resistance welding, except that a lower power level is
required for brazing. The parts with filler metal preplaced are held between electrodes
while pressure and current are applied. Both induction and resistance brazing achieve
rapid heating cycles and are used for relatively small parts. Induction brazing seems to be
the more widely used of the two processes.
Dip Brazing
Indip brazing, either a molten salt bath ora molten metal bath accomplishes
heating. In both methods, assembled parts are immersed in the baths contained in a heating
pot. Solidification occurs when the parts are removed from the bath. In the salt bath
method, the molten mixture contains fluxing ingredients and the filler metal is preloaded
onto the assembly. In the metal bath method, themolten filler metal is theheating medium;
it is drawn by capillary action into the joint during submersion. A flux cover is maintained
on the surface of the molten metal bath. Dip brazing achieves fast heating cycles and can be
used to braze many joints on a single part or on multiple parts simultaneously.
Infrared Brazing
This method uses heat from a high-intensity infrared lamp. Some IR
lamps are capable of generating up to 5000 W of radiant heat energy, which can be
directed at the workparts for brazing. The process is slower than most of the other
processes reviewed above, and is generally limited to thin sections.
Braze Welding
This process differs from the other brazing processes in the type of joint
to which it is applied. As pictured in Figure 31.6, braze welding is used for filling a more
Section 31.1/Brazing
753

conventional weld joint, such as the V-joint shown. A greater quantity of filler metal is
deposited than in brazing, and no capillary action occurs. In braze welding, the joint
consists entirely of filler metal; the base metal does not melt and is therefore not fused
into the joint as in a conventional fusion welding process. The principal application of
braze welding is repair work.
31.2
SOLDERING
Soldering is similar to brazing and can be defined as a joining process in which a filler
metal with melting point (liquidus) not exceeding 450C (840F) is melted and distrib-
uted by capillary action between the faying surfaces of the metal parts being joined. As in
brazing, no melting of the base metals occurs, but the filler metal wets and combines with
the base metal to form a metallurgical bond. Details of soldering are similar to those of
brazing, and many of the heating methods are the same. Surfaces to be soldered must be
precleaned so they are free of oxides, oils, and so on. An appropriate flux must be applied
to the faying surfaces, and the surfaces are heated. Filler metal, called solder, is added to
the joint, which distributes itself between the closely fitting parts.
In some applications, the solder is precoated onto one or both of the surfaces—a
processcalledtinning,irrespectiveofwhetherthesoldercontainsanytin.Typicalclearances
in soldering range from 0.075 to 0.125 mm (0.003–0.005 in), except when the surfaces are
tinned, in which case a clearance of about 0.025 mm (0.001 in) is used. After solidification,
the flux residue must be removed.
As an industrial process, soldering is most closely associated with electronics
assembly (Chapter 35). It is also used for mechanical joints, but not for joints subjected
to elevated stresses or temperatures. Advantages attributed to soldering include (1) low
energy input relative to brazing and fusion welding, (2) variety of heating methods
available, (3) good electrical and thermal conductivity in the joint, (4) capability to make
air-tight and liquid-tight seams for containers, and (5) easy to repair and rework.
The biggest disadvantages of soldering are (1) low joint strength unless reinforced
by mechanically means and (2) possible weakening or melting of the joint in elevated
temperature service.
31.2.1 JOINT DESIGNS IN SOLDERING
As in brazing, soldered joints are limited to lap and butt types, although butt joints should
not be used in load-bearing applications. Some of the brazing adaptations of these joints
also apply to soldering, and soldering technology has added a few more variations of its
own to deal with the special part geometries that occur in electrical connections. In
soldered mechanical joints of sheet-metal parts, the edges of the sheets are often bent
over and interlocked before soldering, as shown in Figure 31.7, to increase joint strength.
For electronics applications, the principal function of the soldered joint is to provide
an electrically conductive path between two parts being joined. Other design considera-
tionsin these typesof soldered jointsinclude heat generation (from the electrical resistance
of the joint) and vibration. Mechanical strength in a soldered electrical connection is often
FIGURE 31.6
Braze welding. The joint
consists of braze (ﬁller) metal; no base metal
is fused in the joint.
754
Chapter 31/Brazing, Soldering, and Adhesive Bonding

achieved by deforming one or both of the metal parts to accomplish a mechanical joint
between them, or by making the surface area larger to provide maximum support by the
solder. Several possibilities are sketched in Figure 31.8.
31.2.2 SOLDERS AND FLUXES
Solders and fluxes are the materials used in soldering. Both are critically important in the
joining process.
Solders
Most solders are alloys of tin and lead, sinceboth metals have low melting points
(seeFigure 6.3).Theiralloyspossessa rangeofliquidusandsolidustemperaturestoachieve
good control of the soldering process for a variety of applications. Lead is poisonous and its
percentage is minimized in most solder compositions. Tin is chemically active at soldering
temperatures and promotes the wetting action required for successful joining. In soldering
copper, common in electrical connections, intermetallic compounds of copper and tin are
formed that strengthen the bond. Silver and antimony are also sometimes used in soldering
FIGURE 31.7
Mechanical interlocking
in soldered joints for
increased strength: (a) ﬂat
lock seam; (b) bolted or
riveted joint; (c) copper
pipe ﬁttings—lap cylindri-
cal joint; and (d) crimping
(forming) of cylindrical lap
joint.
FIGURE 31.8
Techniques for securing
the joint by mechanical
means prior to soldering
in electrical connections:
(a) crimped lead wire on
printed circuit board
(PCB); (b) plated through
hole on PCB to maximize
solder contact surface;
(c) hooked wire on ﬂat
terminal; and (d) twisted
wires.
Section 31.2/Soldering
755

alloys. Table 31.2 lists various solder alloy compositions, indicating their approximate
soldering temperatures and principal applications. Lead-free soldersarebecoming increas-
ingly important as legislation to eliminate lead from solders is enacted.
Soldering Fluxes
Soldering fluxes should do the following: (1) be molten at soldering
temperatures, (2) remove oxide films and tarnish from the base part surfaces, (3) prevent
oxidation during heating, (4) promote wetting of the faying surfaces, (5) be readily
displaced by the molten solder during the process, and (6) leave a residue that is
noncorrosive and nonconductive. Unfortunately, there is no single flux that serves all
of these functions perfectly for all combinations of solder and base metals. The flux
formulation must be selected for a given application.
Soldering fluxes can be classified as organic or inorganic. Organic fluxes are made
of either rosin (i.e., natural rosin such as gum wood, which is not water-soluble) or water-
soluble ingredients (e.g., alcohols, organic acids, and halogenated salts). The water-
soluble type facilitates cleanup after soldering. Organic fluxes are most commonly used
for electrical and electronics connections. They tend to be chemically reactive at elevated
soldering temperatures but relatively noncorrosive at room temperatures. Inorganic
fluxes consist of inorganic acids (e.g., muriatic acid) and salts (e.g., combinations of zinc
and ammonium chlorides) and are used to achieve rapid and active fluxing where oxide
films are a problem. The salts become active when melted, but are less corrosive than the
acids. When solder wire is purchased with an acid core it is in this category.
Bothorganicandinorganicfluxesshouldberemovedaftersoldering,butitisespecially
important in the case of inorganic acids to prevent continued corrosion of the metal surfaces.
Flux removal is usuallyaccomplished using water solutions except in the case of rosins, which
require chemical solvents. Recent trends in industry favor water-soluble fluxes over rosins
because chemical solvents used with rosins are harmful to the environment and to humans.
31.2.3 SOLDERING METHODS
Many of the methods used in soldering are the same as those used in brazing, except that
less heat and lower temperatures are required for soldering. These methods include torch
TABLE 31.2
Some common solder alloy compositions with their melting
temperatures and applications.
Approximate
Melting
Temperature
Filler Metal
Approximate
Composition
C
F
Principal Applications
Lead–silver
96 Pb, 4 Ag
305
580
Elevated temperature joints
Tin–antimony
95 Sn, 5 Sb
238
460
Plumbing and heating
Tin–lead
63 Sn, 37 Pb
183a
361a
Electrical/electronics
60 Sn, 40 Pb
188
370
Electrical/electronics
50 Sn, 50 Pb
199
390
General purpose
40 Sn, 60 Pb
207
405
Automobile radiators
Tin–silver
96 Sn, 4 Ag
221
430
Food containers
Tin–zinc
91 Sn, 9 Zn
199
390
Aluminum joining
Tin–silver–copper
95.5 Sn, 3.9
Electronics: surface mount
technology
Ag, 0.6 Cu
217
423
Compiled from [2], [3], [4], and [13].
aEutectic composition—lowest melting point of tin–lead compositions.
756
Chapter 31/Brazing, Soldering, and Adhesive Bonding

soldering, furnace soldering, induction soldering, resistance soldering, dip soldering, and
infrared soldering. There are other soldering methods, not used in brazing, that should be
described here. These methods are hand soldering, wave soldering, and reflow soldering.
Hand Soldering
Hand soldering is performed manually using a hot soldering iron. A
bit, made of copper, is the working end of a soldering iron. Its functions are (1) to deliver
heat to the parts being soldered, (2) to melt the solder, (3) to convey molten solder to the
joint, and (4) to withdraw excess solder. Most modern soldering irons are heated by
electrical resistance. Some are designed as fast-heating soldering guns, which are popular
in electronics assembly for intermittent (on/off) operation actuated by a trigger. They are
capable of making a solder joint in about a second.
Wave Soldering
Wave soldering is a mechanized technique that allows multiple lead
wires to be soldered to a printed circuit board (PCB) as it passes over a wave of molten
solder. The typical setup is one in which a PCB, on which electronic components have been
placed with their lead wires extending through the holes in the board, is loaded onto a
conveyor for transport through the wave-soldering equipment. The conveyor supports the
PCB on its sides, so that its underside is exposed to the processing steps, which consist of the
following: (1) flux is applied using any of several methods, including foaming, spraying, or
brushing; (2) preheating (using light bulbs, heating coils, and infrared devices) to
evaporate solvents, activate the flux, and raise the temperature of the assembly; and
(3) wave soldering, in which the liquid solder is pumped from a molten bath through a slit
onto the bottom of the board to make the soldering connections between the lead wires
and the metal circuit on the board. This third step is illustrated in Figure 31.9. The board is
often inclined slightly, as depicted in the sketch, and a special tinning oil is mixed with the
molten solder to lower its surface tension. Both of these measures help to inhibit buildup
of excess solder and formation of ‘‘icicles’’ on the bottom of the board. Wave soldering is
widely applied in electronics to produce printed circuit board assemblies (Section 35.3.2).
Reﬂow Soldering
This process is also widely used in electronics to assemble surface
mount components to printed circuit boards (Section 35.4.2). In the process, a solder
paste consisting of solder powders in a flux binder is applied to spots on the board where
electrical contacts are to be made between surface mount components and the copper
circuit. The components are then placed on the paste spots, and the board is heated to
melt the solder, forming mechanical and electrical bonds between the component leads
and the copper on the circuit board.
Heating methods for reflow soldering include vapor phase reflow and infrared
reflow. In vapor phase reflow soldering, an inert fluorinated hydrocarbon liquid is
vaporized by heating in an oven; it subsequently condenses on the board surface where
it transfers its heat of vaporization to melt the solder paste and form solder joints on the
FIGURE 31.9
Wave soldering, in
which molten solder is delivered
up through a narrow slot onto the
underside of a printed circuit
board to connect the component
lead wires.
Section 31.2/Soldering
757

printed circuit boards. In infrared reflow soldering, heat from an infrared lamp is used to
melt the solder paste and form joints between component leads and circuit areas on the
board. Additional heating methods to reflow the solder paste include use of hot plates, hot
air, and lasers.
31.3
ADHESIVE BONDING
Use of adhesives dates back to ancient times (Historical Note 31.1) and adhesive bonding
was probably the first of the permanent joining methods. Today, adhesives are used in a
wide range of bonding and sealing applications for joining similar and dissimilar materials
such as metals, plastics, ceramics, wood, paper, and cardboard. Although well-established
as a joining technique, adhesive bonding is considered a growth area among assembly
technologies because of the tremendous opportunities for increased applications.
Adhesive bonding is a joining process in which a filler material is used to hold two (or
more) closely spaced parts together by surface attachment. The filler material that binds the
parts together is the adhesive. It is a nonmetallic substance—usually a polymer. The parts
being joined are called adherends. Adhesives of greatest interest in engineering are
structural adhesives, which are capableof forming strong, permanent jointsbetweenstrong,
rigid adherends. A large number of commercially available adhesives are cured by various
mechanisms and suited to the bonding of various materials. Curing refers to the process by
which the adhesive’s physical properties are changed from a liquid to a solid, usually by
chemical reaction, to accomplish the surface attachment of the parts. The chemical reaction
may involve polymerization, condensation, or vulcanization. Curing is often motivated by
heat and/or a catalyst, and pressure is sometimes applied between the two parts to activate
the bonding process. If heat is required, the curing temperatures are relatively low, and so
the materials being joined are usually unaffected—an advantage for adhesive bonding. The
curing or hardening of the adhesive takes time, called curing time or setting time. In some
cases this time is significant—generally a disadvantage in manufacturing.
Joint strength in adhesive bonding is determined by the strength of the adhesive itself
and the strength of attachment between adhesive and each of the adherends. One of the
criteria often used to define a satisfactory adhesive joint is that if a failure should occur due
Historical Note 31.1
Adhesive bonding
Adhesives date from ancient times. Carvings 3300 years
old show a glue pot and brush for gluing veneer to wood
planks. The ancient Egyptians used gum from the Acacia
tree for various assembly and sealing purposes. Bitumen,
an asphalt adhesive, was used in ancient times as a
cement and mortar for construction in Asia Minor. The
Romans used pine wood tar and beeswax to caulk their
ships. Glues derived from ﬁsh, stag horns, and cheese
were used in the early centuries after Christ for
assembling components of wood.
In more modern times, adhesives have become an
important joining process. Plywood, which relies on
the use of adhesives to bond multiple layers of wood,
was developed around 1900. Phenol formaldehyde
was the ﬁrst synthetic adhesive developed, around
1910, and its primary use was in bonding of wood
products such as plywood. During World War II,
phenolic resins were developed for adhesive bonding
of certain aircraft components. In the 1950s, epoxies
were ﬁrst formulated. And since the 1950s a variety of
additional adhesives have been developed, including
anaerobics, various new polymers, and second-
generation acrylics.
758
Chapter 31/Brazing, Soldering, and Adhesive Bonding

to excessive stresses, it occurs in one of the adherends rather than at an interface or within
the adhesive itself. The strength of the attachment results from several mechanisms, all
depending on the particular adhesive and adherends: (1) chemical bonding, in which the
adhesive unites with the adherends and forms a primary chemical bond upon hardening;
(2) physical interactions, in which secondary bonding forces result between the atoms of
the opposing surfaces; and (3) mechanical interlocking, in which the surface roughness of
the adherend causes the hardened adhesive to become entangled or trapped in its
microscopic surface asperities.
For these adhesion mechanisms to operate with best results, the following conditions
must prevail: (1) surfaces of the adherend must be clean—free of dirt, oil, and oxide films
that would interfere with achieving intimate contact between adhesive and adherend;
special preparation of the surfaces is often required; (2) the adhesive in its initial liquid
form must achieve thorough wetting of the adherend surface; and (3) it is usually helpful
for the surfaces to be other than perfectly smooth—a slightly roughened surface increases
the effective contact area and promotes mechanical interlocking. In addition, the joint
must be designed to exploit the particular strengths of adhesive bonding and avoid its
limitations.
31.3.1 JOINT DESIGN
Adhesive joints are not generally as strong as those by welding, brazing, or soldering.
Accordingly, consideration mustbegivento the design ofjointsthat are adhesivelybonded.
The following design principles are applicable: (1) Joint contact area should be maximized.
(2) Adhesive joints are strongest in shear and tension as in Figure 31.10(a) and (b), and
joints should be designed so that the applied stresses are of these types. (3) Adhesive
bonded joints are weakest in cleavage or peeling as in Figure 31.10(c) and (d), and
adhesive bonded joints should be designed to avoid these types of stresses.
Typical joint designs for adhesive bonding that illustrate these design principles are
presented in Figure 31.11. Some joint designs combine adhesive bonding with other joining
methods to increase strength and/or provide sealing between the two components. Some of
the possibilities are shown in Figure 31.12. For example, the combination of adhesive
bonding and spot welding is called weldbonding.
In addition to the mechanical configuration of the joint, the application must be
selected so that the physical and chemical properties of adhesive and adherends are
compatibleunder theserviceconditions to which theassembly will be subjected.Adherend
materials include metals, ceramics, glass, plastics, wood, rubber, leather, cloth, paper, and
cardboard. Note that the list includes materials that are rigid and flexible, porous and
FIGURE 31.10
Types of stresses that must be considered in adhesive bonded joints: (a) tension, (b) shear,
(c) cleavage, and (d) peeling.
Section 31.3/Adhesive Bonding
759

nonporous, metallic and nonmetallic, and that similar or dissimilar substances can be
bonded together.
31.3.2 ADHESIVE TYPES
A large number of commercial adhesives are available. They can be classified into three
categories: (1) natural, (2) inorganic, and (3) synthetic.
Natural adhesives are derived from natural sources (e.g., plants and animals),
includinggums,starch,dextrin,soyflour,andcollagen.Thiscategoryofadhesiveisgenerally
limited to low-stress applications, such as cardboard cartons, furniture, and bookbinding; or
where large surface areas are involved (e.g., plywood). Inorganic adhesives are based
principally on sodium silicate and magnesium oxychloride. Although relatively low in cost,
they are also low in strength—a serious limitation in a structural adhesive.
Synthetic adhesives constitute the most important category in manufacturing. They
include a variety of thermoplastic and thermosetting polymers, many of which are listed
and briefly described in Table 31.3. They are cured by various mechanisms, such as
(a)
(b)
(c)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(d)
(f)
(e)
FIGURE 31.11
Some joint designs for adhesive bonding: (a) through (b) butt joints; (c) and (d) T-joints; and
(e) through (f) corner joints.
FIGURE 31.12
Adhesive bonding combined with other joining methods:
(a) weldbonding—spot welded and adhesive bonded; (b) riveted (or bolted) and
adhesive bonded; and (c) formed plus adhesive bonded.
760
Chapter 31/Brazing, Soldering, and Adhesive Bonding

(1) mixing a catalyst or reactive ingredient with the polymer immediately prior to applying,
(2) heating to initiate the chemical reaction, (3) radiation curing, such as ultraviolet
light, and (4) curing by evaporation of water from the liquid or paste adhesive. In addition,
some synthetic adhesives are applied as films or as pressure-sensitive coatings on the
surface of one of the adherends.
31.3.3 ADHESIVE APPLICATION TECHNOLOGY
Industrial applications of adhesive bonding are widespread and growing. Major users
are automotive, aircraft, building products, and packaging industries; other industries
include footwear, furniture, bookbinding, electrical, and shipbuilding. Table 31.3 indicates
some of the specific applications for which synthetic adhesives are used. In this section we
consider several issues relating to adhesives application technology.
Surface Preparation
In order for adhesive bonding to succeed, part surfaces must be
extremely clean. The strength of the bond depends on the degree of adhesion between
adhesive and adherend, and this depends on the cleanliness of the surface. In most cases,
additional processing steps are required for cleaning and surface preparation, the methods
varying with different adherend materials. For metals, solvent wiping is often used for
cleaning, and abrading the surface by sand blasting or other process usually improves
TABLE 31.3
Important synthetic adhesives.
Adhesive
Description and Applications
Anaerobic
Single-component, thermosetting, acrylic-based. Cures by free radical mechanism at room
temperature. Applications: sealant, structural assembly.
Modified acrylics
Two-component thermoset, consisting of acrylic-based resin and initiator/hardener. Cures at
room temperature after mixing. Applications: fiberglass in boats, sheet metal in cars and
aircraft.
Cyanoacrylate
Single-component, thermosetting, acrylic-based that cures at room temperature on alkaline
surfaces. Applications: rubber to plastic, electronic components on circuit boards, plastic and
metal cosmetic cases.
Epoxy
Includes a variety of widely used adhesives formulated from epoxy resins, curing agents, and
filler/modifiers that harden upon mixing. Some are cured when heated. Applications:
aluminum bonding applications and honeycomb panels for aircraft, sheet-metal
reinforcements for cars, lamination of wooden beams, seals in electronics.
Hot melt
Single-component, thermoplastic adhesive hardens from molten state after cooling from
elevated temperatures. Formulated from thermoplastic polymers including ethylene vinyl
acetate, polyethylene, styrene block copolymer, butyl rubber, polyamide, polyurethane, and
polyester. Applications: packaging (e.g., cartons, labels), furniture, footwear, bookbinding,
carpeting, and assemblies in appliances and cars.
Pressure-sensitive
tapes and films
Usually one component in solid form that possesses high tackiness resulting in bonding when
pressure is applied. Formed from various polymers of high-molecular weight. Can be single-
sided or double-sided. Applications: solar panels, electronic assemblies, plastics to wood and
metals.
Silicone
One or two components, thermosetting liquid, based on silicon polymers. Curing by room-
temperature vulcanization to rubbery solid. Applications: seals in cars (e.g., windshields),
electronic seals and insulation, gaskets, bonding of plastics.
Urethane
One or two components, thermosetting, based on urethane polymers. Applications: bonding of
fiberglass and plastics.
Compiled from [8], [10], and [14].
Section 31.3/Adhesive Bonding
761

adhesion. For nonmetallic parts, solvent cleaning is generally used, and the surfaces are
sometimes mechanically abraded or chemically etched to increase roughness. It is desirable
to accomplish the adhesive bonding process as soon as possible after these treatments, since
surface oxidation and dirt accumulation increase with time.
Application Methods
The actual application of the adhesive to one or both part
surfaces is accomplished in a number of ways. The following list, though incomplete,
provides a sampling of the techniques used in industry:

Brushing, performed manually, uses a stiff-bristled brush. Coatings are often uneven.

Flowing, using manually operated pressure-fed flow guns, has more consistent
control than brushing.

Manual rollers, similar to paint rollers, are used to apply adhesive from a flat
container.

Silk screening involves brushing the adhesive through the open areas of the screen
onto the part surface, so that only selected areas are coated.

Spraying uses an air-driven (or airless) spray gun for fast application over large or
difficult-to-reach areas.

Automatic applicators include various automatic dispensers and nozzles for use on
medium- and high-speed production applications. Figure 31.13 illustrates the use of a
dispenser for assembly.

Roll coating is a mechanized technique in which a rotating roller is partially
submersed in a pan of liquid adhesive and picks up a coating of the adhesive, which
is then transferred to the work surface. Figure 31.14 shows one possible application,
in which the work is a thin, flexible material (e.g., paper, cloth, leather, plastic).
Variations of the method are used for coating adhesive onto wood, wood composite,
cardboard, and similar materials with large surface areas.
FIGURE 31.13
Adhesive is
dispensed by a manually
controlled dispenser to bond parts
during assembly. (Courtesy of EFD,
Inc., East Providence, Rhode
Island.)
762
Chapter 31/Brazing, Soldering, and Adhesive Bonding

Advantages and Limitations
Advantages of adhesive bonding are (1) the process is
applicable to a wide varietyofmaterials; (2)partsof differentsizes andcross sectionscan be
joined—fragile parts can be joined by adhesive bonding; (3) bonding occurs over the entire
surface area of the joint, rather than in discrete spots or along seams as in fusion welding,
thereby distributing stresses over the entire area; (4) some adhesives are flexible after
bonding and are thus tolerant of cyclical loading and differences in thermal expansion of
adherends; (5) low temperature curing avoids damage to parts being joined; (6) sealing as
well as bonding can be achieved; and (7) joint design is often simplified (e.g., two flat
surfaces can be joined without providing special part features such as screw holes).
Principal limitations of this technology include (1) joints are generally not as strong
as other joining methods; (2) adhesive must be compatible with materials being joined;
(3) service temperatures are limited; (4) cleanliness and surface preparation prior to
application of adhesive are important; (5) curing times can impose a limit on production
rates; and (6) inspection of the bonded joint is difficult.
REFERENCES
[1] Adams, R. S. (ed.). Adhesive Bonding: Science,
Technology, and Applications. CRC Taylor &
Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2005.
[2] Bastow, E.‘‘Five Solder Families and How They
Work,’’ Advanced Materials & Processes, Decem-
ber 2003, pp. 26–29.
[3] Bilotta, A. J. Connections in Electronic Assemblies.
Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, 1985.
[4] Bralla, J. G. (Editor in Chief). Design for Manufac-
turability Handbook, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York, 1998.
[5] Brazing Manual, 3rd ed. American Welding Society,
Miami, Florida, 1976.
[6] Brockman,
W.,
Geiss,
P.
L.,
Klingen,
J.,
and
Schroeder, K. B. Adhesive Bonding: Materials,
Applications,
and
Technology.
John
Wiley
&
Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2009.
[7] Cary, H. B., and Helzer, S. C. Modern Welding
Technology, 6th ed. Pearson/Prentice Hall, Upper
Saddle River, New Jersey, 2005.
[8] Doyle, D. J. ‘‘The Sticky Six—Steps for Selecting
Adhesives,’’ Manufacturing Engineering, June 1991,
pp. 39–43.
[9] Driscoll, B., and Campagna, J. ‘‘Epoxy, Acrylic, and
Urethane Adhesives,’’ Advanced Materials & Pro-
cesses, August 2003, pp. 73–75.
[10] Hartshorn, S. R. (ed.). Structural Adhesives, Chem-
istry and Technology. Plenum Press, New York,
1986.
[11] Humpston, G., and Jacobson, D. M. Principles of
Brazing. ASM International, Materials Park, Ohio,
2005.
[12] Humpston, G., and Jacobson, D. M. Principles of
Soldering.
ASM
International,
Materials
Park,
Ohio, 2004.
[13] Lambert, L. P. Soldering for Electronic Assemblies.
Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, 1988.
[14] Lincoln, B., Gomes, K. J., and Braden, J. F. Mechan-
ical Fastening of Plastics. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New
York, 1984.
FIGURE 31.14
Roll coating of adhesive
onto thin, ﬂexible material such as paper,
cloth, or ﬂexible polymer.
References
763

[15] Petrie, E. M. Handbook of Adhesives and Sealants,
2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2006.
[16] Schneberger, G. L. (ed.). Adhesives in Manufactur-
ing. CRC Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Florida,
1983.
[17] Shields, J. Adhesives Handbook, 3rd ed. Butter-
worths Heinemann, Woburn, UK, 1984.
[18] Skeist, I. (ed.). Handbook of Adhesives, 3rd ed.
Chapman & Hall, New York, 1990.
[19] Soldering Manual, 2nd ed. American Welding Soci-
ety, Miami, Florida, 1978.
[20] Welding Handbook, 9th ed., Vol. 2, Welding Pro-
cesses. American Welding Society, Miami, Florida,
2007.
[21] Wick, C., and Veilleux, R. F. (eds.). Tool and Man-
ufacturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol. 4,
Quality Control and Assembly. Society of Manu-
facturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1987.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
31.1.
How do brazing and soldering differ from the
fusion-welding processes?
31.2.
How do brazing and soldering differ from the solid-
state welding processes?
31.3.
What is the technical difference between brazing
and soldering?
31.4.
Under what circumstances would brazing or sol-
dering be preferred over welding?
31.5.
What are the two joint types most commonly used
in brazing?
31.6.
Certain changes in joint configuration are usually
made to improve the strength of brazed joints.
What are some of these changes?
31.7.
The molten filler metal in brazing is distributed
throughout the joint by capillary action. What is
capillary action?
31.8.
What are the desirable characteristics of a brazing
flux?
31.9.
What is dip brazing?
31.10.
Define braze welding.
31.11.
What are some of the disadvantages and limita-
tions of brazing?
31.12.
What are the two most common alloying metals
used in solders?
31.13.
What are the functions served by the bit of a
soldering iron in hand soldering?
31.14.
What is wave soldering?
31.15.
List the advantages often attributed to soldering as
an industrial joining process?
31.16.
What are the disadvantages and drawbacks of
soldering?
31.17.
What is meant by the term structural adhesive?
31.18.
An adhesive must cure in order to bond. What is
meant by the term curing?
31.19.
What are some of the methods used to cure
adhesives?
31.20.
Name the three basic categories of commercial
adhesives.
31.21.
What is an important precondition for the success
of an adhesive bonding operation?
31.22.
What are some of the methods used to apply
adhesives in industrial production operations?
31.23.
Identify some of the advantages of adhesive bond-
ing compared to alternative joining methods.
31.24.
What are some of the limitations of adhesive
bonding?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 20 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
31.1.
In brazing, the base metals melt at temperatures
above 840F (450C) while in soldering they melt at
840F (450C) or below: (a) true or (b) false?
31.2.
The strength of a brazed joint is typically (a) equal
to, (b) stronger than, or (c) weaker than the filler
metal out of which it is made?
31.3.
Scarfing in the brazing of a butt joint involves the
wrapping of a sheath around the two parts to be
joined to contain the molten filler metal during the
heating process: (a) true or (b) false?
31.4.
Best clearances between surfaces in brazing are
which one of the following: (a) 0.0025 to 0.025 mm
(0.0001–0.001 in.), (b) 0.025 to 0.250 mm (0.001–
0.010 in.), (c) 0.250 to 2.50 mm (0.010–0.100 in.), or
(d) 2.5 to 5.0 mm (0.10–0.20 in.)?
764
Chapter 31/Brazing, Soldering, and Adhesive Bonding

31.5.
Which of the following is an advantage of brazing
(three best answers): (a) annealing of the base parts
is a by-product of the process, (b) dissimilar metals
can be joined, (c) less heat and energy required
than fusion welding, (d) metallurgical improve-
ments in the base metals, (e) multiple joints can
be brazed simultaneously, (f) parts can be readily
disassembled, and (g) stronger joint than welding?
31.6.
Which of the following soldering methods are not
used for brazing (two correct answers): (a) dip
soldering, (b) infrared soldering, (c) soldering
iron, (d) torch soldering, and (e) wave soldering?
31.7.
Whichoneofthefollowingisnotafunctionofafluxin
brazing or soldering: (a) chemically etch the surfaces
toincreaseroughnessforbetteradhesionofthefiller
metal, (b) promote wetting of the surfaces, (c) pro-
tect the faying surfaces during the process, or
(d) remove or inhibit formation of oxide films?
31.8.
Which of the following metals are used in solder
alloys
(four
correct
answers):
(a)
aluminum,
(b) antimony, (c) gold, (d) iron, (e) lead, (f) nickel,
(g) silver, (h) tin, and (i) titanium?
31.9.
A soldering gun is capable of injecting molten
solder metal into the joint area: (a) true, or
(b) false?
31.10.
In adhesive bonding, which one of the following is
the term used for the parts that are joined:
(a) adherend, (b) adherent, (c) adhesive, (d) adhi-
bit, or (e) ad infinitum?
31.11.
Weldbonding is an adhesive joining method in
which heat is used to melt the adhesive: (a) true
or (b) false?
31.12.
Adhesively bonded joints are strongest under
which
type
of
stresses
(two
best
answers):
(a) cleavage, (b) peeling, (c) shear, and (d) tension?
31.13.
Roughening of the faying surfaces tends to (a) have
no effect on, (b) increase, or (c) reduce the strength
of an adhesively bonded joint because it increases
the effective area of the joint and promotes me-
chanical interlocking?
Multiple Choice Quiz
765

32
MECHANICAL
ASSEMBLY
Chapter Contents
32.1
Threaded Fasteners
32.1.1
Screws, Bolts, and Nuts
32.1.2
Other Threaded Fasteners and
Related Hardware
32.1.3
Stresses and Strengths in Bolted Joints
32.1.4
Tools and Methods for Threaded
Fasteners
32.2
Rivets and Eyelets
32.3
Assembly Methods Based on Interference Fits
32.4
Other Mechanical Fastening Methods
32.5
Molding Inserts and Integral Fasteners
32.6
Design for Assembly
32.6.1
General Principles of DFA
32.6.2
Design for Automated Assembly
Mechanical assembly uses various methods to mechanically
attach two (ormore)parts together. In most cases, the method
involves the use of discrete hardware components, called
fasteners, that are added to the parts during the assembly
operation. In other cases, the method involves the shaping or
reshaping of one of the components being assembled, and no
separate fasteners are required. Many consumer products are
produced using mechanical assembly: automobiles, large and
small appliances, telephones, furniture, utensils—even wear-
ing apparel is ‘‘assembled’’ by mechanical means. In addition,
industrial products such as airplanes, machine tools, and
construction equipment almost always involve mechanical
assembly.
Mechanical fastening methods can be divided into
two major classes: (1) those that allow for disassembly, and
(2) those that create a permanent joint. Threaded fasteners
(e.g., screws, bolts, and nuts) are examples of the first class,
and rivets illustrate the second. There are good reasons why
mechanical assembly is often preferred over other joining
processes discussed in previous chapters. The main reasons
are (1) ease of assembly and (2) ease of disassembly (for the
fastening methods that permit disassembly).
Mechanical assembly is usually accomplished by un-
skilled workers with a minimum of special tooling and in a
relatively short time. The technology is simple, and the
results are easily inspected. These factors are advantageous
not only in the factory, but also during field installation.
Large products that are too big and heavy to be transported
completely assembled can be shipped in smaller subassem-
blies and then put together at the customer’s site.
Ease of disassembly applies, of course, only to the
mechanical fastening methods that permit disassembly.
Periodic disassembly is required for many products so
that maintenance and repair can be performed; for exam-
ple, to replace worn-out components, make adjustments,
and so forth. Permanent joining techniques such as welding
do not allow for disassembly.
766

For purposes of organization, we divide mechanical assembly methods into the
following categories: (1) threaded fasteners, (2) rivets, (3) interference fits, (4) other
mechanical fastening methods, and (5) molded-in inserts and integral fasteners. These
categories are described in Sections 32.1 through 32.5. In Section 32.6, we discuss an
important issue in assembly: design for assembly. Assembly of electronic products
includes mechanical techniques. However, electronics assembly represents a unique
and specialized field, which is covered in Chapter 35.
32.1
THREADED FASTENERS
Threaded fasteners are discrete hardware components that have external or internal
threads for assembly of parts. In nearly all cases, they permit disassembly. Threaded
fasteners are the most important category of mechanical assembly; the common threaded
fastener types are screws, bolts, and nuts.
32.1.1 SCREWS, BOLTS, AND NUTS
Screws and bolts are threaded fasteners that have external threads. There is a technical
distinction between a screw and a bolt that is often blurred in popular usage. A screw is an
externally threaded fastener that is generally assembled into a blind threaded hole. Some
types, called self-tapping screws, possess geometries that permit them to form or cut the
matching threads in the hole. A bolt is an externally threaded fastener that is inserted
through holes in the parts and ‘‘screwed’’ into a nut on the opposite side. A nut is an
internally threaded fastener having standard threads that match those on bolts of the
same diameter, pitch, and thread form. The typical assemblies that result from the use of
screws and bolts are illustrated in Figure 32.1.
Screws and bolts come in a variety of standard sizes, threads, and shapes. Table 32.1
provides a selection of common threaded fastener sizes in metric units (ISO standard)
and U.S. customary units (ANSI standard). (ISO is the abbreviation for the International
Standards Organization. ANSI is the abbreviation for the American National Standards
Institute.)
The metric specification consistsof thenominalmajor diameter, mm, followed by the
pitch, mm. For example, a specification of 4-0.7 means a 4.0-mm major diameter and a pitch
of 0.7 mm. The U.S. standard specifies either a number designating the major diameter (up
to 0.2160 in) or the nominal major diameter, in, followed by the number of threads per inch.
For example, the specification 1/4-20 indicates a major diameter of 0.25 in and 20 threads
per inch. Both coarse pitch and fine pitch standards are given in our table.
Additional technical data on these and other standard threaded fastener sizes can
be found in design texts and handbooks. The United States has been gradually converting
FIGURE 32.1
Typical
assemblies using: (a) bolt
and nut, and (b) screw.
Section 32.1/Threaded Fasteners
767

to metric thread sizes, which will reduce proliferation of specifications. It should be noted
that differences among threaded fasteners have tooling implications in manufacturing. To
use a particular type of screw or bolt, the assembly worker must have tools that are
designed for that fastener type. For example, there are numerous head styles available on
bolts and screws, the most common of which are shown in Figure 32.2. The geometries of
these heads, as well as the variety of sizes available, require different hand tools (e.g.,
screwdrivers) for the worker. One cannot turn a hex-head bolt with a conventional flat-
blade screwdriver.
Screws come in a greater variety of configurations than bolts, since their functions
vary more. Thetypesinclude machinescrews, capscrews, setscrews, and self-tapping screws.
Machine screws are the generic type, designed for assembly into tapped holes. They are
sometimes assembled to nuts, and in this usage they overlap with bolts. Capscrews have the
same geometry as machine screws but are made of higher strength metals and to closer
tolerances. Setscrews are hardened and designed for assembly functions such as fastening
collars, gears, and pulleys to shafts as shown in Figure 32.3(a). They come in various
geometries, some of which are illustrated in Figure 32.3(b). A self-tapping screw (also
called a tapping screw) is designed to form or cut threads in a preexisting hole into which it
is being turned. Figure 32.4 shows two of the typical thread geometries for self-tapping
screws.
TABLE 32.1
Selected standard threaded fastener sizes in metric and U.S. customary units.
ISO (Metric) Standard
ANSI (U.S.C.S) Standard
Nominal
Diameter, mm
Coarse
Pitch, mm
Fine Pitch,
mm
Nominal
Size
Major
Diameter, in
Threads/in,
Coarse (UNC)a
Threads/in,
Fine (UNF)a
2
0.4
2
0.086
56
64
3
0.5
4
0.112
40
48
4
0.7
6
0.138
32
40
5
0.8
8
0.164
32
36
6
1.0
10
0.190
24
32
8
1.25
12
0.216
24
28
10
1.5
1.25
1/4
0.250
20
28
12
1.75
1.25
3/8
0.375
16
24
16
2.0
1.5
1/2
0.500
13
20
20
2.5
1.5
5/8
0.625
11
18
24
3.0
2.0
3/4
0.750
10
16
30
3.5
2.0
1
1.000
8
12
aUNC, unified coarse; UNF, unified fine (in the ANSI standard).
FIGURE 32.2
Various
head styles available on
screws and bolts. There
are additional head styles
not shown.
768
Chapter 32/Mechanical Assembly

Most threaded fasteners are produced by cold forming (Section 19.2). Some are
machined (Sections 22.2.2, 22.3.2, and 22.7.1), but this is usually a more expensive thread-
making process. A variety of materials are used to make threaded fasteners, steels being
the most common because of their good strength and low cost. These include low and
medium carbon as well as alloy steels. Fasteners made of steel are usually plated or coated
for superficial resistance to corrosion. Nickel, chromium, zinc, black oxide, and similar
coatings are used for this purpose. When corrosion or other factors deny the use of steel
fasteners, other materials must be used, including stainless steels, aluminum alloys, nickel
alloys, and plastics (however, plastics are suited to low stress applications only).
32.1.2 OTHER THREADED FASTENERS AND RELATED HARDWARE
Additional threaded fasteners and related hardware include studs, screw thread inserts,
captive threaded fasteners, and washers. A stud (in the context of fasteners) is an
externally threaded fastener, but without the usual head possessed by a bolt. Studs can be
used to assemble two parts using two nuts as shown in Figure 32.5(a). They are available
with threads on one end or both as in Figure 32.5(b) and (c).
FIGURE 32.3
(a) Assembly of collar to shaft using a setscrew; (b) various setscrew geometries (head types
and points).
FIGURE 32.4
Self-tapping screws:
(a) thread-forming and (b) thread-cutting.
FIGURE 32.5
(a) Stud
and nuts used for assem-
bly. Other stud types:
(b)threadsononeendonly
and (c) double-end stud.
Section 32.1/Threaded Fasteners
769

Screw thread inserts are internally threaded plugs or wire coils made to be inserted
into an unthreaded hole and to accept an externally threaded fastener. They are assembled
into weaker materials (e.g., plastic, wood, and light-weight metals such as magnesium) to
provide strong threads. There are many designs of screw thread inserts, one example of
which is illustrated in Figure 32.6. Upon subsequent assembly of the screw into the insert,
the insert barrel expands into the sides of the hole, securing the assembly.
Captive threaded fasteners are threaded fasteners that have been permanently
preassembled to one of the parts to be joined. Possible preassembly processes include
welding, brazing, press fitting, or cold forming. Two types of captive threaded fasteners
are illustrated in Figure 32.7.
A washer is a hardware component often used with threaded fasteners to ensure
tightness of the mechanical joint; in its simplest form, it is a flat thin ring of sheet metal.
Washers serve various functions. They (1) distribute stresses that might otherwise be
concentrated at the bolt or screw head and nut, (2) provide support for large clearance
FIGURE 32.6
Screw
thread inserts: (a) before
insertion, and (b) after
insertion into hole and
screw is turned into the
insert.
FIGURE 32.7
Captive threaded fasteners: (a) weld nut and (b) riveted nut.
770
Chapter 32/Mechanical Assembly

holes in the assembled parts, (3) increase spring tension, (4) protect part surfaces, (5) seal
the joint, and (6) resist inadvertent unfastening [13]. Three washer types are illustrated in
Figure 32.8.
32.1.3 STRESSES AND STRENGTHS IN BOLTED JOINTS
Typical stresses acting on a bolted or screwed joint include both tensile and shear, as depicted
in Figure 32.9. Shown in the figure is a bolt-and-nut assembly. Once tightened, the bolt is
loaded in tension, and the parts are loaded in compression. In addition, forces may be acting
in opposite directions on the parts, which results in a shear stress on the bolt cross section.
Finally,therearestressesappliedonthethreadsthroughouttheirengagementlengthwiththe
nutinadirectionparalleltotheaxisofthebolt.Theseshearstressescancausestrippingofthe
threads. (This failure can also occur on the internal threads of the nut.)
The strength of a threaded fastener is generally specified by two measures:
(1) tensile strength, which has the traditional definition (Section 3.1.1), and (2) proof
strength. Proof strength is roughly equivalent to yield strength; specifically, it is the
maximum tensile stress to which an externally threaded fastener can be subjected without
permanent deformation. Typical values of tensile and proof strength for steel bolts are
given in Table 32.2.
The problem that can arise during assembly is that the threaded fasteners are
overtightened, causing stresses that exceed the strength of the fastener material. Assuming
a bolt-and-nut assembly as shown in Figure 32.9, failure can occur in one of the following
ways: (1) external threads (e.g., bolt or screw) can strip, (2) internal threads (e.g., nut) can
strip, or (3) the bolt can break because of excessive tensile stresses on its cross-sectional
FIGURE 32.8
Types of
washers: (a) plain (ﬂat)
washers; (b) spring wash-
ers, used to dampen vi-
bration or compensate for
wear; and (c) lockwasher
designed to resist loosen-
ing of the bolt or screw.
FIGURE 32.9
Typical
stresses acting on a
bolted joint.
Section 32.1/Threaded Fasteners
771

area. Thread stripping, failures (1) and (2), is a shear failure and occurs when the length of
engagement is too short (less than about 60% of the nominal bolt diameter). This can be
avoided by providing adequate thread engagement in the fastener design. Tensile failure
(3) is the most common problem. The bolt breaks at about 85% of its rated tensile strength
because of combined tensile and torsion stresses during tightening [2].
The tensile stress to which a bolt is subjected can be calculated as the tensile load
applied to the joint divided by the applicable area:
s ¼ F
As
ð32:1Þ
where s ¼ stress, MPa (lb/in2); F ¼ load, N (lb); and As ¼ tensile stress area, mm2 (in2).
This stress is compared to the bolt strength values listed in Table 32.2. The tensile
stress area for a threaded fastener is the cross-sectional area of the minor diameter. This
area can be calculated directly from one of the following equations [2], depending on
whether the bolt is metric standard or American standard. For the metric standard (ISO),
the formula is
As ¼ p
4 D  0:9382 p
ð
Þ2
ð32:2Þ
where D ¼ nominal size (basic major diameter) of the bolt or screw, mm; and p ¼ thread
pitch, mm.
For the American standard (ANSI), the formula is
As ¼ p
4
D  0:9743
n

2
ð32:3Þ
where D ¼ nominal size (basic major diameter) of the bolt or screw, in; and n ¼ the
number of threads per inch.
32.1.4 TOOLS AND METHODS FOR THREADED FASTENERS
The basic function of the tools and methods for assembling threaded fasteners is to provide
relativerotationbetweentheexternalandinternalthreads, andtoapplysufficienttorque to
securetheassembly.Available tools rangefromsimplehand-heldscrewdriversorwrenches
to powered tools with sophisticated electronic sensors to ensure proper tightening. It is
important that the tool match the screw or bolt and/or the nut in style and size, since there
are so many heads available. Hand tools are usually made with a single point or blade, but
powered tools are generally designed to use interchangeable bits. The powered tools
operate by pneumatic, hydraulic, or electric power.
Whether athreadedfastener servesitsintendedpurposedependstoalargedegreeon
the amount of torque applied to tighten it. Once the bolt or screw (or nut) has been rotated
until it is seated against the part surface, additional tightening will increase the tension in
the fastener (and simultaneously the compression in the parts being held together); and the
TABLE 32.2
Typical values of tensile and proof strengths for
steel bolts and screws, diameters range from 6.4 mm (0.25 in)
to 38 mm (1.50 in).
Proof Stress
Tensile Stress
Material
MPa
lb/in2
MPa
lb/in2
Low/medium C steel
228
33,000
414
60,000
Alloy steel
830
120,000
1030
150,000
Source: [13].
772
Chapter 32/Mechanical Assembly

tightening will be resisted by an increasing torque. Thus, there is a correlation between
the torque required to tighten the fastener and the tensile stress experienced by it. To
achieve the desired function in the assembled joint (e.g., to improve fatigue resistance) and
to lock the threaded fasteners, the product designer will often specify the tension force that
shouldbeapplied.This force iscalled the preload. Thefollowingrelationship canbeusedto
determine the required torque to obtain a specified preload [13]:
T ¼ CtDF
ð32:4Þ
where T ¼ torque, N-mm (lb-in); Ct ¼ the torque coefficient whose value typically ranges
between 0.15 and 0.25, depending on the thread surface conditions; D ¼ nominal bolt or
screw diameter, mm (in); and F ¼ specified preload tension force, N (lb).
Various methods are employed to apply the required torque, including (1) operator
feel—not very accurate, but adequate for most assemblies; (2) torque wrenches, which
measure the torque as the fastener is being turned; (3) stall-motors, which are motorized
wrenches designed to stall when the required torque is reached, and (4) torque-turn
tightening, in which the fastener is initially tightened to a low torque level and then
rotated a specified additional amount (e.g., a quarter turn).
32.2
RIVETS AND EYELETS
Rivets are widely used for achieving a permanent mechanically fastened joint. Riveting is
a fastening method that offers high production rates, simplicity, dependability, and low
cost. Despite these apparent advantages, its applications have declined in recent decades
in favor of threaded fasteners, welding, and adhesive bonding. Riveting is one of the
primary fastening processes in the aircraft and aerospace industries for joining skins to
channels and other structural members.
A rivet is an unthreaded, headed pin used to join two (or more) parts by passing the
pin through holes in the parts and then forming (upsetting) a second head in the pin on
the opposite side. The deforming operation can be performed hot or cold (hot working or
cold working), and by hammering or steady pressing. Once the rivet has been deformed,
it cannot be removed except by breaking one of the heads. Rivets are specified by their
length, diameter, head, and type. Rivet type refers to five basic geometries that affect how
the rivet will be upset to form the second head. The five types are defined in Figure 32.10.
In addition, there are special rivets for special applications.
FIGURE 32.10
Five
basic rivet types, also
shown in assembled
conﬁguration: (a) solid,
(b) tubular, (c) semi-
tubular,(d)bifurcated,and
(e) compression.
Section 32.2/Rivets and Eyelets
773

Rivets are used primarily for lap joints. The clearance hole into which the rivet is
inserted must be close to the diameter of the rivet. If the hole is too small, rivet insertion
will be difficult, thus reducing production rate. If the hole is too large, the rivet will not fill
the hole and may bend or compress during formation of the opposite head. Rivet design
tables are available to specify the optimum hole sizes.
The tooling and methods used in riveting can be divided into the following categories:
(1) impact, in which a pneumatic hammer delivers a succession of blows to upset the rivet;
(2) steady compression, in which the riveting tool applies a continuous squeezing pressure
to upset the rivet; and (3) a combination of impact and compression. Much of the
equipmentusedinrivetingisportableandmanuallyoperated.Automaticdrilling-and-riveting
machines are available for drilling the holes and then inserting and upsetting the rivets.
Eyelets arethin-walled tubular fasteners with a flange on one end, usually made from
sheet metal, as in Figure 32.11(a). They are used to produce a permanent lap joint between
two (or more) flat parts. Eyelets are substituted for rivets in low-stress applications to save
material, weight, and cost. During fastening, the eyelet is inserted through the part holes,
and the straight end is formed over to secure the assembly. The forming operation is called
setting and is performed by opposing tools that hold the eyelet in position and curl the
extended portion of its barrel. Figure 32.11(b) illustrates the sequence for a typical eyelet
design. Applications of this fastening method include automotive subassemblies, electrical
components, toys, and apparel.
32.3
ASSEMBLY METHODS BASED ON INTERFERENCE FITS
Several assembly methods are based on mechanical interference between the two mating
parts being joined. This interference, which occurs either during assembly or after the
parts are joined, holds the parts together. The methods include press fitting, shrink and
expansion fits, snap fits, and retaining rings.
Press Fitting
A press fit assembly is one in which the two components have an
interference fit between them. The typical case is where a pin (e.g., a straight cylindrical
FIGURE 32.11
Fastening with an eyelet:
(a) the eyelet, and
(b) assembly sequence:
(1) inserting the eyelet
through the hole and
(2) setting operation.
774
Chapter 32/Mechanical Assembly

pin) of a certain diameter is pressed into a hole of a slightly smaller diameter. Standard pin
sizesarecommerciallyavailabletoaccomplishavarietyoffunctions,suchas(1)locatingand
locking the components—used to augment threaded fasteners by holding two (or more)
parts in fixed alignment with each other; (2) pivot points, to permit rotation of one
component about the other; and (3) shear pins. Except for (3), the pins are normally
hardened. Shear pins are made of softer metals so as to break under a sudden or severe
shearing load to save the rest of the assembly. Other applications of press fitting include
assembly of collars, gears, pulleys, and similar components onto shafts.
The pressures and stresses in an interference fit can be estimated using several
applicable formulas. If the fit consists of a round solid pin or shaft inside a collar (or similar
component), as depicted in Figure 32.12, and the components are made of the same
material, the radial pressure between the pin and the collar can be determined by [13]:
pf ¼
Ei D2
c  D2
p


DpD2
c
ð32:5Þ
where pf ¼ radial or interference fit pressure, MPa (lb/in2); E ¼ modulus of elasticity for the
material; i ¼ interference between the pin (or shaft) and the collar; that is, the starting
difference between the inside diameter of the collar hole and the outside diameter of the pin,
mm (in); Dc¼ outside diameter of the collar, mm (in); and Dp¼ pin or shaft diameter,
mm (in).
The maximum effective stress occurs in the collar at its inside diameter and can be
calculated as
Max se ¼
2pf D2
c
D2
c  D2
p
ð32:6Þ
where Max se ¼ the maximum effective stress, MPa (lb/in2), and pf is the interference fit
pressure computed from Eq. (32.5).
In situations in which a straight pin or shaft is pressed into the hole of a largepart with
geometry other than that of a collar, we can alter the previous equations by taking the
outside diameter Dc to be infinite, thus reducing the equation for interference pressure to
pf ¼ Ei
Dp
ð32:7Þ
and the corresponding maximum effective stress becomes
Max se ¼ 2pf
ð32:8Þ
FIGURE 32.12
Cross section of a solid pin or
shaft assembled to a collar by interference ﬁt.
Section 32.3/Assembly Methods Based on Interference Fits
775

In most cases, particularly for ductile metals, the maximum effective stress should be
comparedwiththeyieldstrengthofthematerial,applyinganappropriatesafetyfactor,asin
the following:
Max se  Y
SF
ð32:9Þ
where Y ¼ yield strength of the material, and SF is the applicable safety factor.
Various pin geometries are available for interference fits. The basic type is a straight
pin, usually made from cold-drawn carbon steel wire or bar stock, ranging in diameter from
1.6 to 25 mm (1/16 to 1.0 in). They are unground, with chamfered or square ends (chamfered
ends facilitate press fitting). Dowel pins are manufactured to more precise specifications
than straight pins, and can be ground and hardened. They are used to fix the alignment of
assembled componentsindies, fixtures, and machinery. Taper pins possess a taper of 6.4 mm
(0.25 in) per foot and are driven into the hole to establish a fixed relative position between
the parts. Their advantage is that they can readily be driven back out of the hole.
Additional pin geometries are commercially available, including grooved pins—
solid straight pins with three longitudinal grooves in which the metal is raised on either
side of each groove to cause interference when the pin is pressed into a hole; knurled
pins, pins with a knurled pattern that causes interference in the mating hole; and coiled
pins, also called spiral pins, which are made by rolling strip stock into a coiled spring.
Shrink and Expansion Fits
These terms refer to the assembly of two parts that have an
interference fit at room temperature. The typical case is a cylindrical pin or shaft assembled
into a collar. To assemble by shrink fitting, the external part is heated to enlarge it by
thermal expansion,and theinternal part eitherremains at room temperature or is cooled to
contract its size. The parts are then assembled and brought back to room temperature, so
that the external part shrinks, and if previously cooled the internal part expands, to form a
strong interference fit. An expansion fit is when only the internal part is cooled to contract
it for assembly; once inserted into the mating component, it warms to room temperature,
expanding to create the interference assembly. These assembly methods are used to fit
gears, pulleys, sleeves, and other components onto solid and hollow shafts.
Various methods are used to heat and/or cool the workparts. Heating equipment
includes torches, furnaces, electric resistance heaters, and electric induction heaters.
Cooling methods include conventional refrigeration, packing in dry ice, and immersion
in cold liquids, including liquid nitrogen. The resulting change in diameter depends on the
coefficient of thermal expansion and the temperature difference that is applied to the part.
If we assume that the heating or cooling has produced a uniform temperature throughout
the work, then the change in diameter is given by
D2  D1 ¼ a D1 T2  T1
ð
Þ
ð32:10Þ
where a ¼ the coefficient of linear thermal expansion, mm/mm-C (in/in-F) for the material
(see Table 4.1); T2 ¼ the temperature to which the parts have been heated or cooled, C (F);
T1 ¼ starting ambient temperature; D2 ¼ diameter of the part at T2, mm (in); and D1 ¼
diameter of the part at T1.
Equations (32.5) through (32.9) for computing interference pressures and effective
stresses can be used to determine the corresponding values for shrink and expansion fits.
Snap Fits and Retaining Rings
Snap fits are a variation of interference fits. A snap fit
involves joining two parts in which the mating elements possess a temporary interference
while being pressed together, but once assembled they interlock to maintain the assembly.
A typical example is shown in Figure 32.13: as the parts are pressed together, the mating
elements elastically deform to accommodate the interference, subsequently allowing the
776
Chapter 32/Mechanical Assembly

parts to snap together; once in position, the elements become connected mechanically so
that they cannot easily be disassembled. The parts are usually designed so that a slight
interference exists after assembly.
Advantages of snap fit assembly include (1) the parts can be designed with self-
aligning features, (2) no special tooling is required, and (3) assembly can be accomplished
very quickly. Snap fitting was originally conceived as a method that would be ideally suited
to industrial robotics applications; however, it is no surprise that assembly techniques that
are easier for robots are also easier for human assembly workers.
A retaining ring, also known as a snap ring, is a fastener that snaps into a circumfer-
ential groove on a shaft or tube to form a shoulder, as in Figure 32.14. The assembly can be
used to locate or restrict the movement of parts mounted on the shaft. Retaining rings are
available for both external (shaft) and internal (bore) applications. They are made from
either sheet metal or wire stock, heat treated for hardness and stiffness. To assemble a
retaining ring, a special pliers tool is used to elastically deform the ring so that it fits over the
shaft (or into the bore) and then is released into the groove.
32.4
OTHER MECHANICAL FASTENING METHODS
In addition to the mechanical assembly techniques discussed in the preceding, there are
several additional methods that involve the use of fasteners. These include stitching, stapling,
sewing, and cotter pins.
Stitching, Stapling, and Sewing
Industrial stitching and stapling are similar operations
involving the use of U-shaped metal fasteners. Stitching is a fastening operation in which a
stitching machine is used to form the U-shaped stitches one at a time from steel wire and
immediately drive them through the two parts to be joined. Figure 32.15 illustrates several
FIGURE 32.13
Snap ﬁt
assembly, showing cross
sections of two mating
parts: (1) before assembly
and (2) parts snapped
together.
FIGURE 32.14
Retaining ring
assembled into a groove on a shaft.
Section 32.4/Other Mechanical Fastening Methods
777

types of wire stitches. The parts to be joined must be relatively thin, consistent with the stitch
size, and the assembly can involve various combinations of metal and nonmetal materials.
Applications of industrial stitching include light sheetmetal assembly, metal hinges, electrical
connections, magazine binding, corrugated boxes, and final product packaging. Conditions
that favor stitching in these applications are (1) high-speed operation, (2) elimination of the
need for prefabricated holes in the parts, and (3) desirability of using fasteners that encircle
the parts.
In stapling, preformed U-shaped staples are punched through the two parts to be
attached. Thestaples aresuppliedinconvenientstrips. Theindividual staplesarelightlystuck
togethertoformthestrip,buttheycanbeseparatedbythestaplingtoolfordriving.Thestaples
comewithvariouspointstylestofacilitatetheirentryintothework.Staplesareusuallyapplied
bymeansofportablepneumaticguns,intowhichstripscontainingseveralhundredstaplescan
be loaded. Applications of industrial stapling include: furniture and upholstery, assembly of
car seats, and various light-gage sheetmetal and plastic assembly jobs.
Sewing is a common joining method for soft, flexible parts such as cloth and leather.
The method involves the use of a long thread or cord interwoven with the parts so as to
produce a continuous seam between them. The process is widely used in the needle trades
industry for assembling garments.
Cotter Pins
Cotter pins are fasteners formed from half-round wire into a single two-stem
pin, asinFigure 32.16.They vary indiameter, rangingbetween 0.8 mm(0.031 in) and 19mm
(3/4 in), and in point style, several of which are shown in the figure. Cotter pins are inserted
into holes in the mating parts and their legs are split to lock the assembly. They are used to
secure parts onto shafts and similar applications.
32.5
MOLDING INSERTS AND INTEGRAL FASTENERS
These assembly methods form a permanent joint between parts by shaping or reshaping
one of the components through a manufacturing process such as casting, molding, or
sheet-metal forming.
FIGURE 32.15
Common types of wire
stitches: (a) unclinched,
(b) standard loop,
(c) bypass loop, and
(d) ﬂat clinch.
FIGURE 32.16
Cotter
pins: (a) offset head,
standard point;
(b) symmetric head,
hammerlock point;
(c) square point;
(d) mitered point; and
(e) chisel point.
778
Chapter 32/Mechanical Assembly

Inserts in Moldings and Castings
This method involves the placement of a component
into a mold before plastic molding or metal casting, so that it becomes a permanent and
integral part of the molding or casting. Inserting a separate component is preferable to
molding or casting its shape if the superior properties (e.g., strength) of the insert material
are required, or the geometry achieved through the use of the insert is too complex or
intricate to incorporate into the mold. Examples of inserts in molded or cast parts include
internally threaded bushings and nuts, externally threaded studs, bearings, and electrical
contacts. Some of these are illustrated in Figure 32.17. Internally threaded inserts must be
placed into the mold with threaded pins to prevent the molding material from flowing into
the threaded hole.
Placing inserts into a mold has certain disadvantages in production: (1) design of the
mold becomes more complicated; (2) handling and placing the insert into the cavity takes
time that reduces production rate; and (3) inserts introduce a foreign material into the
casting or molding, and in the event of a defect, the cast metal or plastic cannot be easily
reclaimed and recycled. Despite these disadvantages, use of inserts is often the most
functional design and least-cost production method.
Integral Fasteners
Integral fasteners involve deformation of component parts so they
interlock and create a mechanically fastened joint. This assembly method is most common
for sheetmetal parts. The possibilities, Figure 32.18, include (a) lanced tabs to attach wires
or shafts to sheet-metal parts; (b) embossed protrusions, in which bosses are formed in one
part and flattened over the mating assembled part; (c) seaming, where the edges of two
separate sheet-metal parts or the opposite edges of the same part are bent over to form the
fastening seam—the metal must be ductile in order for the bending to be feasible;
(d) beading, in which a tube-shaped part is attached to a smaller shaft (or other round
part) by deforming the outer diameter inward to cause an interference around the entire
circumference; and (e) dimpling—forming of simple round indentations in an outer part to
retain an inner part.
Crimping, in which the edges of one part are deformed over a mating component, is
another example of integral assembly. A common example involves squeezing the barrel
of an electrical terminal onto a wire (Section 35.5.1).
32.6
DESIGN FOR ASSEMBLY
Design for assembly (DFA) has received much attention in recent years because assembly
operations constitute a high labor cost for many manufacturing companies. The key to
successful design for assembly can be simply stated [3]: (1) design the product with as few
parts as possible, and (2) design the remaining parts so they are easy to assemble. The cost
of assembly is determined largely during product design, because that is when the number
FIGURE 32.17
Examples of molded-in
inserts: (a) threaded
bushing and (b) threaded
stud.
Section 32.6/Design for Assembly
779

of separate components in the product is determined, and decisions are made about how
these components will be assembled. Once these decisions have been made, there is little
that can be done in manufacturing to influence assembly costs (except, of course, to
manage the operations well).
In this section we consider some of the principles that can be applied during
product design to facilitate assembly. Most of the principles have been developed in the
context of mechanical assembly, although some of them apply to the other assembly and
joining processes. Much of the research in design for assembly has been motivated by the
increasing use of automated assembly systems in industry. Accordingly, our discussion is
divided into two sections, the first dealing with general principles of DFA, and the second
concerned specifically with design for automated assembly.
FIGURE 32.18
Integral fasteners: (a) lanced tabs to attach wires or shafts to sheetmetal,
(b) embossed protrusions, similar to riveting, (c) single-lock seaming, (d) beading, and
(e) dimpling. Numbers in parentheses indicate sequence in (b), (c), and (d).
780
Chapter 32/Mechanical Assembly

32.6.1 GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF DFA
Most of the general principles apply to both manual and automated assembly. Their goal
is to achieve the required design function by the simplest and lowest cost means. The
following recommendations have been compiled from [1], [3], [4], and [6]:

Use the fewest number of parts possible to reduce the amount of assembly required.
This principle is implemented by combining functions within the same part that might
otherwise be accomplished by separate components (e.g., using a plastic molded part
instead of an assembly of sheet metal parts).

Reduce the number of threaded fasteners required. Insteadofusingseparatethreaded
fasteners, design the component to utilize snap fits, retaining rings, integral fasteners,
andsimilarfasteningmechanismsthatcanbeaccomplishedmorerapidly.Usethreaded
fasteners only where justified (e.g., where disassembly or adjustment is required).

Standardize fasteners. This is intended to reduce the number of sizes and styles of
fasteners required in the product. Ordering and inventory problems are reduced, the
assembly worker does not have to distinguish between so many separate fasteners,
the workstation is simplified, and the variety of separate fastening tools is reduced.

Reduce parts orientation difficulties. Orientation problems are generally reduced by
designing a part to be symmetrical and minimizing the number of asymmetric features.
Thisallows easier handling andinsertionduringassembly. This principle isillustratedin
Figure 32.19.

Avoid parts that tangle. Certain part configurations are more likely to become
entangled in parts bins, frustrating assembly workers or jamming automatic feeders.
Parts with hooks, holes, slots, and curls exhibit more of this tendency than parts without
these features. See Figure 32.20.
FIGURE 32.19
Symmetrical parts are
generally easier to insert
and assemble: (a) only
one rotational orientation
possible for insertion;
(b) two possible orienta-
tions; (c) four possible
orientations; and (d) inﬁ-
nite rotational
orientations.
FIGURE 32.20
(a) Parts
that tend to tangle and
(b)partsdesignedtoavoid
tangling.
Section 32.6/Design for Assembly
781

32.6.2 DESIGN FOR AUTOMATED ASSEMBLY
Methods suitable for manual assembly are not necessarily the best methods for automated
assembly. Some assembly operations readily performed by a human worker are quite
difficulttoautomate(e.g.,assemblyusingboltsandnuts).Toautomatetheassemblyprocess,
parts fastening methods must be specified during product design that lend themselves to
machine insertion and joining techniques and do not require the senses, dexterity, and
intelligence of human assembly workers. Following are some recommendations and
principles that can be applied in product design to facilitate automated assembly [6], [10]:

Use modularity in product design. Increasing the number of separate tasks that are
accomplished by an automated assembly system will reduce the reliability of the system.
To alleviate the reliability problem, Riley [10] suggests that the design of the product be
modular in which each module or subassembly has a maximum of 12 or 13 parts to be
produced on a singleassembly system. Also, the subassembly should be designed around
a base part to which other components are added.

Reduce the need for multiple components to be handled at once. The preferred
practice forautomatedassemblyistoseparate the operationsatdifferent stations rather
thantosimultaneouslyhandleand fasten multiplecomponentsat thesame workstation.

Limit the required directions of access. This means that the number of directions in
which new components are added to the existing subassembly should be minimized.
Ideally, all components should be added vertically from above, if possible.

High-quality components. High performance of an automated assembly system
requires that consistently good-quality components are added at each workstation.
Poor quality components cause jams in feeding and assembly mechanisms that result in
downtime.

Use of snap fit assembly. This eliminates the need for threaded fasteners; assembly is
by simple insertion, usually from above. It requires that the parts be designed with
special positive and negative features to facilitate insertion and fastening.
REFERENCES
[1] Andreasen, M., Kahler, S., and Lund, T. Design for
Assembly. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1988.
[2] Blake, A. What Every Engineer Should Know
About Threaded Fasteners. Marcel Dekker, New
York, 1986.
[3] Boothroyd, G., Dewhurst, P., and Knight, W. Product
Design for Manufacture and Assembly. 2nd ed.
CRC Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2001.
[4] Bralla, J. G. (Editor-in-Chief). Design for Manufac-
turability Handbook, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1998.
[5] Dewhurst, P., and Boothroyd, G.‘‘Design for Assem-
bly in Action,’’ Assembly Engineering, January
1987, pp. 64–68.
[6] Groover, M. P. Automation, Production Systems, and
Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 3rd ed. Pearson
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2008.
[7] Groover, M. P., Weiss, M., Nagel, R. N., and Odrey,
N. G. Industrial Robotics: Technology, Program-
ming, and Applications. McGraw-Hill, New York,
1986.
[8] Nof, S. Y., Wilhelm, W. E., and Warnecke, H-J.
Industrial
Assembly.
Chapman
&
Hall,
New
York, 1997.
[9] Parmley, R. O. (ed.). Standard Handbook of Fas-
tening and Joining, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York,
1997.
[10] Riley, F. J. Assembly Automation, A. Management
Handbook, 2nd ed. Industrial Press, New York,
1999.
[11] Speck, J. A. Mechanical Fastening, Joining, and
Assembly. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1997.
[12] Whitney, D. E. Mechanical Assemblies. Oxford
University Press, New York, 2004.
[13] Wick, C., and Veilleux, R. F. (eds.). Tool and Man-
ufacturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol. IV,
Quality Control and Assembly. Society of Manu-
facturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1987.
782
Chapter 32/Mechanical Assembly

REVIEW QUESTIONS
32.1.
How does mechanical assembly differ from the
other methods of assembly discussed in previous
chapters (e.g., welding, brazing, etc.)?
32.2.
What are some of the reasons why assemblies must
be sometimes disassembled?
32.3.
What is the technical difference between a screw
and a bolt?
32.4.
What is a stud (in the context of threaded fasteners)?
32.5.
What is torque-turn tightening?
32.6.
Define proof strength as the term applies in
threaded fasteners.
32.7.
What are the three ways in which a threaded
fastener can fail during tightening?
32.8.
What is a rivet?
32.9.
What is the difference between a shrink fit and
expansion fit in assembly?
32.10.
What are the advantages of snap fitting?
32.11.
What is the difference between industrial stitching
and stapling?
32.12.
What are integral fasteners?
32.13.
Identify some of the general principles and guide-
lines for design for assembly.
32.14.
Identify some of the general principles and guide-
lines that apply specifically to automated assembly.
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 16 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
32.1.
Which of the following are reasons why mechanical
assembly is often preferred over other forming
processes (two best answers): (a) ease of assembly,
(b) ease of disassembly, (c) economies of scale,
(d) involves melting of the base parts, (e) no
heat affected zone in the base parts, and (f) spe-
cialization of labor?
32.2.
Most externally threaded fasteners are produced
by
which
one
of
the
following
processes:
(a) cutting the threads, (b) milling the threads,
(c) tapping, (d) thread rolling, or (e) turning the
threads?
32.3.
Which of the following methods and tools are used
for applying the required torque to achieve a
desired preload of a threaded fastener (three
best answers): (a) arbor press, (b) preload method,
(c) sense of feel by a human operator, (d) snap fit,
(e) stall-motor wrenches, (f) torque wrench, and
(g) use of lockwashers?
32.4.
Which of the following are the common ways in
which threaded fasteners fail during tightening
(two best answers): (a) excessive compressive
stresses on the head of the fastener because of
force applied by the tightening tool, (b) excessive
compressive stresses on the shank of the fastener,
(c) excessive shear stresses on the shank of the
fastener, (d) excessive tensile stresses on the head
of the fastener because of force applied by the
tightening tool, (e) excessive tensile stresses on
the shank of the fastener, and (f) stripping of the
internal or external threads?
32.5.
The difference between a shrink fit and an expan-
sion fit is that in a shrink fit the internal part is
cooled to a sufficiently low temperature to reduce
its size for assembly, whereas in an expansion fit,
the external part is heated sufficiently to increase
its size for assembly: (a) true or (b) false?
32.6.
Advantages of snap fit assembly include which of
the following (three best answers): (a) components
can be designed with features to facilitate part
mating, (b) ease of disassembly, (c) no heat affected
zone, (d) no special tools are required, (e) parts can
be assembled quickly, and (f) stronger joint than
with most other assembly methods?
32.7.
The difference between industrial stitching and
stapling is that the U-shaped fasteners are formed
during the stitching process while in stapling the
fasteners are preformed: (a) true or (b) false?
32.8.
From the standpoint of assembly cost, it is more
desirable to use many small threaded fasteners
rather than few large ones to distribute the stresses
more uniformly: (a) true or (b) false?
32.9.
Which of the following are considered good prod-
uct design rules for automated assembly (two best
answers): (a) design the assembly with the fewest
number of components possible, (b) design the
product using bolts and nuts to allow for dis-
assembly, (c) design with many different fastener
Multiple Choice Quiz
783

types to maximize design flexibility, (d) design
parts with asymmetric features to mate with other
parts having corresponding (but reverse) features,
and (e) limit the required directions of access when
adding components to a base part?
PROBLEMS
Threaded Fasteners
32.1.
A 5-mm-diameter bolt is to be tightened to pro-
duce a preload ¼ 250 N. If the torque coefficient ¼
0.23, determine the torque that should be applied.
32.2.
A 3/8-24 UNF nut and bolt (3/8 in nominal diame-
ter, 24 threads/in) are inserted through a hole in
two stacked steel plates. They are tightened so the
plates are clamped together with a force of 1000 lb.
The torque coefficient is 0.20. (a) What is the
torque required to tighten them? (b) What is the
resulting stress in the bolt?
32.3.
An alloy steel Metric 10  1.5 screw (10-mm diame-
ter, pitch p ¼ 1.5 mm) is to be turned into a threaded
hole and tightened to one/half of its proof strength.
According to Table 32.2, the proof strength ¼
830 MPa. Determine the maximum torque that
should be used if the torque coefficient ¼ 0.18.
32.4.
A Metric 16  2 bolt (16-mm diameter, 2-mm
pitch) is subjected to a torque of 15 N-m during
tightening. If the torque coefficient is 0.24, deter-
mine the tensile stress on the bolt.
32.5.
A 1/2-13 screw is to be preloaded to a tension
force ¼ 1000 lb. Torque coefficient ¼ 0.22. Deter-
mine the torque that should be used to tighten the
bolt.
32.6.
Threaded metric fasteners are available in several
systems, two of which are coarse and fine (Table
32.1). Finer threads are not cut as deep and as a
result have a larger tensile stress area for the same
nominal diameter. (a) Determine the maximum
preload that can be safely achieved for coarse pitch
and fine pitch threads for a 12-mm bolt. (b) Deter-
mine the percent increase in preload of fine
threads compared with course threads.
Coarse
pitch ¼ 1.75 mm and fine pitch ¼ 1.25 mm. Assume
the proof strength for both bolts is 600 MPa.
32.7.
A torque wrench is used on a 3/4-10 UNC bolt in an
automobile final assembly plant. A torque of 70 ft-lb
isgeneratedbythe wrench.Ifthetorquecoefficient¼
0.17, determine the tensile stress in the bolt.
32.8.
The designer has specified that a 3/8-16 UNC low-
carbon bolt (3/8 in nominal diameter, 16 threads/
in) in a certain application should be stressed to its
proof stress of 33,000 lb/in2 (see Table 32.2). De-
termine the maximum torque that should be used if
C ¼ 0.25.
32.9.
A 300-mm-long wrench is used to tighten a Metric
20  2.5 bolt. The proof strength of the bolt for the
particular alloy is 380 MPa. The torque coefficient
is 0.21. Determine the maximum force that can be
applied to the end of the wrench so that the bolt
does not permanently deform.
32.10.
A 1-8 UNC low carbon steel bolt (diameter ¼ 1.0 in,
8 threads/in) is currently planned for a certain ap-
plication. It is to be preloaded to 75% of its proof
strength, which is 33,000 lb/in2 (Table 32.2). How-
ever, this bolt is too large for the size of the compo-
nents involved, and a higher strength but smaller
bolt wouldbepreferable. Determine (a) the smallest
nominal size of an alloy steel bolt (proof strength ¼
120,000 lb/in2) that could be used to achieve the
same preload from the following standard UNC
sizes used by the company: 1/4-20, 5/16-18, 3/8-16,
1/2-13, 5/8-11, or 3/4-10; and (b) compare the torque
required to obtain the preload for the original 1-in
bolt and the alloy steel bolt selected in part (a) if the
torque coefficient in both cases ¼ 0.20.
Interference Fits
32.1.
A dowel pin made of steel (elastic modulus ¼
209,000 MPa) is to be press fitted into a steel
collar.
The
pin
has
a
nominal
diameter
of
16 mm, and the collar has an outside diameter of
27 mm. (a) Compute the radial pressure and the
maximum effective stress if the interference be-
tween the shaft OD and the collar ID is 0.03 mm.
(b) Determine the effect of increasing the outside
diameter of the collar to 39 mm on the radial
pressure and the maximum effective stress.
32.2.
A pin made of alloy steel is press-fitted into a hole
machined in the base of a large machine. The hole
has a diameter of 2.497 in. The pin has a diameter
of 2.500 in. The base of the machine is 4 ft  8 ft.
The base and pin have a modulus of elasticity of
30  106 lb/in2, a yield strength of 85,000 lb/in2, and
a tensile strength of 120,000 lb/in2. Determine
(a) the radial pressure between the pin and the
base and (b) the maximum effective stress in the
interface.
784
Chapter 32/Mechanical Assembly

32.3.
A gear made of aluminum (modulus of elasticity ¼
69,000 MPa) is press fitted onto an aluminum shaft.
The gear has a diameter of 55 mm at the base of its
teeth. The nominal internal diameter of the gear ¼
30 mm and the interference ¼ 0.10 mm. Compute:
(a) the radial pressure between the shaft and the
gear, and (b) the maximum effective stress in the
gear at its inside diameter.
32.4.
A steel collar is press fitted onto a steel shaft. The
modulus of elasticity of steel is 30  106 lb/in2. The
collar has an internal diameter of 2.498 in and
the shaft has an outside diameter ¼ 2.500 in. The
outside diameter of the collar is 4.000 in. Determine
the radial (interference) pressure on the assembly,
and (b) the maximum effective stress in the collar at
its inside diameter.
32.5.
The yield strength of a certain metal ¼ 50,000 lb/in2
and its modulus of elasticity ¼ 22  106 lb/in2. It is
to be used for the outer ring of a press-fit assembly
with a mating shaft made of the same metal. The
nominal inside diameter of the ring is 1.000 in and
its outside diameter ¼ 2.500 in. Using a safety
factor ¼ 2.0, determine the maximum interference
that should be used with this assembly.
32.6.
A shaft made of aluminum is 40.0 mm in diameter
at room temperature (21C). Its coefficient of
thermal expansion ¼ 24.8  106 mm/mm per C.
If it must be reduced in size by 0.20 mm in order to
be expansion fitted into a hole, determine the
temperature to which the shaft must be cooled.
32.7.
A steel ring has an inside diameter ¼ 30 mm and an
outside diameter ¼ 50 mm at room temperature
(21C). If the coefficient of thermal expansion of
steel ¼ 12.1  106 mm/mm per C, determine the
inside diameter of the ring when heated to 500C.
32.8.
A steel collar is to be heated from room tempera-
ture (70F) to 700F. Its inside diameter ¼ 1.000 in,
and its outside diameter ¼ 1.625 in. If the co-
efficient of thermal expansion of the steel is ¼
6.7  106 in/in per F, determine the increase in
the inside diameter of the collar.
32.9.
A bearing for the output shaft of a 200 hp motor is
to be heated to expand it enough to press on the
shaft. At 70F the bearing has an inside diameter of
4.000 in and an outside diameter of 7.000 in. The
shaft has an outside diameter of 4.004 in. The
modulus of elasticity for the shaft and bearing is
30  106 lb/in2 and the coefficient of thermal
expansion is 6.7  106 in/in per F. (a) At what
temperature will the bearing have 0.005 of clear-
ance to fit over the shaft? (b) After it is assembled
and cooled, what is the radial pressure between the
bearing and shaft? (c) Determine the maximum
effective stress in the bearing.
32.10.
A steel collar whose outside diameter ¼ 3.000 in at
room temperature is to be shrink fitted onto a steel
shaft by heating it to an elevated temperature while
the shaft remains at room temperature. The shaft
diameter ¼ 1.500 in. For ease of assembly when the
collarisheatedtoanelevatedtemperatureof1000F,
the clearancebetweenthe shaftandthe collar istobe
0.007 in. Determine (a) the initial inside diameter of
the collar at room temperature so that this clearance
is satisfied, (b) the radial pressure and (c) maximum
effective stress on the resulting interference fit at
room temperature (70F). For steel, the elastic mod-
ulus ¼ 30,000,000 lb/in2 and coefficient of thermal
expansion ¼ 6.7 106 in/in per F.
32.11.
A pin is to be inserted into a collar using an expan-
sion fit. Properties of the pin and collar metal are:
coefficient ofthermal expansionis12.3  106 m/m/
C, yield strength is 400 MPa, and modulus of elas-
ticity is 209 GPa. At room temperature (20C), the
outer and inner diameters of the collar ¼ 95.00 mm
and 60.00 mm, respectively, and the pin has a diame-
ter ¼ 60.03 mm. The pin is to be reduced in size for
assembly into the collar by cooling to a sufficiently
low temperature that there isa clearance of 0.06 mm.
(a) What is the temperature to which the pin must
be cooled for assembly? (b) What is the radial
pressure at room temperature after assembly? (c)
What is the safety factor in the resulting assembly?
Problems
785

Part IX
Special Processing
and Assembly
Technologies
33
RAPID PROTOTYPING
Chapter Contents
33.1
Fundamentals of Rapid Prototyping
33.2
Rapid Prototyping Technologies
33.2.1
Liquid-Based Rapid Prototyping
Systems
33.2.2
Solid-Based Rapid Prototyping
Systems
33.2.3
Powder-Based Rapid Prototyping
Systems
33.3
Application Issues in Rapid Prototyping
In this part of the book, we discuss a collection of process-
ing and assembly technologies that do not fit neatly into our
classification scheme in Figure 1.4. They are technologies
that have been adapted from the conventional manufactur-
ing and assembly operations or developed from scratch to
serve the special functions or needs of designers and
manufacturers. Rapid prototyping, covered in the present
chapter, is a collection of processes used to fabricate a
model, part, or tool in minimum possible time. Chapters 34
and 35 discuss technologies used in electronics manufactur-
ing, an activity of significant economic importance. Chap-
ter 34 covers integrated circuit processing, and Chapter 35
covers electronics assembly and packaging. Chapters 36
and 37 survey some of the technologies used to produce
very small parts and products. Chapter 36 describes micro-
fabrication technologies used to produce items measured in
microns (106 m), whereas Chapter 37 discusses nano-
fabrication technologies for producing items measured in
nanometers (109 m). The processes covered in these five
chapters are relatively new. Rapid prototyping dates from
about 1988. Modern electronics production techniques
date from around 1960 (Historical Note 34.1), although
dramatic advances have been made in electronics process-
ing since that time. The microfabrication technologies
discussed in Chapter 36 followed soon after electronics
786

processing. Finally, the nanofabrication technologies represent an emerging field today
that dates from the 1990s.
Rapid prototyping (RP) is a family of fabrication methods to make engineering
prototypes in minimum possible lead times based on a computer-aided design (CAD)
model of the item. The traditional method of fabricating a prototype part is machining,
which can require significant lead times—up to several weeks, sometimes longer,
depending on part complexity, difficulty in ordering materials, and scheduling production
equipment. A number of rapid prototyping techniques are now available that allow a part
to be produced in hours or days rather than weeks, given that a computer model of the
part has been generated on a CAD system.
33.1
FUNDAMENTALS OF RAPID PROTOTYPING
The special need that motivates the variety of rapid prototyping technologies arises because
product designers would like to have a physical model of a new part or product design rather
than a computer model or line drawing. The creation of a prototype is an integral step in the
design procedure. A virtual prototype, which is a computer model of the part design on a
CAD system, may not be adequate for the designer to visualize the part. It certainly is not
sufficient to conduct real physical tests on the part, although it is possible to perform
simulated tests by finite element analysis or other methods. Using one of the available RP
technologies, a solid physical part can be created in a relatively short time (hours if the
company possesses the RP equipment or days if the part fabrication must be contracted to an
outside firm specializing in RP). The designer can therefore visually examine and physically
feel thepartandbegintoperformtestsandexperimentstoassessitsmeritsandshortcomings.
Available rapidprototypingtechnologiescan bedividedintotwobasiccategories:(1)
material removal processes and (2) material addition processes. The material removal
RP alternative involves machining (Chapter 22), primarily milling and drilling, using a
dedicated Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machine that is available to the design
department on short notice. To use CNC, a part program must be prepared from the CAD
model (Section 38.3.3). The starting material is often a solid block of wax, which is very
easy to machine, and the part and chips can be melted and resolidified for reuse when the
current prototype is no longer needed. Other starting materials can also be used, such as
wood, plastics, or metals (e.g., a machinable grade of aluminum or brass). The CNC
machines used for rapid prototyping are often small, and the terms desktop milling or
desktop machining are sometimes used for this technology. Maximum starting block sizes
in desktop machining are typically 180 mm (7 in) in the x-direction, 150 mm (6 in) in the
y-direction, and 150 mm (6 in) in the z-direction [2].
The principalemphasis inthis chapter is on material-addition RP technologies, all of
which work by adding layers of material one at a time to build the solid part from bottom to
top. Starting materials include (1) liquid monomers that are cured layer by layer into solid
polymers, (2) powders that are aggregated and bonded layer by layer, and (3) solid sheets
that are laminated to create the solid part. In addition to starting material, what distin-
guishes the various material addition RP technologies is the method of building and adding
the layers to create the solid part. Some techniques use lasers to solidify the starting
material, another deposits a soft plastic filament in the outline of each layer, while others
bondsolidlayerstogether. There isa correlationbetweenthestartingmaterialandthepart-
building techniques, as we shall see in our discussion of RP technologies.
The common approach to prepare the control instructions (part program) in all of
the current material addition RP techniques involves the following steps [6]:
1. Geometric modeling. This consists of modeling the component on a CAD system to
define its enclosed volume. Solid modeling is the preferred technique because it
Section 33.1/Fundamentals of Rapid Prototyping
787

provides a complete and unambiguous mathematical representation of the geome-
try. For rapid prototyping, the important issue is to distinguish the interior (mass) of
the part from its exterior, and solid modeling provides for this distinction.
2. Tessellation of the geometric model1. In this step, the CAD model is converted into a
format that approximates its surfaces by triangles or polygons, with their vertices
arranged to distinguish the object’s interior from its exterior. The common tessellation
format used in rapid prototyping is STL, which has become the de facto standard input
format for nearly all RP systems.
3. Slicing of the model into layers. In this step, the model in STL2 file format is sliced
into closely spaced parallel horizontal layers. Conversion of a solid model into layers is
illustrated in Figure 33.1. These layers are subsequently used by the RP system to
construct the physical model. By convention, the layers are formed in the x-y plane
orientation, and the layering procedure occurs in the z-axis direction. For each layer, a
curing path is generated, called the STI file, which is the path that will be followed by
the RP system to cure (or otherwise solidify) the layer.
As our brief overview indicates, there are several different technologies used for material
addition rapid prototyping. This heterogeneity has spawned several alternative names for
rapid prototyping, including layer manufacturing, direct CAD manufacturing, and solid
freeform fabrication. The term rapid prototyping and manufacturing (RPM) is also
being used more frequently to indicate that the RP technologies can be applied to make
production parts and production tooling, not just prototypes.
33.2
RAPID PROTOTYPING TECHNOLOGIES
The 25 or so RP techniques currently developed can be classified in various ways. Let us
adopt a classification system recommended in [6], which is consistent with the way we
classify part-shaping processes in this book (after all, rapid prototyping is a part-shaping
Handle
Cup
Slicing
plane
Handlebar
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 33.1
Conversion of a solid model of an object into layers (only one layer is shown).
1More generally, the term tessellation refers to the laying out or creation of a mosaic, such as one
consisting of small colored tiles affixed to a surface for decoration.
2STL stands for STereoLithography, one of the primary technologies used for rapid prototyping,
developed by 3D Systems Inc.
788
Chapter 33/Rapid Prototyping

process). The classification method is based on the form of the starting material in the RP
process: (1) liquid-based, (2) solid-based, and (3) powder-based. We discuss examples of
each class in the following three sections.
33.2.1 LIQUID-BASED RAPID PROTOTYPING SYSTEMS
The starting material in these technologies is a liquid. About a dozen RP technologies are
in this category, of which we have selected the following to describe: (1) stereolithog-
raphy, (2) solid ground curing, and (3) droplet deposition manufacturing.
Stereolithography
This was the first material addition RP technology, dating from
about 1988 and introduced by 3D Systems, Inc. based on the work of inventor Charles Hull.
There are more installations of stereolithography than any other RP technology. Stereo-
lithography (STL) is a process for fabricating a solid plastic part out of a photosensitive
liquidpolymerusing a directed laserbeamtosolidifythe polymer. Thegeneral setupfor the
process is illustrated in Figure 33.2. Part fabrication is accomplished as a series of layers, in
which one layer is added onto the previous layer to gradually build the desired three-
dimensional geometry. A part fabricated by STL is illustrated in Figure 33.3.
The stereolithography apparatus consists of (1) a platform that can be moved
vertically inside a vessel containing the photosensitive polymer, and (2) a laser whose
beam can be controlled in the x-y direction. At the start of the process, the platform is
positioned vertically near the surface of the liquid photopolymer, and a laser beam is
directed through a curing path that comprises an area corresponding to the base (bottom
layer) of the part. This and subsequent curing paths are defined by the STI file (step 3 in
preparing the control instructions described in the preceding). The action of the laser is to
harden (cure) the photosensitive polymer where the beam strikes the liquid, forming a solid
layerofplasticthatadherestotheplatform.Whentheinitiallayeriscompleted,theplatform
is lowered by a distance equal to the layer thickness, and a second layer is formed on top of
the first by the laser, and so on. Before each new layer is cured, a wiper blade is passed over
the viscous liquid resin to ensure that its level is the same throughout the surface. Each layer
consists of its own area shape, so that the succession of layers, one on top of the previous,
creates the solid part shape. Each layer is 0.076 to 0.50 mm (0.003 to 0.020 in) thick. Thinner
layers provide better resolution and allow more intricate part shapes; but processing time is
FIGURE 33.2
Stereolithography: (1) at
the start of the process, in
which the initial layer is
added to the platform;
and (2) after several layers
have been added so
that the part geometry
gradually takes form.
Elevator
y
y
x
x
x–y Positioning
system
Laser
Laser beam
Part base
Platform
Container
(1)
(2)
z
z
Leadscrew
for elevator
Part being
built in layers
Liquid
polymer
Section 33.2/Rapid Prototyping Technologies
789

greater. Photopolymers are typically acrylic [13], although use of epoxy for STL has also
beenreported [10]. Thestartingmaterialsare liquidmonomers. Polymerizationoccurs upon
exposure to ultraviolet light produced by helium-cadmium or argon ion lasers. Scan speeds
of STL lasers typically range between 500 and 2500 mm/s.
The time requiredtobuildthepart bythislayeringprocess rangesfrom 1hourfor small
parts of simple geometry up to several dozen hours for complex parts. Other factors that
affect cycle time are scan speed and layer thickness. The part build time in stereolithography
canbeestimatedbydeterminingthetimetocompleteeachlayerandthensummingthetimes
for all layers. First, the time to complete a single layer is given by the following equation:
Ti ¼ Ai
vD þ Tr
ð33:1Þ
where Ti ¼ time to complete layer i, seconds, where the subscript i is used to identify the
layer; Ai ¼ area of layer i, mm2 (in2); v ¼ average scanning speed of the laser beam at the
surface, mm/s (in/sec); D ¼ diameter of the laser beam at the surface (called the ‘‘spot
size,’’ assumed circular), mm (in); and Tr ¼ repositioning time between layers, s.
In the case of stereolithography, the repositioning time involves lowering the
worktable in preparation for the next layer to be fabricated. Other RP techniques require
analogous repositioning steps between layers. The average scanning speed v must include
any effects of interruptions in the scanning path (e.g., because of gaps between areas of
the part in a given layer). Once the Ti values have been determined for all layers, then the
build cycle time can be determined:
Tc ¼
X
nl
i¼1
Ti
ð33:2Þ
where Tc ¼ the STL build cycle time, s; and nl ¼ the number of layers used to approximate
the part.3
FIGURE 33.3
A part
produced by
stereolithography. (Photo
courtesy of 3D Systems,
Inc.)
3Although these equations have been developed here for stereolithography, similar formulas can be
developed for the other RP material addition technologies discussed in this chapter, because they all use
the same layer-by-layer fabrication method.
790
Chapter 33/Rapid Prototyping

After all of the layers have been formed, the photopolymer is about 95% cured.
The piece is therefore ‘‘baked’’ in a fluorescent oven to completely solidify the polymer.
Excess polymer is removed with alcohol, and light sanding is sometimes used to improve
smoothness and appearance.
Depending on its design and orientation, a part may contain overhanging features
that have no means of support during the bottom-up approach used in stereolithography.
For example, in the part of Figure 33.1, if the lower half of the handle and the lower
handlebar were eliminated, the upper portion of the handle would be unsupported during
fabrication. In these cases, extra pillars or webs may need to be added to the part simply for
supportpurposes. Otherwise, theoverhangs may floataway orotherwise distort the desired
part geometry. These extra features must be trimmed away after the process is completed.
Solid Ground Curing
Like stereolithography, solid ground curing (SGC)works by curing
a photosensitive polymer layer by layer to create a solid model based on CAD geometric
data. Instead of using a scanning laser beam to accomplish the curing of a given layer, the
entire layer is exposed to an ultraviolet light source through a mask that is positioned
above the surface of the liquid polymer. The hardening process takes 2 to 3 seconds for
each layer. SGC systems are sold under the name Solider system by Cubital Ltd.
The starting data in SGC is similar to that used in stereolithography: a CAD
geometric model of the part that has been sliced into layers. For each layer, the step-
by-step procedure in SGC is illustrated in Figure 33.4 and described here: (1) A mask is
FIGURE 33.4
Solid
ground curing process
for each layer: (1) mask
preparation, (2) applying
liquid photopolymer
layer, (3) mask positioning
and exposure of layer,
(4) uncured polymer
removed from surface,
(5)waxﬁlling,(6)millingfor
ﬂatness and thickness.
U.V. lamp
(1)
(2)
(4)
(6)
(3)
(5)
Mask
Wax
Milling
cutter
Liquid polymer
removed
Liquid photopolymer
layer
Glass
Section 33.2/Rapid Prototyping Technologies
791

created on a glass plate by electrostatically charging a negative image of the layer onto the
surface. The imaging technology is basically the same as that used in photocopiers. (2) A
thin flat layer of liquid photopolymer is distributed over the surface of the work platform.
(3) The mask is positioned above the liquid polymer surface and exposed by a high-
powered (e.g., 2000 W) ultraviolet lamp. The portions of the liquid polymer layer that are
unprotected by the mask are solidified in about 2 seconds. The shaded areas of the layer
remain in the liquid state. (4) The mask is removed, the glass plate is cleaned and made
ready for a subsequent layer in step 1. Meanwhile, the liquid polymer remaining on the
surface is removed in a wiping and vacuuming procedure. (5) The now-open areas of the
layer are filled in with hot wax. When hardened, the wax acts to support overhanging
sections of the part.(6) When thewax has cooled and solidified,the polymer-wax surfaceis
milled to form a flat layer of specified thickness, ready to receive the next application of
liquid photopolymer in step 2. Although we have described SGC as a sequential process,
certain steps are accomplished in parallel. Specifically, the mask preparation step 1 for the
next layer is performed simultaneously with the layer fabrication steps 2 through 6, using
two glass plates during alternating layers.
The sequence for each layer takes about 90 seconds. Throughput time to produce a
part by SGC is claimed to be about eight times faster than competing RP systems [6]. The
solidcubicformcreatedinSGCconsistsofsolidpolymerandwax.Thewaxprovidessupport
for fragile and overhanging features of the part during fabrication, but can be melted away
later to leave the free-standing part. No post curing of the completed prototype model is
required, as in stereolithography.
Droplet Deposition Manufacturing
These systems operate by melting the starting
material and shooting small droplets onto a previously formed layer. The liquid droplets
cold weld to the surface to form a new layer. The deposition of droplets for each new layer is
controlled by a moving x-y spray nozzle workhead whose path is based on a cross section of
a CAD geometric model that has been sliced into layers (similar to the other RP systems
described in the preceding). After each layer has been applied, the platform supporting the
part is lowered a certain distance corresponding to the layer thickness, in preparation for
the next layer. The term droplet deposition manufacturing (DDM) refers to the fact that
small particles of work material are deposited as projectile droplets from the workhead
nozzle.
Several commercial RP systems are based on this general operating principle, the
differences being in the type of material that is deposited and the corresponding
technique by which the workhead operates to melt and apply the material. An important
criterion that must be satisfied by the starting material is that it be readily melted and
solidified. Work materials used in DDM include wax and thermoplastics. Metals with low
melting point, such as tin, zinc, lead, and aluminum, have also been tested.
One of the morepopular BPM systems is thePersonal Modeler, availablefromBPM
Technology, Inc. Wax is commonly used as the work material. The ejector head operates
using a piezoelectric oscillator that shoots droplets of wax at a rate of 10,000 to 15,000 per
second. The droplets are of uniform size at about 0.076 mm (0.003 in) diameter, which
flatten to about 0.05-mm (0.002-in) solidified thickness on impact against the existing part
surface. After each layer has been deposited, the surface is milled or thermally smoothed
to achieve accuracy in the z-direction. Layer thickness is about 0.09 mm (0.0035 in).
33.2.2 SOLID-BASED RAPID PROTOTYPING SYSTEMS
The common feature in these RP systems is that the starting material is solid. In this
section we discuss two solid-based RP systems: (1) laminated-object manufacturing and
(2) fused-deposition modeling.
792
Chapter 33/Rapid Prototyping

Laminated-Object Manufacturing
The principal company offering laminated-object
manufacturing (LOM) systems is Helisys, Inc. Of interest is that much of the early
research and development work on LOM was funded by National Science Foundation.
The first commercial LOM unit was shipped in 1991.
Laminated-object manufacturing produces a solid physical model by stacking layers of
sheet stock that are each cut to an outline corresponding to the cross-sectional shape of a
CADmodel that has been sliced into layers. The layers are bonded one ontopof the previous
one before cutting. After cutting, the excess material in the layer remains in place to support
thepartduringbuilding.StartingmaterialinLOMcanbevirtuallyanymaterialinsheetstock
form, such as paper, plastic, cellulose, metals, or fiber-reinforced materials. Stock thickness is
0.05 to 0.50 mm (0.002 to 0.020 in). In LOM, the sheet material is usually supplied with
adhesive backing as rolls that are spooled between two reels, as in Figure 33.5. Otherwise, the
LOM process must include an adhesive coating step for each layer.
The data preparation phase in LOM consists of slicing the geometric model using the
STL file for the given part. The slicing function is accomplished by LOMSliceTM, the special
software used in laminated-object manufacturing. Slicing the STL model in LOM is
performed after each layer has been physically completed and the vertical height of the
part has been measured. This provides a feedback correction to account for the actual
thickness of the sheet stock being used, a feature unavailable on most other RP systems.
With reference to Figure 33.5, the LOM process for each layer can be described as
follows, picking up the action with a sheet of stock in place and bonded to the previous
stack: (1) LOMSliceTM computes the cross-sectional perimeter of the STL model based
on the measured height of the physical part at the current layer of completion. (2) A laser
beam is used to cut along the perimeter, as well as to crosshatch the exterior portions of the
sheet for subsequent removal. The laser is typically a 25 or 50 W CO2 laser. The cutting
trajectory is controlled by means of an x-y positioning system. The cutting depth is
controlled so that only the top layer is cut. (3) The platform holding the stack is lowered,
and the sheet stock is advanced between supply roll and take-up spool for the next layer.
The platform is then raised to a height consistent with the stock thickness and a heated
roller moves across the new layer to bond it to the previous layer. The height of the physical
stack is measured in preparation for the next slicing computation by LOMSliceTM.
When all of the layers are completed, the new part is separated from the excess
external material using a hammer, putty knife, and wood carving tools. The part can then
FIGURE 33.5
Laminated-object
manufacturing.
Laser
Laser beam
Sheet stock
Supply roll
Platform
Take-up roll
Laminated
block
Part cross section
and crosshatch
Section 33.2/Rapid Prototyping Technologies
793

be sanded to smooth and blend the layer edges. A sealing application is recommended,
using a urethane, epoxy, or other polymer spray to prevent moisture absorption and
damage. LOM part sizes can be relatively large among RP processes, with work volumes
up to 800 mm  500 mm by 550 mm (32 in  20 in  22 in). More common work volumes
are 380 mm  250 mm  350 mm (15 in  10 in  14 in).
Several low-cost systems based on the LOM build method are available. For
example, the JP System 5, available from Schroff Development Corporation, uses a
mechanical knife rather than a laser to cut the sheet stock for each layer. This system is
intended as a teaching tool and requires manual assembly of the layers.
Fused-Deposition Modeling
Fused-deposition modeling (FDM) is an RP process in
which a filament of wax or polymer is extruded onto the existing part surface from a
workhead to complete each new layer. The workhead is controlled in the x-y plane during
each layer and then moves up by a distance equal to one layer in the z-direction. The
starting material is a solid filament with typical diameter ¼ 1.25 mm (0.050 in) fed from a
spool into the workhead that heats the material to about0.5C (1F) aboveits melting point
before extruding it onto the part surface. The extrudate is solidified and cold welded to the
cooler part surface in about 0.1 second. The part is fabricated from the base up, using a
layer-by-layer procedure similar to other RP systems.
FDM was developed by Stratasys Inc., which sold its first machine in 1990. The
starting data is a CAD geometric model that is processed by Stratasys’s software modules
QuickSlice; and SupportWorkTM. QuickSlice; is used to slice the model into layers, and
SupportWorkTM is used to generate any support structures that are required during the
build process. If supports are needed, a dual extrusion head and a different material is used
to create the supports. The second material is designed to readily be separated from the
primary modeling material. The slice (layer) thickness can be set anywhere from 0.05 to
0.75mm(0.002to0.030in).About400mmoffilamentmaterialcanbedepositedpersecond
by the extrusion workhead in widths (called the road width) that can be set between 0.25
and 2.5 mm (0.010 to 0.100 in). Starting materials are wax and several polymers, including
ABS, polyamide, polyethylene, and polypropylene. These materials are nontoxic, allowing
the FDM machine to be set up in an office environment.
33.2.3 POWDER-BASED RAPID PROTOTYPING SYSTEMS
The common feature of the RP technologies described in this section is that the starting
material is powder.4 We discuss two RP systems in this category: (1) selective laser
sintering and (2) three-dimensional printing.
Selective Laser Sintering
Selective laser sintering (SLS) uses a moving laser beam to
sinter heat-fusible powders in areas corresponding to the CAD geometric model one layer
at a time to build the solid part. After each layer is completed, a new layer of loose powders
is spread across the surface using a counter-rotating roller. The powders are preheated to
just below their melting point to facilitate bonding and reduce distortion. Layer by layer,
the powders are gradually bonded into a solid mass that forms the three-dimensional part
geometry. In areas not sintered by the laser beam, the powders remain loose so they can be
poured out of the completed part. Meanwhile, they serve to support the solid regions of the
part as fabrication proceeds. Layer thickness is 0.075 to 0.50 mm (0.003 to 0.020 in).
SLS was developed at the University of Texas (Austin) as an alternative to stereo-
lithography, and SLS machines are currently marketed by DTM Corp. It is a more versatile
process than stereolithography in terms of possible work materials. Current materials used
4The definition, characteristics, and production of powders are described in Chapters 16 and 17.
794
Chapter 33/Rapid Prototyping

in selective laser sintering include polyvinylchloride, polycarbonate, polyester, poly-
urethane, ABS, nylon, and investment casting wax. These materials are less expensive
than the photosensitive resins used in stereolithography. They are also nontoxic and can be
sinteredusinglowpower(25to50W)CO2lasers.Metalandceramicpowdersarealsobeing
used in SLS.
Three-Dimensional Printing
This RP technology was developed at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Three-dimensional printing (3DP) builds the part in the usual
layer-by-layer fashion using an ink-jet printer to eject an adhesive bonding material onto
successive layers of powders. The binder is deposited in areas corresponding to the cross
sections of the solid part, as determined by slicing the CAD geometric model into layers.
The binder holds the powders together to form the solid part, while the unbonded
powders remain loose to be removed later. While the loose powders are in place during
the build process, they provide support for overhanging and fragile features of the part.
When the build process is completed, the part is heat treated to strengthen the bonding,
followed by removal of the loose powders. To further strengthen the part, a sintering step
can be applied to bond the individual powders.
Thepartisbuiltonaplatformwhoseleveliscontrolledbyapiston.Letusdescribethe
process for one cross section with reference to Figure 33.6: (1) A layer of powder is spread
on the existing part-in-process. (2) An ink-jet printing head moves across the surface,
ejecting droplets of binder on those regions that are to become the solid part. (3) When the
printing of the current layer is completed, the piston lowers the platform for the next layer.
Starting materials in 3DP are powders of ceramic, metal, or cermet, and binders
that are polymeric or colloidal silica or silicon carbide [10], [13]. Typical layer thickness
ranges from 0.10 to 0.18 mm (0.004 to 0.007 in). The ink-jet printing head moves across
the layer at a speed of about 1.5 m/s (59 in/sec), with ejection of liquid binder determined
during the sweep by raster scanning. The sweep time, together with the spreading of the
powders, permits a cycle time per layer of about 2 seconds [13].
33.3
APPLICATION ISSUES IN RAPID PROTOTYPING
Applications of rapid prototyping can be classified into three categories: (1) design,
(2) engineering analysis and planning, and (3) tooling and manufacturing.
(1)
(2)
(3)
Powder layer
deposited
Loose
powders
V
V
Ink-jet
printing head
Binder
Layer thickness
(exaggerated)
Work-
piece
FIGURE 33.6
Three-dimensional printing: (1) powder layer is deposited, (2) ink-jet printing of areas that will
become the part, and (3) piston is lowered for next layer (key: v ¼ motion).
Section 33.3/Application Issues in Rapid Prototyping
795

Design
This was the initial application area for RP systems. Designers are able to confirm
their design by building a real physical model inminimum time using rapid prototyping. The
features and functions of the part can be communicated to others more easily using a
physical model than by a paper drawing or displaying it on a CAD system monitor. Benefits
to design attributed to rapid prototyping include [2]: (1) reduced lead times to produce
prototype components, (2) improved ability to visualize the part geometry because of its
physical existence, (3) earlier detection and reduction of design errors, and (4) increased
capability to compute mass properties of components and assemblies.
Engineering Analysis and Planning
The existence of an RP-fabricated part allows for
certain types of engineering analysis and planning activities to be accomplished that would
be more difficult without the physical entity. Some of the possibilities are (1) comparison of
different shapes and styles to optimize aesthetic appeal of the part; (2) analysis of fluid flow
through different orifice designs in valves fabricated by RP; (3) wind tunnel testing of
different streamline shapes using physical models created by RP; (4) stress analysis of a
physical model; (5) fabrication of preproduction parts by RP as an aid in process planning
and tool design; and (6) combining medical imaging technologies, such as magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), with RP to create models for doctors in planning surgical
procedures or fabricating prostheses or implants.
Tooling and Manufacturing
The trend in RP applications is toward its greater use in the
fabrication of production tooling and for actual manufacture of parts. When RP is adopted
to fabricate production tooling, the term rapid tool making (RTM) is often used. RTM
applications divide into two approaches [4]: indirect RTM method, in which a pattern is
created by RP and the pattern is used to fabricate the tool, and direct RTM method, in
whichRPisusedtomakethetoolitself.ExamplesofindirectRTMinclude(1)useofanRP-
fabricated part as the master in making a silicon rubber mold that is subsequently used as a
production mold, (2) RP patterns to make the sand molds in sand casting (Section 11.1),
(3) fabrication of patterns of low-melting point materials (e.g., wax) in limited quantities
forinvestmentcasting(Section11.2.4),and(4)makingelectrodesforEDM(Section26.3.1)
[6], [10]. Examples of direct RTM include: (1) RP-fabricated mold cavity inserts that can
be sprayed with metal to produce injection molds for a limited quantity of production
plastic parts (Section 13.6) and (2) 3-D printing to create a die geometry in metallic
powders followed by sintering and infiltration to complete the fabrication of the die [4],
[6], [10].
Examples of actual part production include [10]: (1) small batch sizes of plastic
parts that could not be economically injection molded because of the high cost of the
mold, (2) parts with intricate internal geometries that could not be made using conven-
tional technologies without assembly, and (3) one-of-a-kind parts such as bone replace-
ments that must be made to correct size for each user.
Not all RP technologies can be used for all of these tooling and manufacturing
examples. Interested readers should consult more complete treatments of the RP
technologies for specific details on these and other examples.
Problems with Rapid Prototyping
The principal problems with current RP technol-
ogies include (1) part accuracy, (2) limited variety of materials, and (3) mechanical
performance of the fabricated parts.
Several sources of error limit part accuracy in RP systems: (1) mathematical,
(2) process related, or (3) material related [13]. Mathematical errors include approxima-
tions of part surfaces used in RP data preparation and differences between the slicing
thicknesses and actual layer thicknesses inthe physical part.The latterdifferences result in
z-axis dimensional errors. An inherent limitation in the physical part is the steps between
layers, especially as layer thickness is increased, resulting in a staircase appearance for
796
Chapter 33/Rapid Prototyping

sloping part surfaces. Process-related errors are those that result from the particular part
building technology used in the RP system. These errors degrade the shape of each layer as
well as the registration between adjacent layers. Process errors can also affect the z-axis
dimension. Finally, material-related errors include shrinkage and distortion. An allow-
ance for shrinkage can be made by enlarging the CAD model of the part based on previous
experience with the process and materials.
Current rapid prototyping systems are limited in the variety of materials they can
process. For example, the most common RP technology, stereolithography, is limited to
photosensitive polymers. In general, the materials used in RP systems are not as strong as
the production part materials that will be used in the actual product. This limits the
mechanical performance of the prototypes and the amount of realistic testing that can be
done to verify the design during product development.
REFERENCES
[1] Ashley, S. ‘‘Rapid Prototyping Is Coming of Age,’’
Mechanical Engineering, July 1995, pp. 62–68.
[2] Bakerjian, R., and Mitchell, P. (eds.). Tool and Man-
ufacturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol. VI,
Design for Manufacturability. Society of Manufactur-
ing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1992, Chapter 7.
[3] Destefani, J. ‘‘Plus or Minus,’’ Manufacturing Engi-
neering, April 2005, pp. 93–97.
[4] Hilton, P. ‘‘Making the Leap to Rapid Tool Making,’’
Mechanical Engineering, July 1995, pp. 75–76.
[5] Kai, C. C., and Fai, L. K.‘‘Rapid Prototyping and
Manufacturing: The Essential Link between Design
and Manufacturing,’’ Chapter 6 in Integrated Product
andProcessDevelopment:Methods,Tools,andTech-
nologies, J. M.Usher, U. Roy, andH.R. Parsaei (eds.).
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1998, pp. 151–183.
[6] Kai, C. C., Fai, L. K., and Chu-Sing, L. Rapid
Prototyping: Principles and Applications. 2nd ed.
World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore, 2003.
[7] Kochan, D., Kai, C. C. and Zhaohui, D. ‘‘Rapid
Prototyping Issues in the 21st Century,’’ Computers
in Industry, Vol. 39, pp. 3–10, 1999.
[8] Noorani, R. I., Rapid Prototyping: Principles and
Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New
Jersey, 2006.
[9] Pacheco, J. M. Rapid Prototyping, Report MTIAC
SOAR-93-01. Manufacturing Technology Informa-
tion
Analysis
Center,
IIT
Research
Institute,
Chicago, 1993.
[10] Pham, D. T., and Gault, R. S. ‘‘A Comparison of
Rapid Prototyping Technologies,’’ International
Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture, Vol.
38, pp. 1257–1287, 1998.
[11] Tseng, A. A., Lee, M. H., and Zhao, B. ‘‘Design and
Operation of a Droplet Deposition System for Free-
form Fabrication of Metal Parts,’’ ASME Journal of
Eng. Mat. Tech., Vol. 123, No. 1, 2001.
[12] Wohlers,
T.,
‘‘Direct
Digital
Manufacturing,’’
Manufacturing
Engineering,
January
2009,
pp. 73–81.
[13] Yan, X., and Gu, P. ‘‘A Review of Rapid Prototyping
Technologies
and
Systems,’’
Computer-Aided
Design, Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 307–318, 1996.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
33.1.
What is rapid prototyping? Provide a definition of
the term.
33.2.
What are the three types of starting materials in
rapid prototyping?
33.3.
Besides the starting material, what other feature
distinguishes the rapid prototyping technologies?
33.4.
What is the common approach used in all of the
material addition technologies to prepare the con-
trol instructions for the RP system?
33.5.
Of all of the current rapid prototyping technolo-
gies, which one is the most widely used?
33.6.
Describe the RP technology called solid ground
curing.
33.7.
Describe the RP technology called laminated-
object manufacturing.
33.8.
What is the starting material in fused-deposition
modeling?
Review Questions
797

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 11 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
33.1.
Machining is never used for rapid prototyping
because it takes too long: (a) true or (b) false?
33.2.
Which of the following rapid prototyping pro-
cesses starts with a photosensitive liquid polymer
to fabricate a component (two correct answers):
(a) ballistic particle manufacturing, (b) fused-
deposition modeling, (c) selective laser sintering,
(d) solid ground curing, and (e) stereolithography?
33.3.
Of all of the current material addition rapid pro-
totyping technologies, which one is the most widely
used: (a) ballistic particle manufacturing, (b) fused
deposition modeling, (c) selective laser sintering,
(d) solid ground curing, and (e) stereolithography?
33.4.
Which one of the following RP technologies uses
solid sheet stock as the starting material: (a) bal-
listic particle manufacturing, (b) fused-deposition
modeling,
(c)
laminated-object
manufacturing,
(d) solid ground curing, or (e) stereolithography?
33.5.
WhichofthefollowingRP technologies uses powders
as the starting material (two correct answers): (a)
ballistic particle manufacturing, (b) fused-deposi-
tion modeling, (c) selective laser sintering, (d) solid
ground curing, and (e) three-dimensional printing?
33.6.
Rapid prototyping technologies are never used to
make production parts: (a) true or (b) false?
33.7.
Which of the following are problems with the
current material addition rapid prototyping tech-
nologies (three best answers): (a) inability of the
designer to design the part, (b) inability to convert
a solid part into layers, (c) limited material variety,
(d) part accuracy, (e) part shrinkage, and (f) poor
machinability of the starting material?
PROBLEMS
33.1.
A prototype of a tube with a square cross section is
to be fabricated using stereolithography. The out-
side dimension of the square ¼ 100 mm and the
inside dimension ¼ 90 mm (wall thickness ¼ 5 mm
except at corners). The height of the tube (z-direc-
tion) ¼ 80 mm. Layer thickness ¼ 0.10 mm. The
diameter of the laser beam (‘‘spot size’’) ¼
0.25 mm, and the beam is moved across the surface
of the photopolymer at a velocity of 500 mm/s.
Compute an estimate for the time required to build
the part, if 10 s are lost each layer to lower the
height of the platform that holds the part. Neglect
the time for postcuring.
33.2.
Solve Problem 33.1 except that the layer thickness ¼
0.40 mm.
33.3.
The part in Problem 33.1 is to be fabricated using
fused deposition modeling instead of stereolithog-
raphy. Layer thickness is to be 0.20 mm and the
width of the extrudate deposited on the surface of
the part ¼ 1.25 mm. The extruder workhead moves
in the x-y plane at a speed of 150 mm/s. A delay of
10 s is experienced between each layer to reposi-
tion the workhead. Compute an estimate for the
time required to build the part.
33.4.
Solve Problem 33.3, except using the following addi-
tional information. It is known that the diameter of
the filament fed into the extruder workhead is
1.25 mm, and the filament is fed into the workhead
fromitsspoolatarateof30.6mmoflengthpersecond
while the workhead is depositing material. Between
layers, the feed rate from the spool is zero.
33.5.
A cone-shaped part is to be fabricated using stereo-
lithography. The radius of the cone at its base ¼
35 mm and its height ¼ 40 mm. The layer thick-
ness ¼ 0.20 mm. The diameter of the laser beam ¼
0.22 mm, and the beam is moved across the surface
of the photopolymer at a velocity of 500 mm/s.
Compute an estimate for the time required to build
the part, if 10 seconds are lost each layer to lower
the height of the platform that holds the part.
Neglect post-curing time.
33.6.
The cone-shaped part in Problem 33.5 is to be built
using laminated-object manufacturing. Layer thick-
ness ¼ 0.20 mm. The laser beam can cut the sheet
stock at a velocity of 500 mm/s. Compute an esti-
mate for the time required to build the part, if
10 seconds are lost each layer to lower the height of
the platform that holds the part and advance the
sheet stock in preparation for the next layer.
Ignore cutting of the cross-hatched areas outside
of the part since the cone should readily drop out of
the stack owing to its geometry.
798
Chapter 33/Rapid Prototyping

33.7.
Stereolithography is to be used to build the part in
Figure 33.1 in the text. Dimensions of the part are:
height ¼ 125 mm, outside diameter ¼ 75 mm,
inside diameter ¼ 65 mm, handle diameter ¼
12 mm, handle distance from cup ¼ 70 mm meas-
ured from center (axis) of cup to center of handle.
The handle bars connecting the cup and handle at
the top and bottom of the part have a rectangular
cross section and are 10 mm thick and 12 mm wide.
The thickness at the base of the cup is 10 mm. The
laser beam diameter ¼ 0.25 mm, and the beam can
be moved across the surface of the photopolymer
at ¼ 500 mm/s. Layer thickness ¼ 0.20 mm. Com-
pute an estimate of the time required to build the
part, if 10 seconds are lost each layer to lower the
height of the platform that holds the part. Neglect
post-curing time.
33.8.
A prototype of a part is to be fabricated using
stereolithography. The part is shaped like a right
triangle whose base ¼ 36 mm, height ¼ 48 mm, and
thickness ¼ 25 mm. In application, the part will
stand on its base, which is 36 mm by 25 mm. In the
stereolithography process, the layer thickness ¼
0.20 mm. The diameter of the laser beam (‘‘spot
size’’) ¼ 0.15 mm, and the beam is moved across
the surface of the photopolymer at a velocity of
400 mm/s. Compute the minimum possible time
required to build the part, if 8 seconds are lost each
layer to lower the height of the platform that holds
the part. Neglect the time for postcuring.
Problems
799

34
PROCESSING
OF INTEGRATED
CIRCUITS
Chapter Contents
34.1
Overview of IC Processing
34.1.1
Processing Sequence
34.1.2
Clean Rooms
34.2
Silicon Processing
34.2.1
Production of Electronic Grade
Silicon
34.2.2
Crystal Growing
34.2.3
Shaping of Silicon into Wafers
34.3
Lithography
34.3.1
Photolithography
34.3.2
Other Lithography Techniques
34.4
Layer Processes Used in IC Fabrication
34.4.1
Thermal Oxidation
34.4.2
Chemical Vapor Deposition
34.4.3
Introduction of Impurities into Silicon
34.4.4
Metallization
34.4.5
Etching
34.5
Integrating the Fabrication Steps
34.6
IC Packaging
34.6.1
IC Package Design
34.6.2
Processing Steps in IC Packaging
34.7
Yields in IC Processing
Anintegratedcircuit(IC)isacollectionofelectronicdevices
such as transistors, diodes, and resistors that have been
fabricated and electrically intraconnected onto a small flat
chip of semiconductor material. The IC was invented in 1959
andhasbeenthesubjectofcontinualdevelopmenteversince
(Historical Note 34.1). Silicon (Si) is the most widely used
semiconductor material for ICs, because of its combination
of properties and low cost. Less common semiconductor
chips are made of germanium (Ge) and gallium arsenide
(GaAs). Because the circuits are fabricated into one solid
piece of material, the term solid-state electronics is used to
denote these devices.
The most fascinating aspect of microelectronics tech-
nologyisthe hugenumberofdevicesthatcanbepackedonto
a single small chip. Various terms have been developed to
define the level of integration and density of packing, such as
large-scale integration (LSI) and very-large-scale integra-
tion (VLSI). Table 34.1 lists these terms, their definitions
(although there is not complete agreement over the dividing
lines between levels), and the period during which the
technology was or is being introduced.
34.1
OVERVIEW OF IC
PROCESSING
Structurally, an integrated circuit consists of hundreds, thou-
sands, or millions of microscopic electronic devices that have
been fabricated and electrically intraconnected within the
surface of a silicon chip. A chip, also called a die, is a square
or rectangular flat plate that is about 0.5 mm (0.020 in) thick
and typically 5 to 25 mm (0.200 to 1.0 in) on a side. Each
electronic device (i.e., transistor, diode, etc.) on the chip
surface consists of separate layers and regions with different
electrical properties combined to perform the particular
800

electronic function of the device. A typical cross section of such a MOSFET1 device is
illustrated in Figure 34.1. The devices are electrically connected to one another by very fine
lines of conducting material, usually aluminum, so that the intraconnected devices (that is,
the integrated circuit) function in the specified way. Conducting lines and pads are also
TABLE 34.1
Levels of integration in microelectronics.
Integration Level
Number of Devices
on a Chip
Approx. Year
Introduced
Small-scale integration (SSI)
10–50
1959
Medium-scale integration (MSI)
50–103
1960s
Large-scale integration (LSI)
103–104
1970s
Very-large-scale integration (VLSI)
104–106
1980s
Ultra-large-scale integration (ULSI)
106–108
1990s
Giga-scale integration
109–1010
2000s
Historical Note 34.1
Integrated circuit technology
The history of integrated circuits includes inventions of
electronic devices and the processes for making these
devices. The development of radar immediately before
World War II (1939 to 1945) identiﬁed germanium and
silicon as important semiconductor elements for the
diodes used in radar circuitry. Owing to the importance
of radar in the war, commercial sources of germanium
and silicon were developed.
In 1947, the transistor was developed at the Bell
Telephone Laboratories by J. Bardeen and W. Brattain. An
improved version was subsequently invented by W.
Shockley of Bell Labs in 1952. These three inventors shared
the 1956 Nobel Prize in Physics for their research on
semiconductors and the discovery of the transistor. The
interest of the Bell Labs was to develop electronic switching
systems that were more reliable than the electromechanical
relays and vacuum tubes used at that time.
In February 1959, J. Kilby of Texas Instruments Inc.
ﬁled a patent application for the fabrication of multiple
electronic devices and their intraconnection to form a
circuit on a single piece of semiconductor material. Kilby
was describing an integrated circuit (IC). In May 1959,
J. Hoerni of Fairchild Semiconductor Corp. applied for a
patent describing the planar process for fabricating
transistors. In July of the same year, R. Noyce also of
Fairchild ﬁled a patent application similar to the Kilby
invention but specifying the use of planar technology and
adherent leads.
Although ﬁled later than Kilby’s, Noyce’s patent was
issued ﬁrst, in 1961 (the Kilby patent was awarded in
1964). This discrepancy in dates and similarity in
inventions have resulted in considerable controversy
over who was really the inventor of the IC. The issue was
argued in legal suits stretching all the way to the U.S.
Supreme Court. The high court refused to hear the case,
leaving stand a lower court ruling that favored several of
Noyce’s claims. The result (at the risk of oversimplifying)
is that Kilby is generally credited with the concept of the
monolithic integrated circuit, whereas Noyce is credited
with the method for fabricating it.
The ﬁrst commercial ICs were introduced by Texas
Instruments in March 1960. Early integrated circuits
contained about 10 devices on a small silicon chip—
about 3 mm (0.12 in) square. By 1966, silicon had
overtaken germanium as the preferred semiconductor
material. Since that year, Si has been the predominant
material in IC fabrication. Since the 1960s, a continual
trend toward miniaturization and increased integration
of multiple devices in a single chip has occurred in the
electronics industry (the progress can be seen in Table
34.1), leading to the components described in this
chapter.
1MOSFET stands for Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistor. A transistor is a semi-
conductor device capable of performing various functions such as amplifying, controlling, or generating
electrical signals. A field-effect transistor is one in which current flows between source and drain regions
through a channel, the flow depending on the application of voltage to the channel gate. A metal-oxide-
semiconductor FET uses silicon dioxide to separate the channel and gate metallization.
Section 34.1/Overview of IC Processing
801

provided to electrically connect the IC to leads, which in turn permit the IC to be connected
to external circuits.
ToallowtheICtobeconnectedtotheoutsideworld, andtoprotect itfromdamage, the
chip is attached to a lead frame and encapsulated inside a suitable package, as in Figure 34.2.
The package is an enclosure, usually made of plastic or ceramic, which provides mechanical
and environmental protection for the chip and includes leads by which the IC can be
electrically connected to external circuits. The leads are attached to conducting pads on the
chip that access the IC.
34.1.1 PROCESSING SEQUENCE
The sequence to fabricate a silicon-based IC chip begins with the processing of silicon
(Section 7.5.2). Briefly, silicon of very high purity is reduced in several steps from sand
(silicon dioxide, SiO2). The silicon is grown from a melt into a large solid single crystal log,
with typical length of 1 to 3 m (3 to 10ft) and diameter up to 300 mm (12 in).The log, called a
boule, is then sliced into thin wafers, which are disks of thickness equal to about 0.5 mm
(0.020 in).
Aftersuitablefinishingandcleaning,thewafersarereadyforthesequenceofprocesses
by which microscopic features of various chemistries will be created in their surface to form
the electronic devices and their intraconnections. The sequence consists of several types of
processes, most of them repeated many times. A total of 200 or more processing steps may be
required to produce a modern IC. Basically, the objective in the sequence is to add, alter,
or remove a layer of material in selected regions of the wafer surface. The layering steps in
IC fabrication are sometimes referred to as the planar process, because the processing
relies on the geometric form of the silicon wafer being a plane. The processes by which the
layers are added include thin film deposition techniques such as physical vapor deposition
FIGURE 34.2
Packaging of an
integrated circuit chip:
(a) cutaway view showing
the chip attached to a lead
frameandencapsulatedin
a plastic enclosure, and
(b) the package as it would
appear to a user. This type
of package is called a dual
in-line package (DIP).
FIGURE 34.1
Cross section of
a transistor (speciﬁcally, a
MOSFET) in an integrated
circuit. Approximate size of the
device is shown; feature sizes
within the device can be as
small as 40 nm.
150 nm
Gate
Drain (n+)
Source (n+)
Silicon dioxide
Silicon substrate (p-type)
Phosphosilicate
glass (P-glass)
802
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

and chemical vapor deposition (Section 28.5), and existing layers are altered by diffusion and
ion implantation (Section 28.2). Additional layer-forming techniques, such as thermal
oxidation, are also employed. Layers are removed in selected regions by etching, using
chemical etchants (usually acid solutions) and other more advanced technologies such as
plasma etching.
Theaddition,alteration,andremovaloflayersmustbedoneselectively;thatis,onlyin
certain extremely small regions of the wafer surface to create the device details such as in
Figure 34.1. To distinguish which regions will be affected in each processing step, a
procedure involving lithography is used. In this technique, masks are formed on the surface
to protect certain areas and allow other areas to be exposed to the particular process (e.g.,
film deposition, etching). By repeating the steps many times, exposing different areas in
each step, the starting silicon wafer is gradually transformed into many integrated circuits.
Processing of the wafer is organized in such a way that many individual chip
surfaces are formed on a single wafer. Because the wafer is round with diameters ranging
from 150 to 300 mm (6 to 12 in), whereas the final chip may only be 12 mm (0.5 in) square,
it is possible to produce hundreds of chips on a single wafer. At the conclusion of planar
processing, each IC on the wafer is visually and functionally tested, the wafer is diced into
individual chips, and each chip that passes the quality test is packaged as in Figure 34.2.
Summarizing the preceding discussion, the production of silicon-based integrated
circuits consists of the following stages, portrayed in Figure 34.3: (1) Silicon processing, in
which sand is reduced to very pure silicon and then shaped into wafers; (2) IC fabrication,
consisting of multiple processing steps that add, alter, and remove thin layers in selected
regions to form the electronic devices; lithography is used to define the regions to be
processedonthesurfaceofthewafer;and(3)ICpackaging,inwhichthewaferistested,cut
into individual dies (IC chips), and the dies are encapsulated in an appropriate package.
The presentation in subsequent sections of our chapter is concerned with the details of
these processing stages. Section 34.2 deals with silicon processing. Section 34.3 discusses
lithography and Section 34.3 examines the processes used in conjunction with lithography to
add,alter,orremovelayers.WeconsideranexampleofICfabricationinSection34.5.Section
34.6 describes die cutting and packaging of the chips. Finally, Section 34.7 covers yield
analysis in IC fabrication.
Before beginning our coverage of the processing details, it is important to note that the
microscopic dimensions of the devices in integrated circuits impose special requirements on
the environment in which IC fabrication is accomplished.
FIGURE 34.3
Sequence of processing steps in the production of integrated circuits: (1) pure silicon is formed
from the molten state into an ingot and then sliced into wafers; (2) fabrication of integrated circuits on the wafer surface;
and (3) wafer is cut into chips and packaged.
Section 34.1/Overview of IC Processing
803

34.1.2 CLEAN ROOMS
Much of the processing sequence for integrated circuits must be carried out in a clean
room, the ambiance of which is more like a hospital operating room than a production
factory. Cleanliness is dictated by the microscopic feature sizes in an IC, the scale of which
continues to decrease with each passing year. Figure 34.4 shows the trend in IC device
feature size; also displayed in the same figure are common airborne particles that are
potential contaminants in IC processing. These particles can cause defects in the integrated
circuits, reducing yields and increasing costs.
A clean room provides protection from these contaminants. The air is purified to
remove most of the particles from the processing environment; temperature and humidity
are also controlled. A standard classification system is used to specify the cleanliness of a
cleanroom.Inthe system,anumber(inincrements often)isusedtoindicatethe quantity of
particles ofsize0.5 mm orgreaterinonecubicfoot ofair.2Thus, a class100 cleanroommust
maintain a count of particles of size 0.5 mm or greater at less than 100/ft3. Modern VLSI
processing requires class 10 clean rooms, which means that the number of particles of size
equaltoorgreaterthan0.5 mmislessthan10/ft3. Theair inthecleanroomisairconditioned
to a temperature of 21C (70F) and 45% relative humidity. The air is passed through a
high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter to capture particle contaminants.
Humans are the biggest source of contaminants in IC processing; emanating from
humans are bacteria, tobacco smoke, viruses, hair, and other particles. Human workers in
IC processing areas are required to wear special clothing, generally consisting of white
cloaks,gloves, and hairnets. Whereextremecleanlinessisrequired,workersare completely
encased in bunny suits. Processing equipment is a second major source of contaminants;
machinery produces wear particles, oil, dirt, and similar contaminants. IC processing is
usually accomplished in laminar-flow hooded work areas, which can be purified to greater
levels of cleanliness than the general environment of the clean room.
2Only in the United States would we mix metric units (0.5 mm) with U.S. customary units (ft3).
FIGURE 34.4
Trend in
device feature size in IC
fabrication; also shown
is the size of common
airborne particles that
can contaminate the
processing environment.
Minimum feature sizes
for logic type ICs are
expected to be about 13
nm in the year 2016 [10].
100
10
1
10 1
10 2
Viruses
Bacteria
Pollen
Human hair
Device feature size,   m
1970
1980
1990
Year
2000
2010
2020
804
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

In addition to the very pure atmosphere provided by the clean room, the chemicals
and water used in IC processing must be very clean and free of particles. Modern practice
requires that chemicals and water be filtered before use.
34.2
SILICON PROCESSING
Microelectronic chipsare fabricatedonasubstrate ofsemiconductormaterial.Siliconisthe
leading semiconductor material today, constituting more than 95% of all semiconductor
devices produced in the world. Our discussion in this introductory treatment will be limited
toSi. The preparation ofthesiliconsubstrate can bedividedintothreesteps: (1) production
of electronic grade silicon, (2) crystal growing, and (3) shaping of Si into wafers.
34.2.1 PRODUCTION OF ELECTRONIC GRADE SILICON
Silicon is one of the most abundant materials in the Earth’s crust (Table 7.1), occurring
naturally as silica (e.g., sand) and silicates (e.g., clay). Electronic grade silicon (EGS) is
polycrystallinesiliconofultrahighpurity—sopurethattheimpuritiesareintherangeofparts
per billion (ppb). They cannot be measured by conventional chemical laboratory techniques
but must be inferred from measurements of resistivity on test ingots. The reduction of the
naturally occurring Si compound to EGS involves the following processing steps.
The first step is carried out in a submerged-electrode arc furnace. The principal raw
material for silicon is quartzite, which is very pure SiO2. The charge also includes coal,
coke, and wood chips as sources of carbon for the various chemical reactions that occur in
the furnace. The net product consists of metallurgical grade silicon (MGS), and the gases
SiO and CO. MGS is only about 98% Si, which is adequate for metallurgical alloying but
not for electronics components. The major impurities (making up the remaining 2% of
MGS) include aluminum, calcium, carbon, iron, and titanium.
The second step involves grinding the brittle MGS and reacting the Si powders with
anhydrous HCl to form trichlorsilane:
Si þ 3HCl gas
ð
Þ ! SiHCl3 gas
ð
Þ þ H2 gas
ð
Þ
ð34:1Þ
The reaction is performed in a fluidized-bed reactor at temperatures around 300C
(550F). Trichlorsilane (SiHCl3), although shown as a gas in Eq. (34.1), is a liquid at room
temperature. Its low boiling point of 32C (90F) permits it to be separated from the
leftover impurities of MGS by fractional distillation.
The final step in the process is reduction of the purified trichlorsilane by means of
hydrogen gas. The process is carried out at temperatures up to 1000C (1800F), and a
simplified equation of the reaction can be written as follows:
SiHCl3 gas
ð
Þ þ H2 gas
ð
Þ ! Si þ 3HCl gas
ð
Þ
ð34:2Þ
The product of this reaction is electronic grade silicon—nearly 100% pure Si.
34.2.2 CRYSTAL GROWING
The silicon substrate for microelectronic chips must be made of a single crystal whose unit
cell is oriented in a certain direction. The properties of the substrate and the way it is
processed are both influenced by these requirements. Accordingly, silicon used as the raw
material in semiconductor device fabrication must not only be of ultra high purity, as in
Section 34.2/Silicon Processing
805

electronic grade silicon; it must also be prepared in the form of a single crystal and then cut
in a direction that achieves the desired planar orientation. The crystal-growing process is
covered here, whereas the next section details the cutting operation.
The most widely used crystal-growing method in the semiconductor industry is the
Czochralski process, illustrated in Figure 34.5, in which a single crystal ingot, called a boule,
is pulled upward from a pool of molten silicon. The setup includes a furnace, a mechanical
apparatus for pulling the boule, a vacuum system, and supporting controls. The furnace
consists of a crucible and heating system contained in a vacuum chamber. The crucible is
supported by a mechanism that permits rotation during the crystal-pulling procedure.
Chunks of EGS are placed in the crucible and heated to a temperature slightly above the
melting point of silicon: 1410C (2570F). Heating is by induction or resistance, the latter
beingusedfor largemelt sizes. Themoltensiliconisdoped3 before boulepullingtomake the
crystal either p-type or n-type.
To initiate crystal growing, a seed crystal of silicon is dipped into the molten pool and
thenwithdrawnupwardundercarefullycontrolledconditions.Atfirstthepullingrate(vertical
velocity of the pulling apparatus) is relatively rapid, which causes a single crystal of silicon to
solidifyagainsttheseed,formingathinneck.Thevelocityisthenreduced,causingtheneckto
growintothedesiredlargerdiameteroftheboulewhilemaintainingitssinglecrystalstructure.
In addition to pulling rate, rotation of the crucible and other process parameters are used to
FIGURE 34.5
The Czochralski process for growing single-crystal ingots of silicon: (a) initial setup prior
to start of crystal pulling, and (b) during crystal pulling to form the boule.
3The term dope (doped, doping) refers to the introduction of impurities into the semiconductor material to
alter its electrical properties, making the semiconductor either an n-type (excess electrons in its structure)
or a p-type (missing electrons in its structure).
806
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

controlboulesize.Single-crystalingotsofdiameter¼300mm(12in)andupto3m(10ft)long
are commonly produced for subsequent fabrication of microelectronic chips.
It is important to avoid contamination of the silicon during crystal growing, because
contaminants, even in small amounts, can dramatically alter the electrical properties of
Si. To minimize unwanted reactions with silicon and the introduction of contaminants at
the elevated temperatures of crystal growing, the procedure is carried out either in an
inert gas (argon or helium) or a vacuum. Choice of crucible material is also important;
fused silica (SiO2), although not perfect for the application, represents the best available
material and is used almost exclusively. Gradual dissolution of the crucible introduces
oxygen as an unintentional impurity in the silicon boule. Unfortunately, the level of
oxygen in the melt increases during the process, leading to a variation in concentration of
the impurity throughout the length and diameter of the ingot.
34.2.3 SHAPING OF SILICON INTO WAFERS
Aseriesofprocessingstepsareusedtoreducethebouleintothin,disc-shapedwafers.Thesteps
canbegroupedasfollows:(1)ingotpreparation,(2)waferslicing,and(3)waferpreparation.
Iningotpreparation,theseedandtangendsoftheingotarefirstcutoff,aswellasportionsof
the ingot that do not meet the strict resistivity and crystallographic requirements for
subsequentICprocessing.Next,aformofcylindricalgrinding,asshowninFigure34.6(a),is
used to shape the ingot into a more perfect cylinder, because the crystal-growing process
cannot achieve sufficient control over diameter and roundness. One or more flats are then
ground along the length of the ingot, as in Figure 34.6(b). After the wafers have been cut
from the ingot, these flats serve several functions: (1) identification, (2) orientation of the
ICs relative to crystal structure, and (3) mechanical location during processing.
The ingot is now ready to be sliced into wafers, using the abrasive cutoff process
illustrated in Figure 34.7. A very thin saw blade with diamond grit bonded to the internal
diameter serves as the cutting edge. Use of the ID for slicing rather than the OD of the saw
bladeprovidesbettercontroloverflatness,thickness,parallelism,andsurfacecharacteristics
of the wafer. The wafers are cut to a thickness of around 0.5 to 0.7 mm (0.020 to 0.028 in),
FIGURE 34.6
Grinding
operations used in
shaping the silicon ingot:
(a) a form of cylindrical
grinding provides diame-
terandroundnesscontrol,
and(b)aﬂatgroundonthe
cylinder.
FIGURE 34.7
Wafer slicing using a
diamond abrasive cutoff saw.
Section 34.2/Silicon Processing
807

depending on diameter (greater thicknesses for larger wafer diameters). For every wafer
cut, a certain amount of silicon is wasted because of the kerf width of the saw blade. To
minimize kerf loss, the blades are made as thin as possible—around 0.33 mm (0.013 in).
Next the wafer must be prepared for the subsequent processes and handling in IC
fabrication. After slicing, the rims of the wafers are rounded using a contour-grinding
operation, such as in Figure 34.8(a). This reduces chipping of the wafer edges during
handling andminimizes accumulation of photoresist solutions at the wafer rims. The wafers
are then chemically etched to remove surface damage that occurred during slicing. This is
followed by a flat polishing operation to provide very smooth surfaces that will accept the
subsequent photolithography processes. The polishing step, seen in Figure 34.8(b), uses a
slurry of very fine silica (SiO2) particles in an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide
(NaOH). The NaOH oxidizes the Si wafer surface, and the abrasive particles remove the
oxidized surface layers—about 0.025 mm (0.001 in) is removed from each side during
polishing. Finally, the wafer is chemically cleaned to remove residues and organic films.
Itisofinterest toknowhow manyICchipscanbefabricatedonawaferofagivensize.
The number depends on the chip size relative to the wafer size. Assuming that the chips are
square, the following equation can be used to estimate the number of chips on the wafer:
nc ¼ 0:34 Dw
Lc

2:25
ð34:3Þ
where nc¼ estimatednumberof chipsonthewafer;Dw ¼ diameter ofthe processableareaof
the wafer, assumed circular, mm (in); and Lc ¼ side dimension of the chip, assumed square,
mm (in).
FIGURE 34.8
Two of
the steps in wafer
preparation: (a) contour
grinding to round the
wafer rim, and (b) surface
polishing.
808
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

The diameter of the processable area of the wafer will be slightly less than the outside
diameter of the wafer. The actual number of chips on the wafer may be different from the
value given by Eq. (34.3), depending on the way the chips are laid out on the wafer.
34.3
LITHOGRAPHY
An IC consists of many microscopic regions on the wafer surface that make up the
transistors, other devices, and intraconnections in the circuit design. In the planar process,
the regions are fabricated by a sequence of steps to add layers to selected areas of the
surface. The form of each layer is determined by a geometric pattern representing circuit
design information that is transferred to the wafer surface by a procedure known as
lithography—basically the same procedure used by artists and printers for centuries.
Several lithographic technologies are used in semiconductor processing: (1) pho-
tolithography, (2) electron lithography, (3) x-ray lithography, and (4) ion lithography. As
their names indicate, the differences are in the type of radiation used to transfer the mask
pattern to the surface by exposing the photoresist. The traditional technique is photo-
lithography, and most of our discussion will be directed at this topic. The reader may
recall that photolithography is used in some chemical machining processes (Section 26.4).
34.3.1 PHOTOLITHOGRAPHY
Photolithography,alsoknownasopticallithography,useslightradiationtoexposeacoating
of photoresist on the surface of the silicon wafer; a mask containing the required geometric
pattern for each layer separates the light source from the wafer, so that only the portions of
the photoresist not blocked by the mask are exposed. The mask consists of a flat plate of
transparentglassontowhichathinfilmofanopaquesubstancehasbeendepositedincertain
areas to form the desired pattern. Thickness of the glass plate is around 2 mm (0.080 in),
whereas the deposited film is only a few mm thick—for some film materials, less than 1 mm.
The mask itself is fabricated by lithography, the pattern being based on circuit design data,
usually in the form of digital output from the CAD system used by the circuit designer.
Photoresists
A photoresist is an organic polymer that is sensitive to light radiation in a
certainwavelengthrange;thesensitivitycauseseitheranincreaseor decreaseinsolubilityof
the polymer to certain chemicals. Typical practice in semiconductor processing is to use
photoresists thatare sensitiveto ultravioletlight. UV light hasa shortwavelength compared
with visible light, permitting sharper imaging of microscopic circuit details on the wafer
surface. It also permits the fabrication and photoresist areas in the plant to be illuminated at
low light levels outside the UV band.
Twotypesofphotoresistsareavailable:positiveandnegative.Apositiveresistbecomes
more soluble in developing solutions after exposure to light. A negative resist becomes less
soluble (the polymer cross–links and hardens) when exposed to light. Figure 34.9 illustrates
the operation of both resist types. Negative resists have better adhesion to SiO2 and metal
surfaces and good etch resistance. However, positive resists achieve better resolution, which
has made it the more widely used technique as IC feature sizes have become smaller and
smaller.
Exposure Techniques
The resistsare exposedthroughthe mask byone of three exposure
techniques: (a) contact printing, (b) proximity printing, and (c) projection printing,
illustrated in Figure 34.10. In contact printing, the mask is pressed against the resist
coating during exposure. This results in high resolution of the pattern onto the wafer
Section 34.3/Lithography
809

surface; an important disadvantage is that physical contact with the wafers gradually wears
out the mask. In proximity printing, the mask is separated from the resist coating by a
distanceof 10 to 25 mm (0.0004 to 0.001in). This eliminates mask wear, but resolution of the
image is slightly reduced. Projection printing involves the use of a high-quality lens (or
mirror) system to project the image through the mask onto the wafer. This has become the
preferred technique because it is noncontact (thus, no mask wear), and the mask pattern
can be reduced through optical projection to obtain high resolution.
FIGURE 34.9
Application of (a) positive resist and (b) negative resist in photolithography; for both
types, the sequence shows: (1) exposure through the mask and (2) remaining resist after developing.
FIGURE 34.10
Photolithography
exposure techniques:
(a) contact printing,
(b) proximity printing, and
(c) projection printing.
810
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

Processing Sequence in Photolithography
Let us examine a typical processing
sequence for a silicon wafer in which photolithography is employed. The surface of the
silicon has been oxidized to form a thin film of SiO2 on the wafer. It is desired to remove the
SiO2 film in certain regions as defined by the mask pattern. The sequence for a positive
resist proceeds as follows, illustrated in Figure 34.11. (1) Prepare surface. The wafer is
properly cleaned to promote wetting and adhesion of the resist. (2) Apply photoresist. In
semiconductor processing, photoresists are applied by feeding a metered amount of liquid
resist onto the center of the wafer and then spinning the wafer to spread the liquid and
achieve a uniform coating thickness. Desired thickness is around 1 mm (0.00004 in), which
gives good resolution yet minimizes pinhole defects. (3) Soft-bake. Purpose of this pre-
exposure bake is to remove solvents, promote adhesion, and harden the resist. Typical
soft-bake temperatures are around 90C (190F) for 10 to 20 min. (4) Align mask and
expose. The pattern mask is aligned relative to the wafer and the resist is exposed through
the mask by one of the methods described in the preceding. Alignment must be
accomplished with very high precision, using optical-mechanical equipment designed
specifically for the purpose. If the wafer has been previously processed by lithography so
that a pattern has already been formed in the wafer, then subsequent masks must be
accurately registered relative to the existing pattern. Exposure of the resist depends on the
same basic rule as in photography—the exposure is a function of light intensity  time. A
mercury arc lamp or other source of UV light is used. (5) Develop resist. The exposed
wafer is next immersed in a developing solution, or the solution is sprayed onto the wafer
surface. For the positive resist in our example, the exposed areas are dissolved in the
developer, thus leaving the SiO2 surface uncovered in these areas. Development is usually
followed by a rinse to stop development and remove residual chemicals. (6) Hard-bake.
This baking step expels volatiles remaining from the developing solution and increases
adhesion of the resist, especially at the newly created edges of the resist film. (7) Etch.
Etching removes the SiO2 layer at selected regions where the resist has been removed.
(8) Strip resist. After etching, the resist coating that remains on the surface must be
removed. Stripping is accomplished using either wet or dry techniques. Wet stripping uses
liquid chemicals; a mixture of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide (H2SO4–H2O2) is
common. Dry stripping uses plasma etching with oxygen as the reactive gas.
Although our example describes the use of photolithography to remove a thin film
of SiO2 from a silicon substrate, the same basic procedure is followed for other processing
FIGURE 34.11
Photolithography
process applied to a
silicon wafer: (1) prepare
surface; (2) apply photo-
resist; (3) soft-bake;
(4) align mask and expose;
(5) develop resist; (6) hard-
bake; (7) etch; (8) strip
resist.
Section 34.3/Lithography
811

steps. The purpose of photolithography in all of these steps is to expose specific regions
beneath the photoresist layer so that the process can be performed on these exposed
regions. In the processing of a given wafer, photolithography is repeated as many times as
needed to produce the desired integrated circuit, each time using a different mask to
define the appropriate pattern.
34.3.2 OTHER LITHOGRAPHY TECHNIQUES
As feature size in integrated circuits continues to decrease and conventional UV photo-
lithography becomes increasingly inadequate, other lithography techniques that offer
higher resolution are growing in importance. These techniques are extreme ultraviolet
lithography, electron beam lithography, x-ray lithography, and ion lithography. In the
following paragraphs, we provide brief descriptions of these alternatives. For each tech-
nique, special resist materials are required that react to the particular type of radiation.
Extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUV) represents a refinement of conventional UV
lithography through the use of shorter wavelengths during exposure. The ultraviolet wave-
length spectrum ranges from about 10 nm to 380 nm (nm ¼ nanometer ¼ 109 m), the upper
end of which is close to the visible light range (approximately 400 to 700 nm wavelengths).
EUV technology permits the feature size of an integrated circuit to be reduced to at about
0.04 mm, compared with about 0.1 mm with conventional UV exposure.
Compared with UV and EUV lithography, electron-beam (E-Beam) lithography
virtually eliminates diffraction during exposure of the resist, thus permitting higher
resolution of the image. Another potential advantage is that a scanning E-beam can be
directed to expose only certain regions of the wafer surface, thus eliminating the need for a
mask. Unfortunately, high-quality electron-beam systems are expensive. Also, because of
the time-consuming sequential nature of the exposure method, production rates are low
compared with the mask techniques of optical lithography. Accordingly, use of E-beam
lithography tends to be limited to small production quantities. E-beam techniques are
widely used for making the masks in UV lithography.
X-ray lithography has been under development since around 1972. As in E-beam
lithography, the wavelengths of X-rays are much shorter than UV light (x-ray wavelength
ranges from 0.005 nm to several dozen nm, overlapping the lower end of the UV range).
Thus, they hold the promise of sharper imaging during exposure of the resist. X-rays are
difficult to focus during lithography. Consequently, contact or proximity printing must be
used, and a small x-ray source must be used at a relatively large distance from the wafer
surface to achieve good image resolution through the mask.
Ion lithography systems divide into two categories: (1) focused ion beam systems,
whose operation is similar to a scanning E-beam system and avoids the need for a mask;
and (2) masked ion beam systems, which expose the resist through a mask by proximity
printing. As with E-beam and x-ray systems, ion lithography produces higher image
resolution than conventional UV photolithography.
34.4
LAYER PROCESSES USED IN IC FABRICATION
The steps required to produce an integrated circuit consist of chemical and physical
processes that add, alter, or remove regions on the silicon wafer that have been defined
by photolithography. These regions constitute the insulating, semiconducting, and con-
ducting areasthatformthe devicesandtheirintraconnectionsinthe integratedcircuits. The
layers are fabricated one at a time, step by step, each layer having a different configuration
and each requiring a separate photolithography mask, until all of the microscopic details of
the electronic devices and conducting paths have been constructed on the wafer surface.
812
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

In this section we consider the wafer processes used to add, alter, and subtract layers.
Processes that add or alter layers to the surface include (1) thermal oxidation, used to grow
a layer of silicon dioxide onto the silicon substrate; (2) chemical vapor deposition, a
versatileprocessused to apply various types of layers inICfabrication;(3)diffusion and ion
implantation, used to alter the chemistry of an existing layer or substrate; and (4) various
metallization processes that add metal layers to provide regions of electrical conduction on
the wafer. Finally (5), several etching processes are used to remove portions of the layers
that have been added to achieve the desired details of the integrated circuit.
34.4.1 THERMAL OXIDATION
Oxidation of the silicon wafer may be performed multiple times during fabrication of an
integratedcircuit.Silicondioxide(SiO2)isaninsulator,contrastedwiththesemiconducting
properties of Si. The ease with which a thin film of SiO2 can be produced on the surface of a
silicon wafer is one of the attractive features of silicon as a semiconductor material.
Silicon dioxide serves a number of important functions in IC fabrication: (1) It is
used as a mask to prevent diffusion or ion implantation of dopants into silicon. (2) It can
be used to isolate devices in the circuit. (3) It provides electrical insulation between levels
in multilevel metallization systems.
Several processes are used to form SiO2 in semiconductor manufacturing, depend-
ing on when during chip fabrication the oxide must be added. The most common process
is thermal oxidation, appropriate for growing SiO2 films on silicon substrates. In thermal
oxidation, the wafer is exposed to an oxidizing atmosphere at elevated temperature;
either oxygen or steam atmospheres are used, with the following reactions, respectively:
Si þ O2 ! SiO2
ð34:4Þ
or
Si þ 2H2O ! SiO2 þ 2H2
ð34:5Þ
Typical temperatures used in thermal oxidation of silicon range from 900C to 1300C
(1650F to 2350F). By controlling temperature and time, oxide films of predictable
thicknesses can be obtained. The equations show that silicon at the surface of the wafer
is consumed in the reaction, as seen in Figure 34.12. To grow a SiO2 film of thickness d
requires a layer of silicon that is 0.44d thick.
When a silicon dioxide film must be applied to surfaces other than silicon, then direct
thermal oxidation is not appropriate. An alternative process must be used, such as chemical
vapor deposition.
34.4.2 CHEMICAL VAPOR DEPOSITION
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) involves growth of a thin film on the surface of a heated
substrate by chemical reactions or decomposition of gases (Section 28.5.2). CVD is widely
FIGURE 34.12
Growth
of SiO2 ﬁlm on a silicon
substrate by thermal
oxidation, showing
changes in thickness that
occur:(1)beforeoxidation
and (2) after thermal
oxidation.
Section 34.4/Layer Processes Used in IC Fabrication
813

used in the processing of integrated circuit wafers to add layers of silicon dioxide, silicon
nitride (Si3N4), and silicon. Plasma-enhanced CVD is often used because it permits the
reactions to take place at lower temperatures.
Typical CVD Reactions in IC Fabrication
In the case of silicon dioxide, if the surface of
the wafer is only silicon (e.g., at the start of IC fabrication), then thermal oxidation is the
appropriate process by which to form a layer of SiO2. If the oxide layer must be grown over
materials other than silicon, such as aluminum or silicon nitride, then some alternative
technique must be used, such as CVD. Chemical vapor deposition of SiO2 is accomplished
by reacting a silicon compound such as silane (SiH4) with oxygen onto a heated substrate.
The reaction is carried out at around 425C (800F) and can be summarized by
SiH4 þ O2 ! SiO2 þ 2H2
ð34:6Þ
The density of the silicon dioxide film and its bonding to the substrate is generally
poorer than that achieved by thermal oxidation. Consequently, CVD is used only when the
preferred process is not feasible; that is, when the substrate surface is not silicon, or when
the high temperatures used in thermal oxidation cannot be tolerated. CVD can be used to
deposit layers of doped SiO2, such as phosphorus-doped silicon dioxide (called P-glass).
Silicon nitride is used as a masking layer during oxidation of silicon. Si3N4 has a low
oxidation rate compared with Si, so a nitride mask can be used to prevent oxidation in
coated areas on the silicon surface. Silicon nitride is also used as a passivation layer
(protecting against sodium diffusion and moisture). A conventional CVD process for
coating Si3N4 onto a silicon wafer involves reaction of silane and ammonia (NH3) ataround
800C (1500F) as follows:
3SiH4 þ 4NH3 ! Si3N4 þ 12H2
ð34:7Þ
Plasma-enhanced CVD is also used for basically the same coating reaction, the advantage
being that it can be performed at much lower temperatures—around 300C (600F).
Polycrystalline silicon (called polysilicon to distinguish it from silicon having a single
crystal structure such as the boule and wafer) has a number of uses in IC fabrication,
including [14]: conducting material for leads, gate electrodes in MOS devices, and contact
material in shallow junction devices. Chemical vapor deposition to coat polysilicon onto a
wafer involves reduction of silane at temperatures around 600C (1100F), as expressed by
the following:
SiH4 ! Si þ 2H2
ð34:8Þ
Epitaxial Deposition
A related process for growing a film onto a substrate is epitaxial
deposition, distinguished by the feature that the film has a crystalline structure that is an
extension of the substrate’s structure. If the film material is the same as the substrate (e.g.,
silicon on silicon), then its crystal lattice will be identical to and a continuation of the wafer
crystal. Two primary techniques to perform epitaxial deposition are vapor-phase epitaxy
and molecular-beam epitaxy.
Vapor-phase epitaxy is the most important in semiconductor processing and is based
on chemical vapor deposition. In growing silicon on silicon, the process is accomplished
under closely controlled conditions at higher temperatures than conventional CVD of Si,
using diluted reacting gases to slow the process so that an epitaxial layer can be successfully
formed. Various reactions are possible, including Eq. (34.8), but the most widely used
industrial processinvolveshydrogenreduction ofsilicontetrachloride gas(SiCl4) ataround
1100C (2000F) as follows:
SiCl4 þ 2H2 ! Si þ 4HCl
ð34:9Þ
814
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

The melting point of silicon is 1410C (2570F), so the preceding reaction is carried
out at temperatures below Tm for Si, considered an advantage for vapor-phase epitaxy.
Molecular-beam epitaxy uses a vacuum evaporation process (Section 28.5.1), in
which silicon together with one or more dopants are vaporized and transported to the
substrate in a vacuum chamber. Its advantage is that it can be carried out at lower
temperatures than CVD; processing temperatures are 400C to 800C (750F to
1450F). However, throughput is relatively low and equipment is expensive.
34.4.3 INTRODUCTION OF IMPURITIES INTO SILICON
IC technology relies on the ability to alter the electrical properties of silicon by introducing
impurities into selected regions at the surface. Adding impurities into the silicon surface is
called doping. The doped regions are used to create p-n junctions that form the transistors,
diodes, and other devices in the circuit. A silicon-dioxide mask produced by thermal
oxidation and photolithography is used to isolate the silicon regions that are to be doped.
Common elements used as impurities areboron (B), which forms electron acceptor regions
in the silicon substrate (p-type regions); and phosphorus (P), arsenic (As), and antimony
(Sb), which form electron donor regions (n-type regions). The predominant technique by
which silicon is doped with these elements is ion implantation.
In ion implantation, vaporized ions of the impurity element are accelerated by an
electric field and directed at the silicon substrate surface (Section 28.2.2). The atoms
penetrate into the surface, losing energy and finally stopping at some depth in the crystal
structure, the average depth being determined by the mass of the ion and the acceleration
voltage. Higher voltages produce greater depths of penetration, typically several hundred
Angstroms (1 Angstrom ¼ 104 mm ¼ 101 nm). Advantagesof ion implantation arethat it
can be accomplished at room temperature and provides exact doping density.
The problem with ion implantation is that the ion collisions disrupt and damage the
crystal lattice structure. Very-high-energy collisions can transform the starting crystalline
material into an amorphous structure. This problem is solved by annealing at tempera-
tures between 500C and 900C (1000Fand 1800F), which allows the lattice structure to
repair itself and return to its crystal state.
34.4.4 METALLIZATION
Conductive materials must be deposited onto the wafer during processing to serve several
functions: (1) form certain components (e.g., gates) of devices in the IC; (2) provide
intraconnecting conduction paths between devices on the chip; and (3) connect the chip to
external circuits. To satisfy these functions the conducting materials must be formed into
very fine patterns. The process of fabricating these patterns is known as metallization, and
it combines various thin film deposition technologies with photolithography. In this
section we consider the materials and processes used in metallization. Connecting the
chip to external circuitry also involves IC packaging, which is explored in Section 34.6.
Metallization Materials
Materials used in the metallization of silicon-based integrated
circuits must have certain desirable properties, some of which relate to electrical
function, whereas others relate to manufacturing processing. The desirable properties
of a metallization material are [5], [14]: (1) low resistivity; (2) low-contact resistance with
silicon, (3) good adherence to the underlying material, usually Si or SiO2; (4) ease of
deposition, compatible with photolithography; (5) chemical stability–noncorroding,
nonreactive, and noncontaminating; (6) physical stability during temperatures encoun-
tered in processing; and (7) good lifetime stability.
Section 34.4/Layer Processes Used in IC Fabrication
815

Although no material meets all of these requirements perfectly, aluminum satisfies
mostofthemeitherwelloradequately,anditisthemostwidelyusedmetallizationmaterial.
Aluminum is usually alloyed with small amounts of (1) silicon to reduce reactivity with
silicon in the substrate, and (2) copper to inhibit electromigration of Al atoms caused by
current flow when the IC is in service. Other materials used for metallization in integrated
circuits include polysilicon (Si); gold (Au); refractory metals (e.g., W, Mo); silicides (e.g.,
WSi2, MoSi2, TaSi2); and nitrides (e.g., TaN, TiN, and ZrN). These other materials are
generallyusedinapplicationssuchasgatesandcontacts.Aluminumisgenerallyfavoredfor
device intraconnections and top level connections to external circuitry.
Metallization Processes
A number of processes are available to accomplish metalli-
zation in IC fabrication: physical vapor deposition, chemical vapor deposition, and
electroplating. Among PVD processes, vacuum evaporation and sputtering are applica-
ble (Section 28.5.1). Vacuum evaporation can be applied for aluminum metallization.
Vaporization is usually accomplished by resistance heating or electron beam evapora-
tion. Evaporation is difficult or impossible for depositing refractory metals and com-
pounds. Sputtering can be used for depositing aluminum as well as refractory metals and
certain metallizing compounds. It achieves better step coverage than evaporation, often
important after many processing cycles when the surface contour has become irregular.
However, deposition rates are lower and equipment is more expensive.
Chemical vapor deposition is also applicable as a metallization technique. Its
processingadvantagesincludeexcellent step coverageandgooddepositionrates. Materials
suited to CVD include tungsten, molybdenum, and most of the silicides used in semi-
conductor metallization. CVD for metallization in semiconductor processing is less
common than PVD. Finally, electroplating (Section 28.3.1) is occasionally used in IC
fabrication to increase the thickness of thin films.
34.4.5 ETCHING
All of thepreceding processesinthis sectioninvolve additionof material to the wafersurface,
either in the form of a thin film or the doping of the surface with an impurity element. Certain
steps in IC manufacturing require material removal from the surface; this is accomplished by
etching away the unwanted material. Etching is usually done selectively, by coating surface
areasthataretobeprotectedandleavingotherareasexposedforetching.Thecoatingmaybe
anetch-resistantphotoresist,oritmaybeapreviouslyappliedlayerofmaterial suchassilicon
dioxide. We briefly encountered etching in our description of photolithography. This section
gives some of the technical details of this step in IC fabrication.
There are two main categories of etching process in semiconductor processing: wet
chemical etching and dry plasma etching. Wet chemical etching is the older of the two
processes and is easier to use. However, there are certain disadvantages that have resulted
in growing use of dry plasma etching.
TABLE 34.2
Some common chemical etchants used in semiconductor processing.
Material to be Removed
Etchant (usually in aqueous solution)
Aluminum (Al)
Mixture of phosphoric acid (H3PO4), nitric acid (HNO3),
and acetic acid (CH3COOH).
Silicon (Si)
Mixture of nitric acid (HNO3) and hydrofluoric acid (HF)
Silicon dioxide (SiO2)
Hydrofluoric acid (HF)
Silicon nitride (Si3N4)
Hot phosphoric acid (H3PO4)
816
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

Wet Chemical Etching
Wet chemical etching involves the use of an aqueous solution,
usually an acid, to etch away a target material. The etching solution is selected because it
chemically attacks the specific material to be removed and not the protective layer used as a
mask.Someofthecommonetchantsusedtoremovematerialsinwaferprocessingarelistedin
Table 34.2.
In its simplest form, the process can be accomplished by immersing the masked wafers
in an appropriate etchant for a specified time and then immediately transferring them to a
thorough rinsing procedure to stop the etching. Process variables such as immersion time,
etchantconcentration,andtemperatureareimportantindeterminingtheamountofmaterial
removed. A properly etched layer will have a profile as shown in Figure 34.13. Note that the
etching reaction is isotropic (it proceeds equally in all directions), resulting in an undercut
below the protective mask. In general, wet chemical etching is isotropic, and so the mask
pattern must be sized to compensate for this effect.
Note also that the etchant does not attack the layer below the target material in our
illustration. In the ideal case, an etching solution can be formulated that will react only
with the target material and not with other materials in contact with it. In practical cases,
the other materials exposed to the etchant may be attacked but to a lesser degree than the
target material. The etch selectivity of the etchant is the ratio of etching rates between the
target material and some other material, such as the mask or substrate material. For
example, etch selectivity of hydrofluoric acid for SiO2 over Si is infinite.
If process control is inadequate, either under-etching or over-etching can occur, as in
Figure 34.14. Underetching, in which the target layer is not completely removed, results
when the etching time is too short and/or the etching solution is too weak. Over-etching
involves too much of the target material being removed, resulting in loss of pattern
definition and possible damageto the layerbeneath the target layer. Over-etching is caused
by overexposure to the etchant.
Dry Plasma Etching
This etching process uses an ionized gas to etch a target material.
Theionizedgasiscreatedbyintroducinganappropriategas mixtureintoavacuum chamber
FIGURE 34.13
Proﬁle of a properly
etched layer.
FIGURE 34.14
Two problems in etching: (a) under-etching and (b) over-etching.
Section 34.4/Layer Processes Used in IC Fabrication
817

and using radio frequency (RF) electrical energy to ionize a portion of the gas, thus creating
a plasma. The high-energy plasma reacts with the target surface, vaporizing the material to
remove it. There are several ways in which a plasma can be used to etch a material; the two
principal processes in IC fabrication are plasma etching and reactive ion etching.
In plasma etching, the function of the ionized gas is to generate atoms or molecules
that are chemically very reactive, so that the target surface is chemically etched upon
exposure. The plasma etchants are usually based on fluorine or chlorine gases. Etch
selectivity is generally more of a problem in plasma etching than in wet chemical etching.
For example, etch selectivity for SiO2 over Si in a typical plasma etching process is 15 at
best [4], compared with infinity with HF chemical etching.
An alternative function of the ionized gas can be to physically bombard the target
material, causing atoms to be ejected from the surface. This is the process of sputtering,
one of the techniques in physical vapor deposition. When used for etching, the process is
called sputter etching. Although this form of etching has been applied in semiconductor
processing, it is much more common to combine sputtering with plasma etching as
described in the preceding, which results in the process known as reactive ion etching.
This produces both chemical and physical etching of the target surface.
The advantage of the plasma etching processes over wet chemical etching is that
they are much more anisotropic. This property can be readily defined with reference to
Figure 34.15. In (a), a fully anisotropic etch is shown; the undercut is zero. The degree to
which an etching process is anisotropic is defined as the ratio:
A ¼ d
u
ð34:10Þ
whereA ¼ degreeof anisotropy; d ¼ depthof etch, which in most cases will be thethickness
of the etched layer; and u ¼ the undercut dimension, as illustrated in Figure 34.15(b).
Wet chemical etching usually yields Avalues around 1.0, indicating isotropic etching.
In sputter etching, ion bombardment of the surface is nearly perpendicular, resulting in A
values approaching infinity—almost fully anisotropic. Plasma etching and reactive ion
etching have high degrees of anisotropy, but below those achieved in sputter etching. As IC
feature sizes continue to shrink, anisotropy becomes increasingly important for achieving
the required dimensional tolerances.
34.5
INTEGRATING THE FABRICATION STEPS
In Sections 34.3 and 34.4, we examined the individual processing technologies used in IC
fabrication. In this section, we show how these technologies are combined into the
sequence of steps to produce an integrated circuit.
The planar processing sequence consists of fabricating a series of layers of various
materials in selected areas on a silicon substrate. The layers form insulating, semiconducting,
FIGURE 34.15
(a) A
fully anisotropic etch,
with A ¼ 1; and (b) a
partially anisotropic etch,
with A ¼ approximately
1.3.
818
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

or conducting regions on the substrate to create the particular electronic devices required in
the integrated circuit. The layers might also serve the temporary function of masking certain
areas so that a particular process is only applied to desired portions of the surface. The masks
are subsequently removed.
The layers are formed by thermal oxidation, epitaxial growth, deposition techniques
(CVD and PVD), diffusion, and ion implantation. In Table 34.3, we summarize the processes
typicallyused to add or alter a layer of a given material type. The use of lithography to apply a
particular process only to selected regions of the surface is illustrated in Figure 34.16.
An example will be useful here to show the process integration in IC fabrication. We
will use an n-channel metal oxide semiconductor (NMOS) logic device to illustrate the
processing sequence. The sequence for NMOS integrated circuits is less complex than for
CMOS or bipolar technologies, although the processes for these IC categories are basically
similar. The device to be fabricated is illustrated in Figure 34.1.
The starting substrate is a lightly doped p-type silicon wafer, which will form the base
of the n-channel transistor. The processing steps are illustrated in Figure 34.17 and
described here (some details have been simplified, and the metallization process for
intraconnecting devices has been omitted): (1) A layer of Si3N4 is deposited by CVD onto
the Si substrate using photolithography to define the regions. This layer of Si3N4 will serve
as a mask for the thermal oxidation process in the next step. (2) SiO2 is grown in the
exposed regions of the surface by thermal oxidation. The SiO2 regions are insulating and
will become the means by which this device is isolated from other devices in the circuit.
(3) The Si3N4 mask is stripped by etching. (4) Another thermal oxidation is done to add a
thin gate oxide layer to previously uncoated surfaces and increase the thickness of the
previous SiO2 layer. (5) Polysilicon is deposited by CVD onto the surface and then doped
n-type using ion implantation. (6) The polysilicon is selectively etched using photo-
lithography to leave the gate electrode of the transistor. (7) The source and drain regions
(n+) are formed by ion implantation of arsenic (As) into the substrate. An implantation
energy level is selected that will penetrate the thin SiO2 layer but not the polysilicon gate
TABLE 34.3
Layer materials added or altered in IC fabrication and
associated processes.
Layer Material (function)
Typical Fabrication Processes
Si, polysilicon (semiconductor)
CVD
Si, epitaxial (semiconductor)
Vapor phase epitaxy
Si doping (n-type or p-type)
Ion implantation, diffusion
SiO2 (insulator, mask)
Thermal oxidation, CVD
Si3N4 (mask)
CVD
Al (conductor)
PVD, CVD
P-glass (protection)
CVD
FIGURE 34.16
Formation of layers selectively through the use of masks: (a) thermal oxidation of
silicon, (b) selective doping, and (c) deposition of a material onto a substrate.
Section 34.5/Integrating the Fabrication Steps
819

or the thicker SiO2 isolation layer. (8) Phosphosilicate glass (P-glass) is deposited onto the
surface by CVD to protect the circuitry beneath.
34.6
IC PACKAGING
After all of the processing steps on the wafer have been completed, a final series of
operations must be accomplished to transform the wafer into individual chips, ready to
connect to external circuits and prepared to withstand the harsh environment of the world
outside the cleanroom. These final steps are referred to as IC packaging. (As we shall seein
the following chapter, packaging extends beyond the preparation of individual IC chips.)
Packaging of integrated circuits is concerned with design issues such as (1) electrical
connections to external circuits; (2) materials to encase the chip and protect it from the
environment (humidity, corrosion, temperature, vibration, mechanical shock); (3) heat
dissipation; (4) performance, reliability, and service life; and (5) cost.
There are also manufacturing issues in packaging, including: (1) chip separation—
cutting the wafer into individual chips, (2) connecting it to the package, (3) encapsulating
thechip,and(4)circuittesting. Themanufacturingissuesaretheonesofgreatestinterestin
this section. Although most of the design issues are properly left to other texts [8], [11], and
[13], let us examine some of the engineering aspects of IC packages and the types of IC
packages available, before describing the package processing steps to make them.
34.6.1 IC PACKAGE DESIGN
In this section we consider three topics related to the design of an integrated circuit
package: (1) the number of input/output terminals required for an IC of a given size,
(2) the materials used in IC packages, and (3) package styles.
Si3N4
SiO2
Polysilicon (n-type)
p-Type Si
substrate
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
P-glass
As
(7)
(8)
(5)
(6)
Additional SiO2
FIGURE 34.17
IC fabrication sequence: (1) Si3N4 mask is deposited by CVD on Si substrate;
(2) SiO2 is grown by thermal oxidation in unmasked regions; (3) the Si3N4 mask is stripped; (4) a thin
layer of SiO2 is grown by thermal oxidation; (5) polysilicon is deposited by CVD and doped n+ using
ion implantation; (6) the poly-Si is selectively etched using photolithography to deﬁne the gate
electrode; (7) source and drain regions are formed by doping n+ in the substrate; (8) P-glass is
deposited onto the surface for protection.
820
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

Determining the Number of Input/Output Terminals
The basic engineering problem
in IC packaging is to connect the many internal circuits to input/output (I/O) terminals so
that the appropriate electrical signalscan be communicated between theIC and the outside
world. As the number of devices in an IC increases, the required number of I/O terminals
(leads) also increases. The problem is of course aggravated by trends in semiconductor
technology that have led to decreases in device size and increases in the number of devices
that can be packed into an IC. Fortunately, the number of I/O terminals does not have to
equal the number of devices in the IC. The dependency between the two values is given by
Rent’s rule, named after the IBM engineer (E. F. Rent) who defined the following
relationship around 1960:
nio ¼ C n m
c
ð34:11Þ
where nio ¼ the number of input/output terminals required; nc ¼ the number of circuits in
the IC, usually taken to be the number of logic gates; and C and m are parameters in the
equation.
Commonlyaccepted Candmvaluesare4.5and0.5foramodernVLSImicroprocessor
circuit. However, the parameters in Rent’s rule depend on the type of circuit. Memory
devices require far fewer I/O terminals than microprocessors because of the column and row
structureofmemoryunits.TypicalvaluesforastaticmemorydeviceareC¼ 6.0andm¼ 0.12.
IC Package Materials
Package sealing involves encapsulating the IC chip in an appro-
priate packaging material. Two material types dominate current packaging technology:
ceramic and plastic. Metal was used in early packaging designs but is today no longer
important, except for lead frames.
The common ceramic packaging material is alumina (Al2O3).Advantagesof ceramic
packagingincludehermeticsealing ofthe ICchipandthefactthat highlycomplexpackages
can be produced. Disadvantages include poor dimensional control because of shrinkage
during firing and the high dielectric constant of alumina.
Plastic IC packages are not hermetically sealed, but their cost is lower than ceramic.
They are generally used for mass produced ICs, where very high reliability is not required.
Plastics used in IC packaging include epoxies, polyimides, and silicones.
IC Package Styles
AwidevarietyofICpackagestylesisavailabletomeettheinput/output
requirements indicated in the preceding. In nearly all applications, the IC is a component in a
larger electronic system and must be attached to a printed circuit board (PCB). There are two
broad categories of component mounting to a PCB, shown in Figure 34.18: through-hole and
surfacemount.Inthrough-holemounting,alsoknownaspin-in-hole(PIH)technology,theIC
package and other electronic components (e.g., discrete resistors, capacitors) have leads that
are inserted through holes in the board and are soldered on the underside. In surface-mount
technology (SMT), the components are attached to the surface of the board (or in some cases,
bothtopandbottomsurfaces).Several leadconfigurationsareavailable inSMT, asillustrated
in (b), (c), and (d) of the figure.
FIGURE 34.18
Types
of component lead
attachment on a printed
circuit board: (a) through-
hole, and several styles of
surface-mount techno-
logy; (b) butt lead; (c) ‘‘J’’
lead; and (d) gull-wing.
Section 34.6/IC Packaging
821

The major styles of IC packages include (1) dual in-line package, (2) square package,
and (3) pin grid array. Some of these are available in both through-hole and surface-mount
styles, whereas others are designed for only one mounting method.
The dual in-line package (DIP) is currently the most common form of IC package,
available in both through-hole and surface-mount configurations. It has two rows of leads
(terminals) on either side of a rectangular body, as in Figure 34.19. Spacing between leads
(center-to-center distance) in the conventional through-hole DIP is 2.54 mm (0.1 in), and
the number of leads ranges between 8 and 64. Hole spacing in the through-hole DIP style is
limited by the ability to drill holes closely togetherin a printed circuit board. This limitation
can be relaxed with surface-mount technology because the leads are not inserted into the
board; standard lead spacing on surface-mount DIPs is 1.27 mm (0.05 in).
The number of terminals in a DIP is limited by its rectangular shape in which leads
project only from two sides; that means that the number of leads on either side is nio/2. For
high values of nio (between 48 and 64), differences in conducting lengths between leads in
the middle of the DIP and those on the ends cause problems in high-speed electrical
characteristics. Some of these problems are addressed with a square package, in which the
leads are arrangedaround theperiphery so that thenumber of terminals on a side is nio/4.A
surface-mount square package is illustrated in Figure 34.20.
Even with a square chippackage, there isstill a practical upper limit on terminal count
dictated by the manner in which the leads in the package are linearly allocated. The number
of leads on a package can be maximized by using a square matrix of pins. A pin grid array
(PGA)consistsofatwo-dimensionalarrayofpinterminalsontheundersideofasquarechip
enclosure. In the ideal, the entire bottom surface of the package is fully occupied by pins, so
that the pin count in each direction is square root of nio. However, as a practical matter, the
center area of the package has no pins because this region contains the IC chip.
34.6.2 PROCESSING STEPS IN IC PACKAGING
The packaging of an IC chip in manufacturing can be divided into the following steps:
(1) wafer testing, (2) chip separation, (3) die bonding, (4) wire bonding, and (5) package
sealing. After packaging, a final functional test is performed on each packaged IC.
FIGURE 34.20
Square
package for surface mounting
with gull wing leads.
FIGURE 34.19
Dual in-line package with
16 terminals, shown as a through-hole
conﬁguration.
822
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

Wafer Testing
Current semiconductor processing techniques provide several hundred
individual ICs per wafer. It isconvenient to perform certain functional tests on the ICs while
they are still together on the wafer—before chip separation. Testing is accomplished by
computer-controlledtest equipment thatusesa set of needleprobesconfigured to matchthe
connecting pads on the surface of the chip; multiprobe is the term used for this testing
procedure. When the probes contact the pads, a series of DC tests are carried out to indicate
shortcircuitsandotherfaults; thisisfollowedbyafunctionaltestoftheIC.Chipsthatfailthe
test are marked with an ink dot; these defects are not packaged. Each IC is positioned in its
turn beneath the probes for testing, using a high precision x-y table to index the wafer from
one chip site to the next.
Chip Separation
Thenextstepaftertestingistocutthewaferintoindividualchips(dice).A
thin diamond-impregnated saw blade is used to perform the cutting operation. The sawing
machine is highly automatic and its alignment with the ‘‘streets’’ between circuits is very
accurate. The wafer is attached to a piece of adhesive tape that is mounted in a frame. The
adhesive tape holds the individual chips in place during and after sawing; the frame is a
convenience in subsequent handling of the chips. Chips with ink dots are now discarded.
Die Bonding
The individual chips must next be attached to their individual packages, a
procedure called die bonding. Owing to the miniature size of the chips, automated handling
systems are used to pick the separated chips from the tape frame and place them for die
bonding. Various techniques have been developed to bond the chip to the packaging
substrate; we describe two methods here: eutectic die bonding and epoxy die bonding.
Eutectic die bonding, used for ceramic packages, consists of (1) depositing a thin film of gold
on the bottom surface of the chip; (2) heating the base of the ceramic package to
a temperature above 370C (698F), the eutectic temperature of the Au–Si system; and
(3) bonding the chip to the metallization pattern on the heated base. In epoxy die bonding,
used for plastic VLSI packaging, a small amount of epoxy is dispensed on the package base
(theleadframe),andthechipispositionedontheepoxy;theepoxyisthencured,bondingthe
chip to the surface.
Wire Bonding
After the die is bonded to the package, electrical connections are made
between the contact pads on the chip surface and the package leads. The connections are
generallymadeusingsmall-diameterwiresofaluminumorgold,asillustratedinFigure34.21.
Typical wire diameters for aluminum are 0.05 mm (0.002 in), and gold wire diameters are
about half that diameter. (Au has higher electrical conductivity than Al, but is more
expensive.) Aluminum wires are bonded by ultrasonic bonding, whereas gold wires are
bonded by thermocompression, thermosonic, or ultrasonic means. Ultrasonic bonding uses
ultrasonic energy to weld the wire to the pad surface. Thermocompression bonding involves
heating the end of the wire to form a molten ball, and then the ball is pressed into the pad to
form the bond. Thermosonic bonding combines ultrasonic and thermal energies to form the
FIGURE 34.21
Typical
wire connection between
chip contact pad and
lead.
Section 34.6/IC Packaging
823

bond. Automatic wire bonding machines are used to perform these operations at rates up to
200 bonds per minute.
Package Sealing
As mentioned, the two common packaging materials are ceramic and
plastic. The processing methods are different for the two materials. Ceramic packages are
made from a dispersion of ceramic powder (Al2O3 is most common) in a liquid binder (e.g.,
polymer and solvent). The mix is firstformed into thin sheets and dried,andthen cutto size.
Holes are punchedforinterconnections. Therequiredwiring paths are then fabricated onto
each sheet, and metal is filled into the holes. The sheets are then laminated by pressing and
sintering to form a monolithic (single stone) body.
Two types of plastic package are available, postmolded and premolded. In post-
molded packages, an epoxy thermosetting plastic is transfer molded around the assembled
chip and lead frame (after wire bonding), in effect transforming the pieces into one solid
body.However, themoldingprocesscanbeharshonthedelicatebondwires,andpremolded
packages are an alternative. In premolded packaging, an enclosure base is molded before
encapsulation and then the chip and lead frame are connected to it, adding a solid lid or
other material to provide protection.
Final Testing
Upon completion of the packaging sequence, each IC must undergo a
final test, the purpose of which is to (1) determine which units, if any, have been damaged
during packaging; and (2) measure performance characteristics of each device.
Burn-in test procedures sometimes include elevated temperature testing, in
which the packaged IC is placed in an oven at temperatures around 125C (250F)
for 24 hours and then tested. A device that fails such a test would have been likely to
have failed early during service. If the device is intended for environments in which
wide temperature variations occur, a temperature cycle test is appropriate. This test
subjects each device to a series of temperature reversals, between values around –50C
(–60F) on the lower side and 125C (250F) on the upper side. Additional tests for
devices requiring high reliability might include mechanical vibration tests and hermetic
(leak) tests.
34.7
YIELDS IN IC PROCESSING
The fabrication of integrated circuits consists of many processing steps performed in
sequence. In wafer processing in particular, there may be hundreds of distinct operations
through which the wafer passes. At each step, there is a chance that something may go
wrong, resulting in the loss of the wafer or portions of it corresponding to individual chips.
A simple probability model to predict the final yield of good product is
Y ¼ Y1Y2 . . . Yn
where Y ¼ final yield; Y1, Y2, Yn are the yields of each processing step; and n ¼ total
number of steps in the processing sequence.
As a practical matter, this model, although perfectly valid, is difficult to use
because of the large number of steps involved and the variability of yields for each step. It
is more convenient to divide the processing sequence into major phases, as we have
organized our discussion in this chapter (see Figure 34.3), and to define the yields for
each phase. The first phase involves growth of the single-crystal boule. The term crystal
yield Yc refers to the amount of single-crystal material in the boule compared with the
starting amount of electronic grade silicon. The typical crystal yield is about 50%. After
crystal growing, the boule is sliced into wafers, the yield for which is described as the
824
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

crystal-to-slice yield Ys. This depends on the amount of material lost during grinding of
the boule, the width of the saw blade relative to the wafer thickness during slicing, and
other losses. A typical value might be 50%, although much of the lost silicon during
grinding and slicing is recyclable.
The next phase is wafer processing to fabricate the individual ICs. From a yield
viewpoint, this can be divided into wafer yield and multiprobe yield. Wafer yield Yw refers
to the number of wafers that survive processing compared to the starting quantity. Certain
wafers are designated as test pieces or similar uses and therefore result in losses and a
reduction in yield; in other cases, wafers are broken or processing conditions go awry.
Typical values of wafer yield are around 70% if testing losses are included. For wafers that
come through processing and are multiprobe tested, only a certain proportion pass the test,
called the multiprobe yield Ym. Multiprobe yield is highly variable and can range from very
low values (less than 10%) to relatively high values (more than 90%), depending on IC
complexity and worker skill in the processing areas.
Following packaging, final testing of the IC is performed. This invariably produces
additional losses, resulting in a final test yield Yt in the range 90% to 95%. If the five
phase yields are combined, the final yield can be estimated by
Y ¼ YcYsYwYmYt
ð34:12Þ
Given the typical values at each step, the final yield compared with the starting amount of
silicon is quite low.
The heart of IC fabrication is wafer processing, the yield from which is measured in
multiprobe testing Ym. Yields in the other areas are fairly predictable, but not in wafer-fab.
Two types of processing defects can be distinguished in wafer processing: (1) area defects
and (2) point defects. Area defects are those that affect major areas of the wafer, possibly
the entire surface. These are caused by variations or incorrect settings in process
parameters. Examples include added layers that are too thin or too thick, insufficient
diffusion depths in doping, and over- or under-etching. In general these defects are
correctable by improved process control or development of alternative processes that are
superior. For example, doping by ion implantation has largely replaced diffusion, and dry
plasma etching has been substituted for wet chemical etching to better control feature
dimensions.
Point defects occur at very localized areas on the wafer surface, affecting only one or a
limited number of ICs in a particular area. Theyare commonly causedby dust particles either
on the wafer surface or the lithographic masks. Point defects also include dislocations in the
crystal lattice structure (Section 2.3.2). These point defects are distributed in some way over
the surfaceof the wafer, resulting in ayieldthat is a function of the density of the defects, their
distribution over the surface, and the processed area of the wafer. If the area defects are
assumed negligible, and the point defects are assumed uniform over the surface area of the
wafer, the resulting yield can be modeled by the equation
Ym ¼
1
1 þ AD
ð34:13Þ
where Ym ¼ the yield of good chips as determined in multiprobe; A ¼ the area processed,
cm2 (in2); and D ¼ density of point defects, defects/cm2 (defects/in2). This equation is
based on Bose-Einstein statistics and has been found to be a good predictor of wafer
processing performance, especially for highly integrated chips (VLSI and beyond).
Wafer processing is the key to successful fabrication of integrated circuits. For an IC
producer to be profitable, high yields must be achieved during this phase of manufactur-
ing. This is accomplished using the purest possible starting materials, the latest equipment
technologies, good process control over the individual processing steps, maintenance of
clean room conditions, and efficient and effective inspection and testing procedures.
Section 34.7/Yields in IC Processing
825

REFERENCES
[1] Bakoglu, H. B. Circuits, Interconnections, and
Packaging for VLSI. Addison-Wesley Longman,
Reading, Massachusetts, 1990.
[2] Coombs, C. F., Jr. (ed.) Printed Circuits Handbook,
6th ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2006.
[3] Edwards, P. R. Manufacturing Technology in the Elec-
tronics Industry. Chapman & Hall, London, 1991.
[4] Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology. 4th ed. John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 2000.
[5] Gise, P., and Blanchard, R. Modern Semiconductor
Fabrication Technology. Prentice-Hall, Upper Sad-
dle River, New Jersey, 1986.
[6] Harper, C. Electronic Materials and Processes
Handbook, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2009.
[7] Jackson, K. A., and Schroter, W. (eds.). Handbook of
Semiconductor Technology. Vol. 2, Processing of
Semiconductors. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2000.
[8] Manzione, L. T. Plastic Packaging of Micro-
electronic Devices. AT&T Bell Laboratories, pub-
lished by Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1990.
[9] May, G. S., and Spanos, C. J. Fundamentals of
Semiconductor
Manufacturing
and
Process
Control. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey,
2006.
[10] National Research Council (NRC). Implications of
Emerging Micro- and Nanotechnologies. Commit-
tee on Implications of Emerging Micro- and Nano-
technologies,
The
National
Academies
Press,
Washington, D.C., 2002.
[11] Pecht, M. (ed.). Handbook of Electronic Package
Design. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1991.
[12] Runyan, W. R., and Bean, K. E. Semiconductor Inte-
grated
Circuit
Processing
Technology.
Addison-
Wesley Longman, Reading, Massachusetts, 1990.
[13] Seraphim, D. P., Lasky, R., and Li, C-Y. (eds.).
Principles of Electronic Packaging. McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1989.
[14] Sze, S. M. (ed.). VLSI Technology. McGraw-Hill,
New York, 2004.
[15] Ulrich, R. K., and Brown, W. D. Advanced Elec-
tronic Packaging. 2nd ed. IEEE Press and John
Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2006.
[16] Van
Zant,
P.
Microchip
Fabrication.
5th
ed.
McGraw-Hill, New York, 2005.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
34.1.
What is an integrated circuit?
34.2.
Name some of the important semiconductor
materials.
34.3.
Describe the planar process.
34.4.
What are the three major stages in the production
of silicon-based integrated circuits?
34.5.
What is a clean room and explain the classification
system by which clean rooms are rated?
34.6.
What are some of the significant sources of con-
taminants in IC processing?
34.7.
What is the name of the process most commonly
used to grow single crystal ingots of silicon for
semiconductor processing?
34.8.
What are the alternatives to photolithography in
IC processing?
34.9.
What is a photoresist?
34.10.
Why is ultraviolet light favored over visible light in
photolithography?
34.11.
Name
the
three
exposure
techniques
in
photolithography.
34.12.
What layer material is produced by thermal oxida-
tion in IC fabrication?
34.13.
Define epitaxial deposition.
34.14.
What are some of the important design functions of
IC packaging?
34.15.
What is Rent’s rule?
34.16.
Name the two categories of component mounting
to a printed circuit board.
34.17.
What is a DIP?
34.18.
What is the difference between postmolding and
premolding in plastic IC chip packaging?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 16 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point.
Each omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct
826
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

number of answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct
answers.
34.1.
How many electronic devices would be contained
in an IC chip for it to be classified in the VLSI
category: (a) 1000, (b) 10,000, (c) 1 million, or
(d) 100 million?
34.2.
An alternative name for chip in semiconductor
processing is which one of the following (one
best answer): (a) component, (b) device, (c) die,
(d) package, or (e) wafer?
34.3.
Which one of the following is the source of silicon
for semiconductor processing: (a) pure Si in nature,
(b) SiC, (c) Si3N4, or (d) SiO2?
34.4.
Which one of the following is the most common
form
of
radiation
used
in
photolithography:
(a) electronic beam radiation, (b) incandescent
light, (c) infrared light, (d) ultraviolet light, or
(e) X-ray?
34.5.
After exposure to light, a positive resist becomes
(a) less soluble or (b) more soluble to the chemical
developing fluid?
34.6.
Which of the following processes are used to add
layers of various materials in IC fabrication (three
best answers): (a) chemical vapor deposition,
(b) diffusion, (c) ion implantation, (d) physical
vapor deposition, (e) plasma etching, (f) thermal
oxidation, and (g) wet etching?
34.7.
Which of the following are doping processes in IC
fabrication (two best answers): (a) chemical vapor
deposition, (b) diffusion, (c) ion implantation,
(d) physical vapor deposition, (e) plasma etching,
(f) thermal oxidation, and (g) wet etching?
34.8.
Which one of the following is the most common
metal for intraconnection of devices in a silicon inte-
grated circuit: (a) aluminum, (b) copper, (c) gold,
(d) nickel, (e) silicon, or (f) silver?
34.9.
Which etching process produces the more aniso-
tropic etch in IC fabrication: (a) plasma etching or
(b) wet chemical etching?
34.10.
Which of the following are the two principal
packaging
materials
used
in
IC
packaging:
(a) aluminum, (b) aluminum oxide, (c) copper,
(d) epoxies, and (e) silicon dioxide?
34.11.
Which of the following metals are commonly used
for wire bonding of chip pads to the lead frame
(two best answers): (a) aluminum, (b) copper,
(c) gold, (d) nickel, (e) silicon, and (f) silver?
PROBLEMS
Silicon Processing and IC Fabrication
34.1.
A single crystal boule of silicon is grown by the
Czochralski process to an average diameter of
320 mm with length ¼ 1500 mm. The seed and
tang ends are removed, which reduces the length to
1150 mm. The diameter is ground to 300 mm. A 90-
mm-wide flat is ground on the surface that extends
from one end to the other. The ingot is then sliced
into wafers of thickness ¼ 0.50 mm, using an
abrasive saw blade whose thickness ¼ 0.33 mm.
Assuming that the seed and tang portions cut off
the ends of the starting boule were conical in shape,
determine (a) the original volume of the boule,
mm3; (b) how many wafers are cut from it, assum-
ing the entire 1150 mm length can be sliced; and
(c) the volumetric proportion of silicon in the
starting boule that is wasted during processing.
34.2.
A silicon boule is grown by the Czochralski process
to a diameter of 5.25 in and a length of 5 ft. The
seed and tang ends are cut off, reducing the effec-
tive length to 48.00 in. Assume that the seed and
tang portions are conical in shape. The diameter is
ground to 4.921 in (125 mm). A primary flat of
width 1.625 in is ground on the surface the entire
length of the ingot. The ingot is then sliced into
wafers 0.025 in thick, using an abrasive saw blade
whose thickness ¼ 0.0128 in. Determine (a) the
original volume of the boule, in3; (b) how many
wafers are cut from it, assuming the entire 4 ft
length can be sliced, and (c) what is the volumetric
proportion of silicon in the starting boule that is
wasted during processing?
34.3.
The processable area on a 156-mm-diameter wafer
is a 150-mm-diameter circle. How many square IC
chips can be processed within this area, if each chip
is 7.5 mm on a side? Assume the cut lines (streets)
between chips are of negligible width.
34.4.
Solve Problem 34.3, only use a wafer size of 257 mm
whose processable area has a diameter ¼ 250 mm.
What is the percent increase in (a) wafer diameter,
(b) processable wafer area, and (c) number of chips,
compared to the values in the previous problem?
34.5.
A 6.0-in wafer has a processable area with a 5.85-in
diameter. How many square IC chips can be fabri-
cated within this area, if each chip is 0.50 in on a
side? Assume the cut lines (streets) between chips
are of negligible width.
Problems
827

34.6.
Solve Problem 34.5, only use a wafer size of 12.0 in
whose processable area has a diameter ¼ 11.75 in.
What is the percent increase in (a) processable area
on the wafer and (b) number of chips on the wafer
compared
with
the
200%
increase
in
wafer
diameter?
34.7.
A 250 mm diameter silicon wafer has a processable
area that is circular with a diameter ¼ 225 mm. The
IC chips that will be fabricated on the wafer sur-
face are square with 20 mm on a side. However, the
processable area on each chip is only 18 mm by
18 mm. The density of circuits within each chip’s
processable area is 465 circuits per mm2. (a) How
many IC chips can be placed onto the wafer?
(b) Using Rent’s Rule with C ¼ 3.8 and m ¼
0.43, how many input/output terminals (pins) will
be needed for each chip package?
34.8.
A 12-inch diameter silicon wafer has a processable
area that is circular with a diameter ¼ 11.4 in. The
IC chips that will be fabricated on the wafer surface
are square with 0.75 in on a side, including an
allowance for subsequent chip separation. How-
ever, the processable area on each chip is only
0.60 in by 0.60 in. The density of circuits within
each chip’s processable area is 100,000 circuits per
square inch. (a) How many IC chips can be placed
onto the wafer? (b) Using Rent’s Rule with C ¼ 3.8
and m ¼ 0.43, how many input/output terminals
(pins) will be needed for each chip package?
34.9.
A silicon boule has been processed through grind-
ing to provide a cylinder whose diameter ¼ 285 mm
and whose length ¼ 900 mm. Next, it will be sliced
into wafers 0.7 mm thick using a cut-off saw with a
kerf ¼ 0.5 mm. The wafers thus produced will be
used to fabricate as many IC chips as possible for
the personal computer market. Each IC has a
market value to the company of $98. Each chip
is square with 15 mm on a side. The processable
area of each wafer is defined by a diameter ¼
270 mm. Estimate the value of all of the IC chips
that could be produced, assuming an overall yield
of 80% good product.
34.10.
The surface of a silicon wafer is thermally oxidized,
resulting in a SiO2 film that is 100 nm thick. If the
starting
thickness
of
the
wafer
was
exactly
0.400 mm, what is the final wafer thickness after
thermal oxidation?
34.11.
It is desired to etch out a region of a silicon dioxide
film on the surface of a silicon wafer. The SiO2 film
is 100 nm thick. The width of the etched-out area is
specified to be 650 nm. (a) If the degree of anisot-
ropy for the etchant in the process is known to be
1.25, what should be the size of the opening in the
mask through which the etchant will operate? (b) If
plasma etching is used instead of wet etching, and
the degree of anisotropy for plasma etching is
infinity, what should be the size of the mask
opening?
IC Packaging
34.12.
An integrated circuit used in a microprocessor will
contain 1000 logic gates. Use Rent’s rule with C ¼
3.8 and m ¼ 0.6 to determine the approximate
number of input/output pins required in the
package.
34.13.
A dual-in-line package has a total of 48 leads. Use
Rent’s rule with C ¼ 4.5 and m ¼ 0.5 to determine
the approximate number of logic gates that could
be fabricated in the IC chip for this package.
34.14.
It is desired to determine the effect of package style
on the number of circuits (logic gates) that can be
fabricated onto an IC chip to which the package is
assembled. Using Rent’s rule with C ¼ 4.5 and m ¼
0.5, compute the estimated number of devices
(logic gates) that could be placed on the chip in
the following cases: (a) a DIP with 16 I/O pins on a
side—a total of 32 pins; (b) a square chip carrier
with 16 pins on a side—a total of 64 I/O pins; and
(c) a pin grid array with 16 by 16 pins—a total of
256 pins.
34.15.
An integrated circuit used in a memory module
contains 224 memory circuits. Sixteen of these
integrated circuits are packaged onto a board to
provide a 256 Mbyte memory module. Use Rent’s
rule, Eq. (34.11), with C ¼ 6.0 and m ¼ 0.12 to
determine the approximate number of input/out-
put pins required in each of the integrated circuits.
34.16.
In the equation for Rent’s rule with C ¼ 4.5 and
m ¼ 0.5, determine the value of nio and nc at which
the number of logic gates equals the number of I/O
terminals in the package.
34.17.
A static memory device will have a two-dimen-
sional array with 64  64 cells. Determine the
number of input/output pins required using Rent’s
rule with C ¼ 6.0 and m ¼ 0.12.
34.18.
To produce a 10 megabit memory chip, how many
I/O pins are predicted by Rent’s rule (C ¼ 6.0 and
m ¼ 0.12)?
34.19.
The first IBM personal computer was based on the
Intel 8088 CPU, which was released in 1979. The
8088 had 29,000 transistors and 40 I/O pins. The final
version of the Pentium III (1 GHz) was released in
2000. It contained 28,000,000 transistors and had 370
I/O pins. (a) Determine the Rent’s rule coefficient
values m and C assuming that a transistor can be
considered a circuit. (b) Use the value of m and C to
828
Chapter 34/Processing of Integrated Circuits

predict the number of I/O pins required for the first
Pentium 4 assuming that it is manufactured with
42,000,000 transistors. (c) The first Pentium 4, re-
leased in 2001, used 423 I/O pins. Comment on the
accuracy of your prediction.
34.20.
Suppose it is desired to produce a memory device
that will be contained in a dual-in-line package
with 32 I/O leads. How many memory cells can be
contained in the device, as estimated by (a) Rent’s
rule with C ¼ 6.0 and m ¼ 0.12?
34.21.
A 12-inch diameter silicon wafer has a processable
area that is circular with a diameter ¼ 11.4 in. The
IC chips that will be fabricated on the wafer surface
are square with 0.75 in on a side, including an
allowance for subsequent chip separation. How-
ever, the processable area on each chip is only
0.60 in by 0.60 in. The density of circuits within
each chip’s processable area is 100,000 circuits per
square inch. (a) How many IC chips can be placed
onto the wafer? (b) Using Rent’s Rule with C ¼ 3.8
and m ¼ 0.43, how many input/output terminals
(pins) will be needed for each chip package?
34.22.
A 250 mm diameter silicon wafer has a processable
area that is circular with a diameter ¼ 225 mm. The
IC chips that will be fabricated on the wafer surface
are square with 20 mm on a side. However, the
processable area on each chip is only 18 mm by
18 mm. The density of circuits within each chip’s
processable area is 465 circuits per mm2. (a) How
many IC chips can be placed onto the wafer?
(b) Using Rent’s Rule with C ¼ 4.5 and m ¼
0.35, how many input/output terminals (pins) will
be needed for each chip package?
Yields in IC Processing
34.23.
Given that crystal yield ¼ 55%, crystal-to-slice
yield ¼ 60%, wafer yield ¼ 75%, multiprobe
yield ¼ 65%, and final test yield ¼ 95%, if a starting
boule weighs 125 kg, what is the final weight of
silicon that is represented by the non-defective chips
after final test?
34.24.
On a particular production line in a wafer fabrica-
tion facility, the crystal yield is 60%, the crystal-to-
slice yield is 60%, wafer yield is 90%, multiprobe is
70%, and final test yield is 80%. (a) What is the
overall yield for the production line? (b) If wafer
yield and multiprobe yield are combined into the
same reporting category, what overall yield for the
two operations would be expected?
34.25.
A silicon wafer with a diameter of 200 mm is
processed over a circular area whose diameter ¼
190 mm. The chips to be fabricated are square with
10 mm on a side. The density of point defects in the
surface area is 0.0047 defects/cm2. Determine an
estimate of the number of good chips using the
Bose-Einstein yield computation.
34.26.
A 12-in wafer is processed over a circular area of
diameter ¼ 11.75 in. The density of point defects in
the surface area is 0.018 defects/in2. The chips to be
fabricated are square with an area of 0.16 in2 each.
Determine an estimate of the number of good chips
using the Bose-Einstein yield computation.
34.27.
The yield of good chips in multiprobe for a certain
batch of wafers is 83%. The wafers have a diameter
of 150 mm with a processable area that is 140 mm in
diameter. If the defects are all assumed to be point
defects, determine the density of point defects using
the Bose-Einstein method of estimating yield.
34.28.
A silicon wafer has a processable area of 35.0 in2.
The yield of good chips on this wafer is Ym ¼ 75%.
If the defects are all assumed to be point defects,
determine the density of point defects using the
Bose-Einstein method of estimating yield.
Problems
829

35
ELECTRONICS
ASSEMBLY AND
PACKAGING
Chapter Contents
35.1
Electronics Packaging
35.2
Printed Circuit Boards
35.2.1
Structures, Types, and Materials for
PCBs
35.2.2
Production of the Starting Boards
35.2.3
Processes Used in PCB Fabrication
35.2.4
PCB Fabrication Sequence
35.3
Printed Circuit Board Assembly
35.3.1
Component Insertion
35.3.2
Soldering
35.3.3
Cleaning, Testing, and Rework
35.4
Surface-Mount Technology
35.4.1
Adhesive Bonding and Wave
Soldering
35.4.2
Solder Paste and Reflow Soldering
35.4.3
Combined SMT-PIH Assembly
35.4.4
Cleaning, Inspection, Testing, and
Rework
35.5
Electrical Connector Technology
35.5.1
Permanent Connections
35.5.2
Separable Connectors
Integrated circuits constitute the heart of an electronic sys-
tem, but the complete system consists of much more than
packaged ICs. The ICs and other components are mounted
and interconnected on printed circuit boards, which in turn
are interconnected and contained in a chassis or cabinet.
Chip packaging (Section 34.6) is only part of the total
electronic package. In thischapter we consider the remaining
levels of the package and how they are manufactured and
assembled.
35.1
ELECTRONICS PACKAGING
The electronics package is the physical means by which the
components in a system are electrically interconnected and
interfaced to external devices; it includes the mechanical
structure that holds and protects the circuitry. Awell-designed
electronics package serves the following functions: (1) power
distribution and signal interconnection, (2) structural support,
(3) circuit protection from physical and chemical hazards in
the environment, (4) dissipation of heat generated by the
circuits, and (5) minimum delays in signal transmission
within the system.
For complex systems containing many components
and interconnections, the electronics package is organized
into levels that comprise a packaging hierarchy, illustrated
in Figure 35.1 and summarized in Table 35.1. The lowest
level is the zero level, which refers to the intraconnections
on the semiconductor chip. The packaged chip, consisting
of the IC in a plastic or ceramic enclosure and connected to
the package leads, constitutes the first level of packaging.
Packaged chips and other components are assembled
to a printed circuit board (PCB) using two technologies
(Section 35.6.1): (1) pin-in-hole (PIH) technology and
(2) surface-mount technology (SMT). The chip package
styles and assembly techniques are different for PIH and
SMT. In many cases, both assembly technologies are
830

employed in the same board. Printed circuit board assembly represents the second level of
packaging. Figure 35.2 shows a variety of PCB assemblies of both PIH and SMT types.
The assembled PCBs are, in turn, connected to a chassis or other framework; this is
the third level of packaging. This third level may consist of a rack that holds the boards,
using wiring cables to make the interconnections. In major electronic systems, such as large
computers, thePCBsaretypicallymounted ontoa largerprinted circuit board called a back
plane, which has conduction paths to permit interconnection between the smaller boards
attached to it. This latter configuration is known as card-on-board (COB) packaging, in
which the smaller PCBs are called cards and the back plane is the board.
The fourth level of packaging consists of wiring and cabling inside the cabinet that
contains the electronic system. For systems of relatively low complexity, the packaging
may not include all of the possible levels in the hierarchy.
FIGURE 35.1
Packaging hierarchy in a
large electronic system.
Cabinet and system
Rack
Printed circuit board
Components
Packaged chip
IC chip (die)
Level 0
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
TABLE 35.1
Packaging hierarchy.
Level
Description of Interconnection
0
Intraconnections on the chip
1
Chip-to-package interconnections to form IC package
2
IC package to circuit board interconnections
3
Circuit board to rack; card-on-board packaging
4
Wiring and cabling connections in cabinet
Section 35.1/Electronics Packaging
831

35.2
PRINTED CIRCUIT BOARDS
A printed circuit board consists of one or more thin sheets of insulating material, with thin
copper lines on one or both surfaces that interconnect the components attached to the
board.Inboardsconsistingofmorethanone layer,copperconductingpathsare interleaved
between the layers. PCBs are used in packaged electronic systems to hold components,
provideelectrical interconnections amongthem, and make connections to external circuits.
They have become standard building blocks in virtually all electronic systems that contain
packaged ICs and other components (Historical Note 35.1). PCBs are so important and
widely usedbecause(1) they provide a convenient structural platform for the components;
(2) a board with correctly routed interconnections can be mass produced consistently,
without the variability usually associated with hand wiring; (3) nearly all of the soldering
connections between components and the PCB can be accomplished in a one-step
mechanized operation, (4) an assembled PCB gives reliable performance; and (5) in
complex electronic systems, each assembled PCB can be detached from the system for
service, repair, or replacement.
FIGURE 35.2
Acollection
of printed circuit board as-
semblies showing both pin-
in-hole and surface-mount
technologies. (Photo cour-
tesy of Phoenix Technolo-
gies, Inc.)
Historical Note 35.1
Printed circuit boards
Before printed circuit boards, electrical and electronic
components were manually fastened to a sheet-metal
chassis and then hand wired and soldered to form the
desired circuit. The usual sheet metal was aluminum.
In the late 1950s, various plastic boards became
commercially available. These boards, which provided
electrical insulation, gradually replaced the aluminum
chassis. The ﬁrst plastics were phenolics, followed by
glass-ﬁber–reinforced epoxies. The boards came with
predrilled holes spaced at standard intervals in both
832
Chapter 35/Electronics Assembly and Packaging

35.2.1 STRUCTURES, TYPES, AND MATERIALS FOR PCBS
A printed circuit board (PCB), also called a printed wiring board (PWB), is a laminated
flat panel of insulating material designed to provide electrical interconnections between
electronic components attached to it. Interconnections are made by thin conducting
paths on the surface of the board or in alternating layers sandwiched between layers of
insulating material. The conducting paths are made of copper and are called tracks. Other
copper areas, called lands, are also available on the board surface for attaching and
electrically connecting components.
Insulation materials in PCBs are usually polymer composites reinforced with glass
fabricsorpaper.Polymersincludeepoxy(mostwidelyused),phenolic,andpolyimide.E-glassis
the usual fiber in glass-reinforcing fabrics, especially in epoxy PCBs; paper is a common
reinforcing layer for phenolic boards. The usual thickness of the substrate layer is 0.8 to3.2 mm
(0.031 to 0.125 in), and copper foil thickness is around 0.04 mm (0.0015 in). The materials
formingthePCBstructuremustbeelectricallyinsulating,strongandrigid,resistanttowarpage,
dimensionally stable, heat resistant, and flame retardant. Chemicals are often added to the
polymer composite to obtain the last two characteristics.
There are three principal types of printed circuit board, shown in Figure 35.3: (a)
single-sided board, in which copper foil is only on one side of the insulation substrate;
(b) double-sided board, in which the copper foil is on both sides of the substrate; and
(c) multilayer board, consisting of alternating layers of conducting foil and insulation. In
allthreestructures,theinsulationlayersareconstructedofmultiplelaminatesofepoxy-glass
sheets (or other composite) bonded together to form a strong and rigid structure. Multilayer
boards are used for complex circuit assemblies in which a large number of components
must be interconnected with many track routings, thus requiring more conducting paths
than can be accommodated in one or two copper layers. Four layers is the most common
multilayer configuration, but boards with up to 24 conducting layers are produced.
35.2.2 PRODUCTION OF THE STARTING BOARDS
Single- and double-sided boards can be purchased from suppliers that specialize in mass
producingtheminstandardsizes.Theboardsarethencustom-processedbyacircuitfabricator
tocreatethespecifiedcircuitpatternandboardsizeforagivenapplication.Multilayerboards
directions. This inspired the use of electronic
components that matched these hole spacings. The
dual-in-line package evolved during this period.
The components in these circuit boards were hand-
wired, which proved increasingly difﬁcult and prone to
human error as component densities increased and
circuits became more complex. The printed circuit
board, with etched copper foil on its surface to form the
wiring interconnections, was developed to solve these
problems with manual wiring.
Initial techniques to design the circuit masks involved
a manual inking procedure, in which the designer
attempted to route the conducting tracks to provide the
required connections and avoid short circuits on a large
sheet of paper or vellum. This became more difﬁcult as
the number of components on the board increased and
the conducting lines interconnecting the components
became ﬁner. Computer programs were developed to aid
the designer in solving the routing problem. However, in
many cases, it was impossible to ﬁnd a solution with no
intersecting tracks (short circuits). To solve the problem,
jumper wires were hand-soldered to the board to make
these connections. As the number of jumper wires
increased, the problem of human error again appeared.
Multilayer boards were introduced to deal with this
routing issue.
The initial technique for ‘‘printing’’ the circuit pattern
onto the copper-clad board was screen printing. As track
widths became ﬁner and ﬁner, photolithography was
substituted.
Section 35.2/Printed Circuit Boards
833

arefabricatedfromstandardsingle-anddouble-sidedboards.Thecircuitfabricatorprocesses
the boards separately to form the required circuit pattern for each layer in the final structure,
and then the individual boards are bonded together with additional layers of epoxy-fabric.
Processingofmultilayerboardsismoreinvolvedandmoreexpensivethantheothertypes;the
reason for using them is that they provide better performance for large systems than using a
much greater number of lower-density boards of simpler construction.
The copper foil used to clad the starting boards is produced by a continuous electro-
forming process (Section 28.3.2), in which a rotating smooth metal drum is partially
submersed in an electrolytic bath containing copper ions. The drum is the cathode in the
circuit,causingthecoppertoplateontoitssurface.Asthedrumrotatesoutofthebath,thethin
copper foil is peeled from its surface. The process is ideal for producing the very thin copper
foil needed for PCBs.
Production of the starting boards consists of pressing multiple sheets of woven glass
fiber that have been impregnated with partially cured epoxy (or other thermosetting
polymer). The number of sheets used in the starting sandwich determines the thickness
of the final board. Copper foil is placed on one or both sides of the epoxy-glass laminated
stack, depending on whether single- or double-sided boards are to be made. For single-sided
boards, a thinrelease film isused on one side in placeof the copper foil to prevent sticking of
the epoxy in the press. Pressing is accomplished between two steam-heated platens of a
hydraulic press. The combination of heat and pressure compacts and cures the epoxy-glass
layers to bond and harden the laminates into a single-piece board. The board is then cooled
and trimmed to remove excess epoxy that has been squeezed out around the edges.
The completed board consists of a glass-fabric–reinforced epoxy panel, clad with
copper over its surface area on one or both sides. It is now ready for the circuit fabricator.
Panels are usually produced in large standard widths designed to match the board handling
systems on wave-soldering equipment, automatic insertion machines, and other PCB
processing and assembly facilities. If the electronic design calls for a smaller size, several
units can be processed together on the same larger board and then separated later.
35.2.3 PROCESSES USED IN PCB FABRICATION
Thecircuitfabricatoremploysavarietyofprocessingoperationstoproducea finishedPCB,
ready for assembly of components. The operations include cleaning, shearing, hole drilling
FIGURE 35.3
Three types of printed circuit board structure: (a) single-sided, (b) double-sided, and
(c) multilayer.
834
Chapter 35/Electronics Assembly and Packaging

orpunching, patternimaging,etching, andelectrolessandelectrolyticplating.Mostofthese
processes have been discussed. In this section we focus on the details that are relevant to
PCB fabrication.Ourdiscussionfollowsapproximatelytheorderinwhichtheprocessesare
performed on a board. However, there are differences in processing sequence between
different board types, and we examine these differences in Section 35.2.4. Some of the
operations in PCB fabrication must be performed under clean room conditions to avoid
defects in the printed circuits, especially for boards with fine tracks and details.
Board Preparation
Initial preparation of the board consists of shearing, hole-making, and
other shaping operations to create tabs, slots, and similar features in the board. If necessary,
the starting panel may have to be sheared to size for compatibility with the circuit fabricator’s
equipment. The holes, called tooling holes, are made by drilling or punching and are used for
positioning the board during subsequent processing. The sequence of fabrication steps
requires close alignment from one process to the next, and these holes are used with locating
pins at each operation to achieve accurate registration. Three tooling holes per board are
usually sufficient for this purpose; hole size is about 3.2 mm (0.125 in), larger than the circuit
holes to be drilled later.
The board is typically bar coded for identification purposes in this preparation phase.
Finally, a cleaning process is used to remove dirt and grease from the board surface.
Although cleanliness requirements are not as stringent as in IC fabrication, small particles
ofdirt and dustcan causedefects inthecircuit patternof a printed circuit board; andsurface
films of grease can inhibit etching and other chemical processes. Cleanliness is essential for
producing reliable PCBs.
Hole Drilling
In addition to tooling holes, functional circuit holes are required in PCBs
as (1) insertion holes for inserting component leads in through-hole boards, (2) via holes,
which are later copper-plated and used as conducting paths from one side of the board to
the other, and (3) holes to fasten certain components such as heat sinks and connectors to
the board. These holes are either drilled or punched, using the tooling holes for location.
Cleaner holes can be produced by drilling, so most holes in PCB fabrication are drilled. A
stack of three or four panels may be drilled in the same operation, using a computer
numerically controlled (CNC) drill press that receives its programming instructions from
the design database. For high-production jobs, multiple-spindle drills are sometimes
used, permitting all of the holes in the board to be drilled in one feed motion.
Standard twist drills (Section 23.3.2) are used to drill the holes, but the application
makes a number of unusual demands on the drill and drilling equipment. Perhaps the
biggest single problem is the small hole size in printed circuit boards; drill diameter is
generally less than 1.27 mm (0.050 in), but some high-density boards require hole sizes of
0.15 mm (0.006 in) or even less [8]. Such small drill bits lack strength, and their capacity to
dissipate heat is low.
Another difficulty is the unique work material. The drill bit must first pass through a
thin copper foil and then proceed through an abrasive epoxy-glass composite. Different
drills would normally be specified for these materials, but a single drill must suffice in PCB
drilling. The small hole size, combined with the stacking of several boards or multilayer
boards, result in a high depth-to-diameter ratio, aggravating the problem of chip extraction
from the hole. Other requirements placed on the operation include high accuracy in hole
location, smooth hole walls, and absence of burrs on the holes. Burrs are usually formed
when the drill enters or exits a hole; thin sheets of material are often placed on top of and
beneath the stack of boards to inhibit burr formation on the boards themselves.
Finally, any cutting tool must be used at a certain cutting speed to operate at best
efficiency. For a drill bit, cutting speed is measured at the diameter. For very small drill sizes,
this means extremely high rotational speeds—up to 100,000 rev/min in some cases. Special
spindle bearings and motors are required to achieve these speeds.
Section 35.2/Printed Circuit Boards
835

Circuit Pattern Imaging and Etching
There are two basic methods by which the circuit
pattern is transferred to the copper surface of the board: screen printing and photo-
lithography. Both methods involve the use of a resist coating on the board surface that
determines where etching of the copper will occur to create the tracks and lands of the
circuit.
Screen printing was the first method used for PCBs. It is indeed a printing technique,
and the term ‘‘printed circuit board’’ can be traced to this method. In screen printing, a
stencil screen containing the circuit pattern is placed on the board, and liquid resist is
squeezed through the mesh to the surface beneath. This method is simple and inexpensive,
but its resolution is limited. It is normally used only for applications in which track widths
are greater than about 0.25 mm (0.010 in).
The second method of transferring the circuit pattern is photolithography, in which
a light-sensitive resist material is exposed through a mask to transfer the circuit pattern.
The procedure is similar to the corresponding process in IC fabrication (Section 34.3.1);
some of the details in PCB processing will be described here.
Photoresists used by circuit fabricators are available in two forms: liquid or dry film.
Liquid resists can be applied by roller or spraying. Dry film resists are more commonly used
in PCB fabrication. They consist of three layers: a film of photosensitive polymer sand-
wiched between a polyester support sheet on one side and a removable plastic cover sheet
on the other side. The cover sheet prevents the photosensitive material from sticking during
storage and handling. Although more expensive than liquid resists, they can be applied in
coatings of uniform thickness, and their processing in photolithography is simpler. To apply,
the cover sheet is removed, and the resist film is placed on the copper surface to which it
readily adheres. Hot rollers are used to press and smooth the resist onto the surface.
Alignment of the masks relative to the board relies on the use of registration holes
that are aligned with the tooling holes on the board. Contact printing is used to expose the
resist beneath the mask. The resist is then developed, which involves removal of the
unexposed regions of the negative resist from the surface.
After resist development, certain areas of the copper surface remain covered by
resist while other areas are now unprotected. The covered areas correspond to circuit
tracks and lands, while uncovered areas correspond to open regions between. Etching
removes the copper cladding in the unprotected regions from the board surface, usually
by means of a chemical etchant. Etching is the step that transforms the solid copper film
into the interconnections for an electrical circuit.
Etching is done in an etching chamber in which the etchant is sprayed onto the surface
of the board that is now partially coated with resist. Various etchants are used to remove
copper, including ammonium persulfate ((NH4)2S2O4), ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH),
cupric chloride (CuCl2), and ferric chloride (FeCl3). Each has its relative advantages and
disadvantages. Process parameters (e.g., temperature, etchant concentration, and duration)
must be closely controlled to avoid over- or under-etching, as in IC fabrication. After etching,
the board must be rinsed and the remaining resist chemically stripped from the surface.
Plating
In printed circuit boards, plating is needed on the hole surfaces to provide
conductive paths from one side to the other in double-sided boards, or between layers in
multilayerboards.TwotypesofplatingprocessareusedinPCBfabrication:electroplatingand
electrolessplating(Section28.3.3).Electroplatinghasahigherdepositionratethanelectroless
plating but requires that the coated surface be metallic (conductive); electroless plating is
slower but does not require a conductive surface.
Afterdrillingoftheviaholesandinsertionholes,thewallsoftheholesconsistofepoxy-
glass insulation material, which is nonconductive. Accordingly, electroless plating must be
usedinitiallytoprovideathincoatingofcopperontheholewalls.Oncethethinfilmofcopper
has been applied, electrolytic plating is then used to increase coating thickness on the hole
surfaces to between 0.025 and 0.05 mm (0.001 and 0.002 in).
836
Chapter 35/Electronics Assembly and Packaging

Gold is another metal sometimes plated onto printed circuit boards. It is used as a
very thin coating on PCB edge connectors to provide superior electrical contact. Coating
thickness is only about 2.5 mm (0.0001 in).
35.2.4 PCB FABRICATION SEQUENCE
In this section we describe the processing sequence for various board types. The sequence
is concerned with transforming a copper-clad board of reinforced polymer into a printed
circuit board, a procedure called circuitization. The desired result is illustrated in
Figure 35.4 for a double-sided board.
Circuitization
Three methods of circuitization can be used to determine which regions
of the board will be coated with copper [12]: (1) subtractive, (2) additive, and (3)
semiadditive.
In the subtractive method, open portions of the copper cladding on the starting
board are etched away from the surface, so that the tracks and lands of the desired circuit
remain. The process is called ‘‘subtractive’’ because copper is removed from the board
surface. The steps in the subtractive method are described in Figure 35.5.
The additive method starts with a board surface that is not copper clad, such as the
uncoated surface of a single-sided board. However, the uncoated surface is treated with a
chemical, called a buttercoat, which acts as the catalyst for electroless plating. The steps
in the method are outlined in Figure 35.6.
FIGURE 35.4
A section
of a double-sided PCB,
showing various features
accomplished during fab-
rication: tracks and lands,
and copper-plated inser-
tion and via holes.
FIGURE 35.5
The sub-
tractive method of circui-
tization in PCB fabrication:
(1)applyresisttoareasnot
to be etched, using pho-
tolithography to expose
the areas that are to be
etched, (2) etch, and (3)
strip resist.
Section 35.2/Printed Circuit Boards
837

The semiadditive method uses a combination of additive and subtractive steps. The
starting board has a very thin copper film on its surface—5 mm (0.0002 in) or less. The
method proceeds as described in Figure 35.7.
Processing of Different Board Types
Processing methods differ for the three PCB
types: single-sided, double-sided, and multilayer. A single-sided board begins fabrication
FIGURE 35.6
The additive method of circuitization in PCB fabrication: (1) a resist ﬁlm is applied to the
surface using photolithography to expose the areas to be copper plated; (2) the exposed surface is
chemically activated to serve as a catalyst for electroless plating; (3) copper is plated on exposed areas;
and (4) resist is stripped.
FIGURE 35.7
The semiadditive method of circuitization in PCB fabrication: (1) Apply resist to areas that will not be
plated; (2) electroplate copper, using the thin copper ﬁlm for conduction; (3) apply tin on top of plated copper; (4) strip
resist;(5)etchremainingthinﬁlmofcopperonthesurface,whilethetinservesasaresistfortheelectroplatedcopper;and
(6) strip tin from copper.
838
Chapter 35/Electronics Assembly and Packaging

as a flat sheet of insulating material clad on one side with copper film. The subtractive
method is used to produce the circuit pattern in the copper cladding.
Adouble-sidedboardinvolvesasomewhatmorecomplexprocessingsequencebecause
it has circuit tracks on both sides that must be electrically connected. The interconnection is
accomplished by means of copper-plated via holes that run from lands on one surface of the
boardtolandsontheoppositesurface,asshowninFigure35.4.Atypicalfabricationsequence
foradouble-sidedboard(copper-cladonbothsides)usesthesemiadditivemethod.Afterhole
drilling, electroless plating is used to initially plate the holes, followed by electroplating to
increase plating thickness.
A multilayer board is structurally the most complex of the three types, and this
complexity is reflected in its manufacturing sequence. The laminated construction can be
seen in Figure 35.8, which highlights some of the features of a multilayer PCB. The
fabricationstepsfortheindividuallayers are basicallythesameasthoseusedforsingle-and
double-sided boards. What makes multilayer board fabrication more complicated is that
(1) all of the layers, each with its own circuit design, must first be processed; then (2) the
layers must be joined together to form one integral board; and finally (3) the assembled
board must itself be put through its own processing sequence.
A multilayer board consists of logic layers, which carry electrical signals between
components on the board, and voltage layers, which are used to distribute power. Logic
layers are generally fabricated from double-sided boards, whereas voltage layers are
usually made from single-sided boards. Thinner insulating substrates are used for multi-
layer boards than for their standalone single- and double-sided counterparts, so that a
suitable thickness of the final board can be achieved.
In the second stage, the individual layers are assembled together. The procedure
startswith copper foil onthe bottomoutside, andthen adds the individual layers, separating
one from the next by one or more sheets of glass fabric impregnated with partially cured
epoxy. After all layers have been sandwiched together, a final copper foil is placed on the
stack to form the top outer layer. Layers are then bonded into a single board by heating the
assembly under pressure to cure the epoxy. After curing, any excess resin squeezed out of
the sandwich around the edges is trimmed away.
At the start of the third stage of fabrication, the board consists of multiple layers
bonded together, with copper foil cladded on its outer surfaces. Its construction can therefore
belikenedtothatofadouble-sidedboard;anditsprocessingislikewisesimilar.Thesequence
consists of drilling additional through-holes, plating the holes to establish conduction paths
between the two exterior copper films as well as certain internal copper layers, and the use of
photolithography and etching to form the circuit pattern on the outer copper surfaces.
Testing and Finishing Operations
After a circuit has been fabricated on the board
surface, it must be inspected and tested to ensure that it functions according to design
specifications and contains no quality defects. Two procedures are common: (1) visual
FIGURE 35.8
Typical
cross section of a multilayer
printed circuit board.
Copper
Partially buried via hole
Insulation
layers
Plated through hole
Internal signal and power tracks
Buried via hole
Section 35.2/Printed Circuit Boards
839

inspection and (2) continuity testing. In visual inspection, the board is examined visually to
detect open and short circuits, errors in drilled hole locations, and other faults that can be
observed without applying electrical power to the board. Visual inspections, performed not
only after fabrication but also at various critical stages during production, are accom-
plished by human eye or machine vision (Section 42.6.3).
Continuity testing involves the use of contact probes brought simultaneously into
contactwithtrackandlandareasontheboardsurface.Thesetupconsistsofanarrayofprobes
thatareforcedunderlightpressuretomakecontactwithspecifiedpointsontheboardsurface.
Electrical connections between contact points can be quickly checked in this procedure.
Several additional processing steps must be performed on the bare board to prepare
it for assembly. The first of these finishing operations is the application of a thin solder layer
on the track and land surfaces. This layer serves to protect the copper from oxidation and
contamination. It is carried out either by electroplating or by bringing the copper side into
contact with rotating rollers that are partially submersed in molten solder.
A second operation involves application of a coating of solder resist to all areas of the
board surface except the lands that are to be subsequently soldered in assembly. The solder
resist coating is chemically formulated to resist adhesion of solder; thus, in the subsequent
soldering processes, solder adheres only to land areas. Solder resist is usually applied by
screen printing.
Finally, an identification legend is printed onto the surface, again by screen printing.
The legend indicates where the different components are to be placed on the board in
final assembly. In modern industrial practice, a bar code is also printed on the board for
production control purposes.
35.3
PRINTED CIRCUIT BOARD ASSEMBLY
A printed circuit board assembly consists of electronic components (e.g., IC packages,
resistors, capacitors)aswellasmechanicalcomponents (e.g.,fasteners, heatsinks)mounted
on a printed circuit board. This is level 2 in electronic packaging (Table 35.1). As indicated,
PCB assembly is based on either pin-in-hole (PIH) or surface-mount technologies (SMT).
Some PCB assemblies include both PIH and SMT components. Our discussion here deals
exclusively with PIH assemblies. In Section 35.4, we consider surface-mount technology
and combinations of the two types. The scope of electronic assembly also includes higher
packaging levels such as assemblies of multiple PCBs electrically connected and mechani-
callycontainedina chassisor cabinet.In Section 35.5,weexplore the technologiesby which
electrical connections are made at these higher levels.
Inprinted circuit assembliesusingPIHtechnology, the leadpinsmustbeinserted into
through-holes in the circuit board. Once inserted, the leads are soldered into place in the
holes in the board. In double-sided and multilayer boards, the hole surfaces into which the
leads are inserted are generally copper plated, giving rise to the name plated through-hole
(PTH) for these cases. After soldering, the boards are cleaned and tested, and those boards
not passing the test are reworked if possible. Thus, we can divide the processing of PIH
assemblies into the following steps: (1) component insertion, (2) soldering, (3) cleaning,
(4) testing, and (5) rework.
35.3.1 COMPONENT INSERTION
In component insertion, the leads of components are inserted into their proper through-
holes in the PCB. A single board may be populated with hundreds of separate components
(DIPs, resistors, etc.), all of which need to be inserted into the board. In modern electronic
840
Chapter 35/Electronics Assembly and Packaging

assembly plants, most component insertions are accomplished by automatic insertion
machines. A small proportion is done by hand for nonstandard components that cannot be
accommodated on automatic machines. These cases include switches and connectors as
well as resistors, capacitors, and certain other components. Although the proportion of
componentinsertions accomplished manuallyinindustry islow, theircost ishighbecause of
much lower production rates than automatic insertions. Industrial robots (Section 38.4) are
sometimes used to substitute for human labor in these component insertion tasks.
Automatic insertion machines are either semiautomatic or fully automatic. The
semiautomatic type involves insertion of the component by a mechanical insertion device
whose position relative to the board is controlled by a human operator. Fully automatic
insertionmachinescomprisethepreferredcategorybecausetheyarefasterandtheirneedfor
humanattentionislimitedtoloadingcomponentsandfixingjamswhentheyoccur.Automatic
insertion machines are controlled by a program that is usually prepared directly from circuit
design data. Components are loaded into these machines in the form of reels, magazines, or
other carriers that maintain proper orientation of the components until insertion.
The insertion operation involves (1) preforming the leads, (2) insertion of leads into
the board holes, and then (3) cropping and clinching the leads on the other side of the
board. Preforming is needed only for some component types and involves bending of leads
that are initially straight into a U-shape for insertion. Many components come with
properly shaped leads and require little or no preforming.
Insertionisaccomplishedbyaworkheaddesignedforthecomponenttype.Components
inserted by automatic machines are grouped into three basic categories: (a) axial lead,
(b) radial lead, and (c) dual-in-line package. The dual-in-line package (Section 34.6.1) is a
very common package for integrated circuits. Typical axial and radial lead components are
pictured in Figure 35.9. Axial components are shaped like a cylinder, with leads projecting
from each end. Typical components of this type include resistors, capacitors, and diodes.
Theirleadsmustbebent,assuggestedinourfigure,tobeinserted.Radialcomponentshave
parallel leads and have various body shapes, one of which is shown in Figure 35.9(b). This
type of component is exemplified by light-emitting diodes, potentiometers, resistor net-
works, and fuse holders. These configurations are sufficiently different that separate
insertion machines with the appropriate workhead designs must be used to handle each
category. Accurate positioning of the board beneath the workhead before each insertion is
performed by a high-speed x-y positioning table.
Once the leads have been inserted through the holes in the board, they are clinched
and cropped. Clinching involves bending the leads, as in Figure 35.10, to mechanically
secure the component to the board until soldering. If this were not done, the component
is at risk of being knocked out of its holes during handling. In cropping, the leads are cut
to proper length; otherwise, there is a possibility that they might become bent and cause a
short circuit with nearby circuit tracks or components. These operations are performed
automatically on the underside of the board by the insertion machine.
The three types of insertion machines, corresponding to the three basic component
configurations, can be joined to form an integrated circuit board assembly line. The
FIGURE 35.9
Twoofthe
three basic component
typesusedwithautomatic
insertion machines: (a)
axial lead and (b) radial
lead. The third type, dual-
in-line package (DIP), is il-
lustrated in Figure 34.19.
Section 35.3/Printed Circuit Board Assembly
841

integration is accomplished by means of a conveyor system that transfers boards from one
machine type to the next. A computer control system is used to track the progress of each
board as it moves through the cell and download the correct programs to each workstation.
35.3.2 SOLDERING
The second basic step in PCB assembly is soldering. For inserted components, the most
important soldering techniques are wave soldering and hand soldering. These methods as
well as other aspects of soldering are discussed in Section 31.2.
Wave Soldering
Wave soldering is a mechanized technique in which printed circuit
boards containing inserted components are moved by conveyor over a standing wave of
moltensolder(Figure31.9).Thepositionoftheconveyorissuchthatonlytheundersideofthe
board, with component leads projecting through the holes, is in contact with the solder. The
combination of capillary action and the upward force of the wave cause the liquid solder to
flow into the clearances between leads and through-holes to obtain a good solder joint. The
tremendous advantage of wave soldering is that allof the solder joints on a board are made in
a single pass through the process.
Hand Soldering
Hand soldering involves a skilled operator using a soldering iron to make
circuit connections. Compared with wave soldering, hand soldering is slow because solder
joints are made one at a time. As a production method, it is generally used only for small lot
production and rework. As with other manual tasks, human error can result in quality
problems.Handsolderingissometimesusedafterwavesolderingtoadddelicatecomponents
that would be damaged in the harsh environment of the wave-soldering chamber. Manual
methodshavecertainadvantagesinPCBassemblythatshouldbenoted:(1)Heat is localized
and can be directed at a small target area; (2) equipment is inexpensive compared with
wave soldering; and (3) energy consumption is considerably less.
35.3.3 CLEANING, TESTING, AND REWORK
The final processing steps in PCB assembly are cleaning, testing, and rework. Visual
inspections are also performed on the board to detect obvious flaws.
Cleaning
Aftersoldering,contaminantsarepresentontheprintedcircuitassembly.These
foreign substances include flux, oil and grease, salts, and dirt, some of which can cause
chemical degradation of the assembly or interfere with its electronic functions. One or more
chemical cleaning operations (Section 28.1.1) must be carried out to remove these
undesirable materials. Traditional cleaning methods for PCB assemblies include hand
cleaning with appropriatesolvents and vapor degreasing withchlorinatedsolvents. Concern
over environmental hazards in recent years has motivated the search for effective water-
FIGURE 35.10
Clinching and cropping of
component leads: (1) as
inserted, and (2) after
bendingandcutting;leads
can be bent either (a)
inward or (b) outward.
842
Chapter 35/Electronics Assembly and Packaging

based solvents to replace the chlorinated and fluorinated chemicals traditionally used in
vapor degreasing.
Testing
Visual inspection is used to detect for board substrate damage, missing or
damaged components, soldering faults, and similar quality defects that can be observed
byeye.Machinevisionsystemsarebeingusedtoperformtheseinspectionsautomaticallyin
a growing number of installations.
Test procedures must be performed on the completed assembly to verify its function-
ality. The board design must allow for this testing by including test points in the circuit layout.
These test points are convenient locations in the circuit where probes can make contact for
testing. Individual components in the circuit are tested by contacting the component leads,
applying input test signals, and measuring the output signals. More sophisticated procedures
include digital function tests, in which the entire circuit or major subcircuits are tested using a
programmed sequence of input signals and measuring the corresponding output signals to
simulate operating conditions.
Anothertestusedforprintedcircuitboardassembliesisthesubstitutiontest,inwhich
aproductionunitispluggedintoamock-upoftheworkingsystemandenergizedtoperform
its functions. If the assembly performs in a satisfactory way, it is deemed as passing the test.
It is then unplugged and the next production unit is substituted in the mock-up.
Finally, a burn-in test is performed on certain types of PCB assemblies that may be
subject to ‘‘infant mortality.’’ Some boards contain defects that are not revealed in normal
functional tests but which are likely to cause failure of the circuit during early service.
Burn-in tests operate the assemblies under power for a certain period of time, such as 24 or
72 hours, sometimes at elevated temperatures, such as 40C (100F), to force these defects
to manifest their failures during the testing period. Boards not subject to infant mortality
will survive this test and provide long service life.
Rework
When inspection and testing indicate that one or more components on the board
are defective or certain solder joints are faulty, it usually makes sense to try to repair the
assembly rather than discard it together with all of the remaining good components. This
repair step is an integral part of electronic assembly plant operations. Common rework tasks
include touchup (repair of solder faults), replacement of defective or missing components,
and repair of copper film that has lifted from the substrate surface. These tasks are manual
operations, requiring skilled workers using soldering irons.
35.4
SURFACE-MOUNT TECHNOLOGY
One effect of the growing complexity of electronic systems has been the need for greater
packing densities in printed circuit assemblies. Conventional PCB assemblies that use
leaded components inserted into through-holes have the following inherent limitations in
terms of packing density: (1) components can be mounted on only one side of the board,
and (2) center-to-center distance between lead pins in leaded components must be a
minimum of 1.0 mm (0.04 in) and is usually 2.5 mm (0.10 in).
Surface-mount technology uses an assembly method in which component leads are
soldered to lands on the surface of the board rather than into holes running through the
board(HistoricalNote35.2).Byeliminatingtheneedforleadsinsertedintothroughholesin
the board, several advantages accrue [6]: (1) smaller components can be made, with leads
closer together; (2) packing densities can be increased; (3) components can be mounted on
both sides of the board; (4) smaller PCBs can be used for the same electronic system; and
(5) drilling of the many through holes during board fabrication is eliminated—via holes to
interconnect layers are still required. Typical areas on the board surface taken by SMT
components range between 20% and 60% compared with through-hole components.
Section 35.4/Surface-Mount Technology
843

Despite these advantages, the electronics industry has not fully adopted SMT to the
exclusion of PIH technology. There are several reasons: (1) Owing to their smaller size,
surface mount components are more difficult to handle and assemble by humans; (2) SMT
components are generally more expensive than leaded components, although this dis-
advantage may change as SMT production techniques are perfected; (3) inspection, testing,
and rework of the circuit assemblies is generally more difficult in SMT because of the
smaller scale involved; and (4) certain types of components are not available in surface
mount form. This final limitation results in some electronic assemblies that contain both
surface-mount and leaded components.
The same basic steps are requiredto assemble surface-mount componentsto PCBs as
in pin-in-hole technology. The components must be placed on the board and soldered,
followed by cleaning, testing, and rework. The methods of placement and soldering the
components, as well as certain of the testing and rework procedures, are different in surface
mount technology. Component placement inSMT means correctlylocating the component
on the PCB and affixing it sufficiently to the surface until soldering provides a permanent
mechanical and electrical connection. Two alternative placement and soldering methods
are available: (1) adhesive bonding of components and wave soldering, and (2) solder
paste and reflow soldering. It turns out that certain types of SMT components are more
suited to one method, whereas other types are more suited to the other.
35.4.1 ADHESIVE BONDING AND WAVE SOLDERING
The steps in this method are described in Figure 35.11. Various adhesives (Section 31.3) are
used for affixing components to the board surface. Most common are epoxies and acrylics.
The adhesive is applied by one of three methods: (1) brushing liquid adhesive through a
screen stencil; (2) using an automatic dispensing machine with a programmable x-y
positioning system; or (3) using a pin transfer method, in which a fixture consisting of pins
arranged according to where adhesive must be applied is dipped into the liquid adhesive
and then positioned onto the board surface to deposit adhesive in the required spots.
The components are then placed onto the board surface by automatic placement
machines operating under computer control. The term ‘‘onsertion’’ machines is used for
these units, to distinguish them from insertion machines used in PIH technology.
Onsertion machines operate at cycle rates of up to four components placed per second.
After component placement, the adhesive is cured. Depending on adhesive type,
curingisbyheat,ultraviolet(UV)light,oracombinationofUVandinfrared(IR)radiation.
Historical Note 35.2
Surface-mount technology
Surface-mount technology (SMT) traces its origins to
the electronic systems in the aerospace and military
industries of the 1960s. The ﬁrst components were small,
ﬂat ceramic packages with gull-wing leads. The initial
reason why these packages were attractive, compared
with through-hole technology, was the fact that they
could be placed on both sides of a printed circuit
board—in effect, doubling the component density. In
addition, the SMT package could be made smaller than
a comparable through-hole package, further increasing
component densities on the printed circuit board.
In the early 1970s, further advances in SMT
were made in the form of leadless components—
components with ceramic packages that had no
discrete leads. This permitted even greater circuit
densities in military and aerospace electronics. In the
late 1970s, plastic SMT packages became available,
motivating the widespread use of surface-mount
technology. The computer and automotive industries
have become important users of SMT, and their
demand for SMT components has contributed to the
signiﬁcant growth in this technology.
844
Chapter 35/Electronics Assembly and Packaging

With the surface-mount components now bonded to the PCB surface, the board is put
through wave soldering. The operation differs from its PIH counterpart in that the
components themselves pass through the molten solder wave. Technical problems some-
times encountered in SMTwave soldering include components uprooted from the board,
components shifting position, and larger components creating shadows that inhibit proper
soldering of neighboring components.
35.4.2 SOLDER PASTE AND REFLOW SOLDERING
In this method, a solder paste is used to affix components to the surface of the circuit
board. The sequence of steps is depicted in Figure 35.12.
Asolder pasteisa suspension of solder powdersina fluxbinder. It has three functions:
(1) it is the solder—typically 80% to 90% of total paste volume, (2) it is the flux, and (3) it is
the adhesive that secures the components to the surface of the board. Methods of applying
the solder paste to the board surface include screen printing and syringe dispensing.
Properties of the paste must be compatible with these application methods; the paste must
flow yet not be so liquid that it spreads beyond the localized area where it is applied.
After solder paste application, components are placed on the board by the same type
of onsertion machines used with the adhesive bonding assembly method. A low-tempera-
ture baking operation is performed to dry the flux binder; this reduces gas escape during
soldering. Finally, the solder reflow process (Section 31.2.3) heats the solder paste
sufficiently that the solder particles melt to form a high-quality mechanical and electrical
joint between the component leads and the circuit lands on the board.
As in PIH technology, the various operations required to assemble SMT printed
circuit boards are accomplished using integrated production lines, as shown in
Figure 35.13.
FIGURE 35.11
Adhesive bonding and wave soldering, shown here for a discrete capacitor or resistor
component:(1)adhesiveisappliedtoareasontheboardwherecomponentsaretobeplaced;(2)componentsare
placed onto adhesive-coated areas; (3) adhesive is cured; and (4) solder joints are made by wave soldering.
Section 35.4/Surface-Mount Technology
845

35.4.3 COMBINED SMT-PIH ASSEMBLY
Our discussion of the SMTassembly methods has assumed a relatively simple circuit board
with SMT components on only one side. These cases are unusual because most SMT circuit
assemblies combine surface-mounted and pin-in-hole components on the same board. In
addition, SMT assemblies can be populated on both sides of the board, whereas PIH
components are normally limited to one side only. The assembly sequence must be altered
to allow for these additional possibilities, although the basic processing steps described in
the two preceding sections are the same.
One possibility is for the SMT and PIH components to be on the same side of the
board. For this case, a typical sequence would consist of the steps described in Figure 35.14.
More complex PCB assemblies consist of SMT-PIH components as in our figure, but with
SMT components on both sides of the board.
FIGURE 35.12
Solder paste and reﬂow method: (1) apply solder paste to desired land areas, (2) place components onto
board, (3) bake paste, and (4) solder reﬂow.
FIGURE 35.13
SMT
production line. Sta-
tions include board
launching, screen
printing of solder
paste, several com-
ponent placement
operations, and sol-
der reﬂow oven.
(Photo courtesy of
Universal Instru-
ments Corp.)
846
Chapter 35/Electronics Assembly and Packaging

35.4.4 CLEANING, INSPECTION, TESTING, AND REWORK
After the components have been connected to the board, the assembly must be cleaned,
inspected for solder faults, circuit tested, and reworked if necessary.
Inspection of soldering quality is somewhat more difficult for surface-mounted
circuits (SMCs) because these assemblies are generally more densely packed, the solder
jointsaresmaller, andtheirgeometriesaredifferent fromjointsinthrough-holeassemblies.
One of the problems is the way SMCs are held in place during soldering. In PIH assembly,
the components are mechanically fastened in place by clinched leads. In SMT assembly,
components are held by adhesive or paste. At soldering temperatures this method of
attachment is not as secure, and component shifting sometimes occurs. Another problem
with the smaller sizes in SMT is a greater likelihood of solder bridges forming between
adjacent leads, resulting in short circuits.
The smaller scale also poses problems in SMT circuit testing because less space is
available around each component. Contact probes must be physically smaller and more
probes are required because SMT assemblies are more densely populated. One way of
dealing with this issue is to design the circuit layout with extra lands whose only purpose is
toprovidea testprobe contactsite. Unfortunately,includingthesetestlandsrunscounter to
the goal of achieving higher packing densities on the board.
Manual rework in surface-mount assemblies is more difficult than in conventional
PIH assemblies, again due to the smaller component sizes. Special tools are required, such
as small-bit soldering irons, magnifying devices, and instruments for grasping and manip-
ulating the small parts.
35.5
ELECTRICAL CONNECTOR TECHNOLOGY
PCB assemblies must be connected to back planes, and into racks and cabinets, and these
cabinets must be connected to other cabinets and systems by means of cables. The growing
use of electronics in so many types of products has made electrical connections an
important technology. The performance of any electronic system depends on the reliability
of the individual connections linking the elements of the system together. In this section we
examine connector technology that is usually applied at the third and higher levels of
electronics packaging.
FIGURE 35.14
Typical
process sequence for
combined SMT-PIH as-
semblieswithcomponents
on same side of board: (1)
applysolderpasteonlands
for SMT components, (2)
place SMT components on
the board, (3) bake, (4) re-
ﬂow solder, (5) insert PIH
components, and (6) wave
solder PIH components.
This would be followed by
cleaning, testing, and
rework.
Solder paste
SMT component
PIH component
Through-
holes
Land
Solder
Solder
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Section 35.5/Electrical Connector Technology
847

To begin, there are two basic methods of making electrical connections: (1) soldering
and (2) pressure connections. Soldering was discussed in Section 31.2 and throughout the
current chapter. It is the most widely used technology in electronics. Pressure connections
are electrical connections in which mechanical forces are used to establish electrical
continuity between components. They can be divided into two types: permanent and
separable.
35.5.1 PERMANENT CONNECTIONS
Apermanentconnectioninvolveshigh-pressurecontactbetweentwometalsurfaces,inwhich
one or both of the parts is mechanically deformed during the assembly process. Permanent
connection methods include crimping, press fit technology, and insulation displacement.
Crimping of Connector Terminals
This connection method is used to assemble wire to
electrical terminals. Although assembly of the wire to the terminal forms a permanent joint,
the terminal itself is designed to be connected and disconnected to its mating component.
There are a variety of terminal styles, some of which are shown in Figure 35.15, and they are
available in various sizes. They all must be connected to conductor wire, and crimping is the
operation for doing this. Crimping involves the mechanical deformation of the terminal
barrel to form a permanent connection with the stripped end of a wire inserted into it. The
crimping operation squeezes and closes the barrel around the bare wire. Crimping is
performedbyhandtoolsorcrimpingmachines.Theterminalsaresuppliedeitherasindividual
pieces or on long strips that can be fed into a crimping machine. Properly accomplished, the
crimped joint will have low electrical resistance and high mechanical strength.
Press Fit Technology
Press fit in electrical connections is similar to that in mechanical
assembly, but the part configurations are different. Press fit technology is widely used in the
electronics industry to assemble terminal pins into metal-plated through-holes in large
PCBs. In that context, a press fit involves an interference fit between the terminal pin and
the plated hole into which it has been inserted. There are two categories of terminal pins:
(a) solid and (b) compliant, as in Figure 35.16. Within these categories, pin designs vary
among suppliers. The solid pin is rectangular in cross section and is designed so that its
corners press and even cut into the metal of the plated hole to form a good electrical
connection. The compliant pin is designed as a spring-loaded device that conforms to the
hole contour but presses against the walls of the hole to achieve electrical contact.
Insulation Displacement
Insulation displacement is a method of making a permanent
electrical connection in which a sharp, prong-shaped contact pierces the insulation and
squeezesagainstthewireconductortoformanelectricalconnection.Themethodisillustrated
in Figure 35.17 and is commonly used to make simultaneous connections between multiple
contactsandflatcable.Theflatcable,calledribboncable,consistsofanumberofparallelwires
FIGURE 35.15
Some of
the terminal styles availa-
ble for making separable
electrical connections:
(a) slotted tongue, (b) ring
tongue, and (c) ﬂanged
spade.
Terminal
Barrel
Wire
(a)
(b)
(c)
848
Chapter 35/Electronics Assembly and Packaging

held in a fixed arrangement by the insulation surrounding them. It is often terminated in
multiple pin connectors that are widely used in electronics to make electrical connections
between major subassemblies. In these applications, the insulation displacement method
reduces wiring errors and speeds harness assembly. To make the assembly, the cable is placed
inanestandapressisusedtodrivetheconnectorcontactsthroughtheinsulationandagainstthe
metal wires.
35.5.2 SEPARABLE CONNECTORS
Separable connections are designed to permit disassembly and reassembly; they are
meant to be connected and disconnected multiple times. When connected they must
provide metal-to-metal contact between mating components with high reliability and
low electrical resistance. Separable connection devices typically consist of multiple
contacts, contained in a plastic molded housing, designed to mate with a compatible
connector or individual wires or terminals. They are used for making electrical connec-
tions between various combinations of cables, printed circuit boards, components, and
individual wires.
Awide selection of connectors is available to serve many different applications. The
design issues in choosing among them include (1) power level (e.g., whether the connector
is used for power or signal transmission), (2) cost, (3) number of individual conductors
involved, (4) types of devices and circuits to be connected, (5) space limitations, (6) ease of
joining the connector to its leads, (7) ease of connecting with the mating terminal or
connector, and (8) frequency of connection and disconnection. Some of the principal
connector types are cable connectors, terminal blocks, sockets, and connectors with low or
zero insertion force.
FIGURE 35.16
Two types
of terminal pins in elec-
tronics press ﬁt technology:
(a) solid, and (b) compliant.
(a)
(b)
Pin
Printed circuit
board
Plated (metal)
through hole
FIGURE 35.17
Insulation displacement
method of joining a con-
nector contact to ﬂat wire
cable:(1)startingposition,
(2) contacts pierce insula-
tion, and (3) after
connection.
Section 35.5/Electrical Connector Technology
849

Cable connectors are devices that are permanently connected to cables (one or both
ends) and are designed to be plugged into and unplugged from a mating connector. A power
cord connector that plugs into a wall receptacle is a familiar example. Other styles include the
type of multiple pin connector and mating receptacle shown in Figure 35.18, used to provide
signal transmission between electronic subassemblies. Other multiple pin connector styles
are used to attach printed circuit boards to other subassemblies in the electronic system.
Terminal blocks consist of a series of evenly spaced receptacles that allow connections
between individual terminals or wires. The terminals or wires are often attached to the block
by means of screws or other mechanical fastening mechanisms to permit disassembly. A
conventional terminal block is illustrated in Figure 35.19.
A socketinelectronics refers to a connection device mounted to a PCB, into whichIC
packages and other components can be inserted. Sockets are permanently attached to the
PCB by soldering and/or press fitting, but they provide a separable connection method for
the components, which can be conveniently added, removed, or replaced in the PCB
assembly. Sockets are therefore an alternative to soldering in electronics packaging.
Insertion and withdrawal forces can be a problem in the use of pin connectors and
PCB sockets. These forces increase in proportion to the number of pins involved. Possible
damage can result when components with many contacts are assembled. This problem has
motivated the development of connectors with low insertion force (LIF) or zero insertion
force (ZIF), in which special mechanisms have been devised to reduce or eliminate the
forces required to push the positive and negative connectors together and disconnect them.
FIGURE 35.19
Terminal block
that uses screws to attach termi-
nals. (Photo courtesy of AMP, Inc.,
now a division of Tyco Industries.)
FIGURE 35.18
Multiple
pin connector and mating receptacle,
both attached to cables. (Courtesy of
AMP Inc., now a division of Tyco
Industries.)
850
Chapter 35/Electronics Assembly and Packaging

REFERENCES
[1] Arabian, J. Computer Integrated Electronics Man-
ufacturing and Testing. Marcel Dekker, New York,
1989.
[2] Bakoglu, H. B. Circuits, Interconnections, and
Packaging for VLSI. Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Massachusetts, 1990.
[3] Bilotta, A. J. Connections in Electronic Assemblies.
Marcel Dekker, New York, 1985.
[4] Capillo, C. Surface Mount Technology. McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1990.
[5] Coombs, C. F. Jr. (ed.). Printed Circuits Handbook,
6th ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2007.
[6] Edwards, P. R. Manufacturing Technology in the Elec-
tronics Industry. Chapman & Hall, London, 1991.
[7] Harper, C. Electronic Materials and Processes
Handbook, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2009.
[8] Kear, F. W. Printed Circuit Assembly Manufactur-
ing, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1987.
[9] Lambert, L. P. Soldering for Electronic Assemblies.
Marcel Dekker, New York, 1988.
[10] Marks, L. and Caterina, J. Printed Circuit Assembly
Design. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2000.
[11] Prasad, R. P. Surface Mount Technology: Principles
and Practice, 2nd ed. New York, Springer, 1997.
[12] Seraphim, D. P., Lasky, R., and Li, C-Y. (eds.).
Principles of Electronic Packaging. McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1989.
[13] Ulrich, R. K., and Brown, W. D. Advanced Elec-
tronic Packaging. 2nd ed. IEEE Press and John
Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2006.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
35.1.
What are the functions of a well-designed elec-
tronics package?
35.2.
Identify the levels of packaging hierarchy in
electronics.
35.3.
What is the difference between a track and a land
on a printed circuit board?
35.4.
Define a printed circuit board (PCB).
35.5.
Name the three principal types of printed circuit
board.
35.6.
What is a via hole in a printed circuit board?
35.7.
What are the two basic methods by which the
circuit pattern is transferred to the copper surface
of the boards?
35.8.
What is etching used for in PCB fabrication?
35.9.
What is continuity testing, and when is it performed
in the PCB fabrication sequence?
35.10.
What are the two main categories of printed circuit
board assemblies, as distinguished by the method
of attaching components to the board?
35.11.
What are some of the reasons and defects that
make rework an integral step in the PCB fabrica-
tion sequence?
35.12.
Identify some of the advantages of surface-mount
technology
over
conventional
through-hole
technology.
35.13.
Identify some of the limitations and disadvantages
of surface-mount technology?
35.14.
What are the two methods of component place-
ment and soldering in surface-mount technology?
35.15.
What is a solder paste?
35.16.
Identify the two basic methods of making electrical
connections.
35.17.
Define crimping in the context of electrical
connections.
35.18.
What
is
press
fit
technology
in
electrical
connections?
35.19.
What is a terminal block?
35.20.
What is a pin connector?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 14 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
35.1.
The second level of packaging refers to which one of
thefollowing:(a)componenttoprintedcircuitboard,
(b)ICchiptopackage,(c)intraconnectionsontheIC
chip, or (d) wiring and cabling connections?
35.2.
Surface-mount technology is included within which
one of the following levels of packaging: (a) zeroth,
(b) first, (c) second, (d) third, or (e) fourth?
Multiple Choice Quiz
851

35.3.
Card-on-board (COB) packaging refers to which
one of the following levels in the electronics
packaging hierarchy: (a) zeroth, (b) first, (c) sec-
ond, (d) third, or (e) fourth?
35.4.
Which of the following polymeric materials is
commonly used as an ingredient in the insulation
layer of a printed circuit board (two correct
answers): (a) copper, (b) E-glass, (c) epoxy, (d)
phenolic, (e) polyethylene, and (f) polypropylene?
35.5.
Typical thickness of the copper layer in a printed
circuit board is which one of the following:
(a) 0.100 inch, (b) 0.010 inch, (c) 0.001 inch, or
(d) 0.0001 inch?
35.6.
Photolithography is widely used in PCB fabrica-
tion. Which of the following is the most common
resist type used in the processing of PCBs:
(a) negative resists or (b) positive resists?
35.7.
Which of the following plating processes has the
higher
deposition
rate
in
PCB
fabrication:
(a) electroless plating or (b) electroplating?
35.8.
In addition to copper, which one of the following is
another common metal plated onto a PCB:
(a) aluminum, (b) gold, (c) nickel, or (d) tin?
35.9.
Which of the following are the soldering processes
used to attach components to printed circuit boards
in through-hole technology (two best answers):
(a) hand soldering, (b) infrared soldering, (c) re-
flow soldering, (d) torch soldering, and (e) wave
soldering?
35.10.
In general, which of the following technologies
results
in
greater
problems
during
rework:
(a) surface-mount technology, or (b) through-
hole technology?
35.11.
Which of the following electrical connection meth-
ods produce a separable connection (two correct
answers): (a) crimping of terminals, (b) press fit-
ting,
(c)
soldering,
(d)
terminal
blocks,
and
(e) sockets?
852
Chapter 35/Electronics Assembly and Packaging

36
MICROFABRICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
Chapter Contents
36.1
Microsystem Products
36.1.1
Types of Microsystem Devices
36.1.2
Microsystem Applications
36.2
Microfabrication Processes
36.2.1
Silicon Layer Processes
36.2.2
LIGA Process
36.2.3
Other Microfabrication Processes
An important trend in engineering design and manufac-
turing is the growth in the number of products and/or
components of products whose features sizes are meas-
ured in microns (1 mm ¼ 103 mm ¼ 106 m). Several
terms have been applied to these miniaturized items. The
term microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) empha-
sizes the miniaturization of systems consisting of both
electronic and mechanical components. The word micro-
machines is sometimes used for these devices. Micro-
system technology (MST) is a more general term that
refers to the products (not necessarily limited to electro-
mechanical products) as well as the fabrication technol-
ogies to produce them. A related term is nanotechnology,
which refers to even smaller products whose dimensions
are measured in nanometers (1 nm ¼ 103 mm ¼ 109 m).
Figure 36.1 indicates the relative sizes and other factors
associated with these terms. We discuss microfabrication
techniques in the current chapter and nanofabrication in
Chapter 37.
36.1
MICROSYSTEM PRODUCTS
Designing products that are smaller and comprised of even
smaller parts and subassemblies means less material usage,
lower power requirements, greater functionality per unit
space, and accessibility to regions that are forbidden to
larger products. In most cases, smaller products should
mean lower prices because less material is used; however,
the price of a given product is influenced by the costs of
research, development, and production, and how these
costs can be spread over the number of units sold. The
economies of scale that result in lower-priced products
have not yet fully been realized in microsystems technol-
ogy, except for a limited number of cases that we shall
examine in this section.
853

36.1.1 TYPES OF MICROSYSTEM DEVICES
Microsystem products can be classified by type of device (e.g., sensor, actuator) or by
application area (e.g., medical, automotive). The device categories are as follows [1]:

Microsensors. A sensor is a device that detects or measures some physical phenome-
non such as heat or pressure. It includes a transducer that converts one form of physical
variable into another form (e.g., a piezoelectric device converts mechanical force into
electrical current) plus the physical packaging and external connections. Most micro-
sensors are fabricated on a silicon substrate using the same processing technologies as
those used for integrated circuits (Chapter 34). Microscopic-sized sensors have been
developed for measuring force, pressure, position, speed, acceleration, temperature,
flow, and a variety of optical, chemical, environmental, and biological variables. The
term hybrid microsensor is often used when the sensing element (transducer) is
combined with electronic components in the same device. Figure 36.2 shows a
micrograph of a micro-accelerometer developed at Motorola Co.
Log scale
Dimension, m
10–10 m
10–9 m
10–8 m
10–7 m
10–6 m
10–5 m
10–4 m
10–3 m
10–2 m
10–1 m
1 m
Other units
Angstrom
1 nm
10 nm
100 nm
1 m
10 m
100 m
1 mm
10 mm
100 mm
1000 mm
Examples of 
objects
Atom
Molecule
Virus
Bacteria
Human hair
Human 
tooth
Human 
hand
Human leg 
of tall man
Terminology
Nanotechnology
Microsystem technology
Traditional engineering linear dimensions
Precision engineering
How to observe
Electron beam microscope
Optical microscope
Magnifying glass
Naked eye
Scanning probe microscopes
Fabrication 
Nanofabrication processes
Silicon layer technologies
methods
LIGA process
Precision machining
Conventional machining
Casting, forming, sheet-metalworking
Key: nm = nanometer, m = micron or micrometer, mm = millimeter, m = meter
FIGURE 36.1
Terminology and relative sizes for microsystems and related technologies.
FIGURE 36.2
Micrograph of a micro-
accelerometer. (Photo
courtesy of A. A. Tseng,
Arizona State University
[4].)
854
Chapter 36/Microfabrication Technologies


Microactuators. Like a sensor, an actuator converts a physical variable of one type into
another type, but the converted variable usually involves some mechanical action (e.g., a
piezoelectric device oscillating in response to an alternating electrical field). An actuator
causes a change in position or the application of force. Examples of microactuators
include valves, positioners, switches, pumps, and rotational and linear motors [1].

Microstructures and microcomponents. These terms are used to denote a microsized
part that is not a sensor or actuator. Examples of microstructures and microcompo-
nents include microscopic gears, lenses, mirrors, nozzles, and beams. These items must
be combined with other components (microscopic or otherwise) to provide a useful
function. Figure 36.3 shows a microscopic gear alongside a human hair for comparison.

Microsystems and micro-instruments. These terms denote the integration of several
of the preceding components together with the appropriate electronics package into
a miniature system or instrument. Microsystems and micro-instruments tend to be
very application specific; for example, microlasers, optical chemical analyzers, and
microspectrometers. The economics of manufacturing these kinds of systems have
tended to make commercialization difficult.
36.1.2 MICROSYSTEM APPLICATIONS
The preceding microdevices and systems have been applied in a wide variety of fields.
There are many problem areas that can be approached best using very small devices.
Some important examples are the following:
Ink-Jet Printing Heads
This is currently one of the largest applications of MST, because a
typicalink-jetprinterusesupseveralcartridgeseachyear.Theoperationofanink-jetprinting
head is depicted in Figure 36.4. An array of resistance heating elements is located above a
corresponding array of nozzles. Ink is supplied by a reservoir and flows between the heaters
and nozzles. Each heating element can be independently activated under microprocessor
control in microseconds. When activated by a pulse of current, the liquid ink immediately
beneath the heaterboils toforma vaporbubble, forcing inktobeexpelled throughthe nozzle
opening. The ink hits the paper and dries almost immediately to form a dot that is part of an
alphanumeric character or other image. Meanwhile, the vapor bubble collapses, drawing
more ink from the reservoir to replenish the supply. Today’s ink-jet printers possess
resolutions of 1200 dots per inch (dpi), which converts to a nozzle separation of only about
21 mm, certainly in the microsystem range.
FIGURE 36.3
A microscopic gear and a
human hair. The image
was made using a
scanning electron
microscope. The gear is
high-density polyethylene
molded by a process
similar to the LIGA process
(Section 36.3.3) except
that the mold cavity was
fabricated using a focused
ion beam. (Photo courtesy
of W. Hung, Texas A&M
University, and M. Ali,
Nanyang Technological
University.)
Section 36.1/Microsystem Products
855

Thin-Film Magnetic Heads
Read-write heads are key components in magnetic storage
devices. These heads were previously manufactured from horseshoe magnets that were
manually wound with insulated copper wire. Because the reading and writing of magnetic
media with higher-bit densities are limited by the size of the read-write head, hand-wound
horseshoe magnets were a limitation on the technological trend toward greater storage
densities. Development of thin-film magnetic heads at IBM Corporation was an important
breakthrough in digital storage technology as well as a significant success story for micro-
fabrication technologies. Thin-film read-write heads are produced annually in hundreds of
millions of units, with a market of several billions of dollars per year.
A simplified sketch of the read-write head is presented in Figure 36.5, showing its
MST parts. The copper conductor coils are fabricated by electroplating copper through a
resist mold. The cross section of the coil is about 2 to 3 mm on a side. The thin-film cover,
only a few mm thick, is made of nickel–iron alloy. The miniature size of the read-write head
has permitted the significant increases in bit densities of magnetic storage media. The small
sizes are made possible by microfabrication technologies.
Compact Discs
Compact discs (CDs) and digital versatile discs (DVDs)1 are important
commercial products today, as storage media for audio, video, games, and computer software
FIGURE 36.5
Thin-ﬁlm
magnetic read-write head
(simpliﬁed).
Gap
Lower pole
Copper coil
Upper pole
Disc surface
FIGURE 36.4
Diagram
of an ink-jet printing
head.
Ink drop
Nozzle plate
Conductor
Substrate
Resistance heater
Ink
Nozzle
Resistance film
Thermal barrier
1The DVD was originally called a digital video disc because its primary applications were motion picture
videos. However, DVDs of various formats are now used for data storage and other computer applications,
games, and high-quality audio.
856
Chapter 36/Microfabrication Technologies

and data applications. A CD disk is molded of polycarbonate (Section 8.2), which has ideal
optical and mechanical properties for the application. The disk is 120 mm in diameter and
1.2 mm thick. The data consist of small pits (depressions) in a helical track that begins at a
diameter of 46 mm and ends at about 117 mm. The tracks in the spiral are separated by about
1.6 mm. Each pit in the track is about 0.5 mm wide and about 0.8 mm to 3.5 mm long. These
dimensions certainly qualify CDs as products of microsystem technology. The corresponding
dimensions of DVDs are even smaller, permitting much higher data storage capacities.
Although most of the microfabrication processes are discussed in Section 36.2, let us
briefly describe the production sequence for CDs here, because it is rather unique and uses
several processes that are quite conventional. As consumer products, music CDs are mass-
produced by plastic injection molding (Section 13.6). To make the mold, a master is created
from a smooth, thin layer of positive photoresist coated onto a 300-mm diameter glass plate.
Amodulatedlaserbeamwritesthedataontothephotoresistbyexposingmicroscopicregions
on the surface as the plate is rotated and moved slowly andprecisely to create the spiral track.
When the photoresist is developed, the exposed regions are removed. These regions in the
master will correspond to the pits in the CD. A thin layer of nickel is then deposited onto the
surface of the master by sputtering (Section 28.5.1). Electroforming (Section 28.3.2) is then
used to build up the thickness of the nickel (to several mm), thus creating a negative
impression of the master. This is called the ‘‘father’’. Several impressions are made of the
father by the same electroforming process, in effect creating a negative impression of the
father, whose surface geometry is identical to the original glass plate master. These impres-
sions are called ‘‘mothers’’. Finally, the mothers are used to create the actual mold impres-
sions (called ‘‘stampers’’), again by electroforming, and these are used to mass-produce the
CDs.2 The process sequence is similar for DVDs but more involved because of the smaller
scale and different data format requirements.
Once molded, the pitted side of the polycarbonate disk is coated with aluminum by
sputtering to create a mirror surface. To protect this layer, a thin polymer coating (e.g.,
acrylic) is deposited onto the metal. Thus, the final compact disk is a sandwich with a
relatively thick polycarbonate substrate on one side, a thin polymer layer on the other side,
and in between a very thin layer of aluminum. In subsequent operation, the laser beam of a
CD player (or other data reader) is directed through the polycarbonate substrate onto the
reflective surface, and the reflected beam is interpreted as a sequence of binary digits.
Automotive
Microsensors and other microdevices are widely used in modern automotive
products. Use of these microsystems is consistent with the increased application of on-board
electronics to accomplish control and safety functions for the vehicle. The functions include
electronic engine control, cruise control, anti-lock braking systems, air-bag deployment,
automatic transmission control, power steering, all-wheel drive, automatic stability control,
on-board navigation systems, and remote locking and unlocking, not to mention air con-
ditioning and radio. These control systems and safety features require sensors and actuators,
and a growing number of these are microscopic in size. There are currently 20 to 100 sensors
installedinamodernautomobile,dependingonmakeandmodel.In1970therewerevirtually
no on-board sensors. Some specific on-board microsensors are listed in Table 36.1.
Medical
Opportunities for using microsystems technology in this area are tremendous.
Indeed, significant strides have already been made, and many of the traditional medical and
2The reason for the rather involved mold-making sequence is because the pitted surfaces of the
impressions degrade after multiple uses. A father can be used to make three to six mothers, and each
mother can be used to make three to six stampers, before their respective surfaces become degraded. A
stamper (mold) can be used to produce only a few thousand disks, so if the production run is for several
hundred thousand CDs, more than one stamper must be used during the run to produce all high-quality
CDs.
Section 36.1/Microsystem Products
857

surgical methods have already been transformed by MST. One of the driving forces behind
theuseofmicroscopicdevicesistheprincipleof minimal-invasivetherapy,whichinvolvesthe
use of very small incisions or even available body orifices to access the medical problem of
concern. Advantages of this approach over the use of relatively large surgical incisions
include less patient discomfort, quicker recovery, fewer and smaller scars, shorter hospital
stays, and lower health insurance costs.
Amongthe techniquesbasedonminiaturizationof medicalinstrumentationisthefield
of endoscopy,3 now routinely used for diagnostic purposes and with growing applications in
surgery. It is standard medical practice today to use endoscopicexamination accompanied by
laparoscopic surgery for hernia repair and removal of organs such as gall bladder and
appendix. Growing use of similar procedures is expected in brain surgery, operating through
one or more small holes drilled through the skull.
OtherapplicationsofMSTinthemedicalfieldnowinclude orareexpectedtoinclude
(1) angioplasty, in which damaged blood vessels and arteries are repaired using surgery,
lasers, or miniaturized inflatable balloons at the end of a catheter that is inserted into the
vein; (2) telemicrosurgery, in which a surgical operation is performed remotely using a
stereo microscope and microscopic surgical tools; (3) artificial prostheses, such as heart
pacemakers and hearing aids; (4) implantable sensor systems to monitor physical variables
in the human body such as blood pressure and temperature; (5) drug delivery devices that
can be swallowed by a patient and then activated by remote control at the exact location
intended for treatment, such as the intestine, and (6) artificial eyes.
Chemical and Environmental
A principal role of microsystem technology in chemical
and environmental applications is the analysis of substances to measure trace amounts of
chemicals or detect harmful contaminants. A variety of chemical microsensors have been
developed. They are capable of analyzing very small samples of the substance of interest.
Micropumps are sometimes integrated into these systems so that theproper amountsof the
substance can be delivered to the sensor component.
Other Applications
There are many other applications of microsystem technology
beyond those described in the preceding. We list some examples in the following:
TABLE 36.1
Microsensors installed in a modern automobile.
Microdevice
Application(s)
Accelerometer
Air-bag release, anti-lock brakes, active suspension system
Angular speed sensor
Intelligent navigation systems
Level sensors
Sense oil and gasoline levels
Optical sensor
Automatic headlight control
Position sensor
Transmission, engine timing,
Pressure sensors
Optimize fuel consumption, sense oil pressure, fluid
pressures of hydraulic systems (e.g., suspension
systems), lumbar seat support pressure, climate control,
tire pressure
Proximity and range sensors
Sense distances from front and rear bumpers for parking
control and collision prevention
Temperature sensors
Cabin climate control, engine management system
Torque sensor
Drive train
Compiled from [1] and [5].
3The use of a small instrument (i.e., an endoscope) to visually examine the inside of a hollow body organ
such as the rectum or colon.
858
Chapter 36/Microfabrication Technologies


Scanning probe microscope. This is a technology for measuring microscopic details of
surfaces, allowing surface structures to be examined at the nanometer level. In order to
operate in this dimensional range, the instruments require probes that are only a few
mm in length and that scan the surface at a distance measured in nm. These probes are
produced using microfabrication techniques.4

Biotechnology. In biotechnology, the specimens of interest are often microscopic in
size. To study these specimens, manipulators and other tools are needed that are of the
same size scale. Microdevices are being developed for holding, moving, sorting,
dissecting, and injecting the small samples of biomaterials under a microscope.

Electronics. Printed circuit board (PCB) and connector technologies are discussed in
Chapter 35, but they should also be cited here in the context of MST. Miniaturization
trends in electronics have forced PCBs, contacts, and connectors to be fabricated with
smaller and more complex physical details, and with mechanical structures that are
more consistent with the microdevices discussed in this chapter than with the inte-
grated circuits discussed in Chapter 34.
36.2
MICROFABRICATION PROCESSES
Many of the products in microsystem technology are based on silicon, and most of the
processing techniques used in the fabrication of microsystems are borrowed from the micro-
electronics industry. There are several important reasons why silicon is a desirable material in
MST:(1)ThemicrodevicesinMSToftenincludeelectroniccircuits,soboththecircuitandthe
microdevice can be fabricated in combination on the same substrate. (2) In addition to its
desirable electronic properties, silicon also possesses useful mechanical properties, such as
high strength and elasticity, good hardness, and relatively low density.5 (3) The technologies
for processing silicon are well-established, owing to their widespread use in microelectronics.
(4) Use of single-crystal silicon permits the production of physical features to very close
tolerances.
Microsystem technology often requires silicon to be fabricated along with other
materials to obtain a particular microdevice. For example, microactuators often consist of
several components made of different materials. Accordingly, microfabrication techniques
consist of more than just silicon processing. Our coverage of the microfabrication processes
is organized into three sections: (1) silicon layering processes, (2) the LIGA process, and
(3) other processes accomplished on a microscopic scale.
36.2.1 SILICON LAYER PROCESSES
The first application of silicon in microsystems technology was in the fabrication of
Si piezoresistive sensors for the measurement of stress, strain, and pressure in the early
1960s [5]. Silicon is now widely used in MST to produce sensors, actuators, and other
microdevices. The basic processing technologies are those used to produce integrated
circuits(Chapter34).However,itshouldbenotedthatcertaindifferencesexistbetweenthe
processing of ICs and the fabrication of the microdevices covered in this chapter:
1. The aspect ratios in microfabrication are generally much greater than in IC fabrica-
tion. Aspect ratio is defined as the height-to-width ratio of the features produced, as
illustrated in Figure 36.6. Typical aspect ratios in semiconductor processing are about
4Scanning probe microscopes are discussed in Section 37.2.2.
5Silicon is discussed in Section 7.5.2.
Section 36.2/Microfabrication Processes
859

1.0 or less, whereas in microfabrication the corresponding ratio might be as high as
400 [5].
2. The sizes of the devices made in microfabrication are often much larger than in IC
processing, where the prevailing trend in microelectronics is inexorably toward greater
circuit densities and miniaturization.
3. The structures produced in microfabrication often include cantilevers and bridges and
other shapes requiring gaps between layers. These kinds of structures are uncommon in
IC fabrication.
4. The silicon processing techniques are sometimes supplemented to obtain a three-
dimensional structure or other physical feature in the microsystem.
Notwithstanding these differences, let us nevertheless recognize that most of the
silicon-processing steps used in microfabrication are the same or very similar to those used
to produce ICs. After all, silicon is the same material whether it is used for integrated
circuits or microdevices. The processing steps are listed in Table 36.2, together with brief
descriptions and text references in which the reader can obtain more detailed descriptions.
All of these process steps are discussed in previous chapters. As in IC fabrication, the
various processes in Table 36.2 add, alter, or remove layers of material from a substrate
according to geometric data contained in lithographic masks. Lithography is the funda-
mental technology that determines the shape of the microdevice being fabricated.
Regarding our preceding list of differences between IC fabrication and microdevice
fabrication,theissueofaspect ratioshouldbeaddressed inmoredetail. Thestructures inIC
processing are basically planar, whereas three-dimensional structures are more likely to be
required inmicrosystems. Thefeaturesofmicrodevices arelikely topossesslarge height-to-
width ratios. These 3-D features can be produced in single-crystal silicon by wet etching,
provided the crystal structure is oriented to allow the etching process to proceed aniso-
tropically. Chemical wet etching of polycrystalline silicon is isotropic, with the formation of
cavities under the edges of the resist, as illustrated in Figure 34.13. However, in single-
crystal Si, the etching rate depends on the orientation of the lattice structure. In Figure 36.7,
the three crystal faces of silicon’s cubic lattice structure are illustrated. Certain etching
solutions, such as potassium hydroxide (KOH) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH),have a very
low etching rate in the direction of the (111) crystal face. This permits the formation of
distinct geometric structures with sharpedgesin a single-crystal Si substrate whose latticeis
oriented to favor etch penetration vertically or at sharpangles into thesubstrate. Structures
(a)
(b)
Height
Height
Width
Width
Substrate
FIGURE 36.6
Aspect ratio (height-to-width ratio) typical in (a) fabrication of integrated circuits and
(b) microfabricated components.
860
Chapter 36/Microfabrication Technologies

such as those in Figure 36.8 can be created using this procedure. It should be noted that
anisotropic wet etching is also desirable in IC fabrication (Section 34.4.5), but its conse-
quence is greater in microfabrication because of the larger aspect ratios. The term bulk
micromachining is used for the relatively deep wet etching process into single-crystal
silicon substrate (Si wafer); whereas the term surface micromachining refers to the planar
structuring of the substrate surface, using much more shallow layering processes.
Bulk micromachining can be used to create thin membranes in a microstructure.
However, a method is needed to control the etching penetration into the silicon, so as to
leave the membrane layer. A common method used for this purpose is to dope the silicon
substrate with boron atoms, which significantly reduce the etching rate of the silicon. The
FIGURE 36.7
Three
crystal faces in the silicon
cubic lattice structure:
(a) (100) crystal face,
(b) (110) crystal face, and
(c) (111) crystal face.
z
y
x
(a)
z
y
x
(b)
z
y
x
(c)
TABLE 36.2
Silicon layering processes used in microfabrication.
Process
Brief Description
Text Reference
Lithography
Printing process used to transfer copies of a mask pattern onto the
surface of silicon or other solid material (e.g., silicon dioxide).
The usual technique in microfabrication is photolithography.
Section 34.3
Thermal oxidation
(Layer addition) Oxidation of silicon surface to form silicon
dioxide layer.
Section 34.4.1
Chemical vapor
deposition
(Layer addition) Formation of a thin film on the surface of a substrate
by chemical reactions or decomposition of gases.
Sections 28.5.2
and 34.4.2
Physical vapor
deposition
(Layer addition) Family of deposition processes in which a material is
converted to vapor phase and condensed onto a substrate surface as
a thin film. PVD processes include vacuum evaporation and
sputtering.
Section 28.5.1
Electroplating and
electroforming
(Layer addition) Electrolytic process in which metal ions in solution
are deposited onto a cathode work material.
Sections 28.3.1
and 28.3.2
Electroless plating
(Layer addition) Deposition in an aqueous solution containing ions of
the plating metal with no external electric current. Work surface acts
as catalyst for the reaction.
Section 28.3.3
Thermal diffusion
(doping)
(Layer alteration) Physical process in which atoms migrate from
regions of high concentration into regions of low concentration.
Sections 28.2.1
and 34.4.3
Ion implantation
(doping)
(Layer alteration) Embedding atoms of one or more elements in a
substrate using a high-energy beam of ionized particles.
Sections 28.2.2
and 34.4.3
Wet etching
(Layer removal) Application of a chemical etchant in aqueous
solution to etch away a target material, usually in conjunction with a
mask pattern.
Section 34.4.5
Dry etching
(Layer removal) Dry plasma etching using an ionized gas to etch a
target material.
Section 34.4.5
Section 36.2/Microfabrication Processes
861

processingsequenceisshown inFigure36.9.Instep (2), epitaxialdeposition isusedtoapply
the upper layer of silicon so that it will possess the same single-crystal structure and lattice
orientation as the substrate (Section 34.4.2). This is a requirement of bulk micromachining
that will be used to provide the deeply etched region in subsequent processing. The use of
boron doping to establish the etch resistant layer of silicon is called the p+etch-stop
technique.
Surface micromachining can be used to construct cantilevers, overhangs, and similar
structures on a silicon substrate, as shown in part (5) of Figure 36.10. The cantilevered
beams in the figure are parallel to but separated by a gap from the silicon surface. Gap size
and beam thickness are in the micron range. The process sequence to fabricate this type of
structure is depicted in the earlier parts of Figure 36.10.
Dry etching, which involves material removal through the physical and/or chemical
interaction between the ions in an ionized gas (plasma) and the atoms of a surface that has
been exposed to the ionized gas (Section 34.4.5), provides anisotropic etching in almost any
material. Its anisotropic penetration characteristic is not limited to a single-crystal silicon
substrate. Ontheotherhand,etch selectivity ismore of a problemin dry etching; that is, any
surfaces exposed to the plasma are attacked.
A procedure called the lift-off technique is used in microfabrication to pattern
metals such as platinum on a substrate. These structures are used in certain chemical
FIGURE 36.8
Several
structures that can be
formed in single-crystal
silicon substrate by bulk
micromachining: (a) (110)
siliconand(b)(100)silicon.
(111 Crystal face)
Substrate
(111 Crystal face)
(a)
(b)
Si
Si
SiO2
Membrane
SiO2
Boron-doped
layer
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
FIGURE 36.9
Formation of a thin membrane in a silicon substrate: (1) silicon substrate is doped with boron, (2) a
thick layer of silicon is applied on top of the doped layer by epitaxial deposition, (3) both sides are thermally oxidized to
formaSiO2resistonthesurfaces,(4)theresistispatternedbylithography,and(5)anisotropicetchingisusedtoremove
the silicon except in the boron-doped layer.
862
Chapter 36/Microfabrication Technologies

sensors, but are difficult to produce by wet etching. The processing sequence in the lift-off
technique is illustrated in Figure 36.11.
36.2.2 LIGA PROCESS
LIGA is an important process in MST. It was developed in Germany in the early 1980s. The
letters LIGA stand for the German words LIthographie (in particular, x-ray lithography,
although other lithographic exposure methods are also used, such as ion beams in
Figure 36.3), Galvanoformung (translated electrodeposition or electroforming), and
Abformtechnik (plastic molding). The letters also indicate the LIGA processing sequence.
These processing steps have each been described in previous sections of our book: x-ray
lithography in Section 35.3.2; electrodeposition and electroforming in Sections 28.3.1 and
28.3.2, respectively; and plastic molding processes in Sections 13.6 and 13.7. Let us examine
how they are integrated in LIGA technology.
The LIGA processing steps are illustrated in Figure 36.12. Let us elaborate on the brief
description provided in the figure’s caption: (1) A thick layer of (x-ray) radiation-sensitive
resist is applied to a substrate. Layer thickness can range between several microns to
centimeters, depending on the size of the part(s) to be produced. The common resist
material used in LIGA is polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA, Section 8.2.2 under
‘‘Acrylics’’). The substrate must be a conductive material for the subsequent electro-
depositionprocessesperformed. The resist is exposedthrougha maskto high-energy x-ray
radiation. (2) The irradiated areas of the positive resist are chemically removed from the
substrate surface, leaving the unexposed portions standing as a three-dimensional plastic
structure. (3) The regions where the resist has been removed are filled with metal using
electrodeposition. Nickel is the common plating metal used in LIGA. (4) The remaining
resist structure is stripped (removed), yielding a three-dimensional metal structure.
Resist
Pt
Si
(1)
(2)
(3)
FIGURE 36.11
The lift-off technique: (1) resist is applied to substrate and structured by
lithography;(2)platinumisdepositedontosurfaces;and(3)resistisremoved,takingwithitthe
platinum on its surface but leaving the desired platinum microstructure.
Si
SiO2
Cantilevers
Si
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
FIGURE 36.10
Surface micromachining to form cantilevers: (1) on the silicon substrate is formed a silicon dioxide
layer, whose thickness will determine the gap size for the cantilevered member; (2) portions of the SiO2 layer are
etched using lithography; (3) a polysilicon layer is applied; (4) portions of the polysilicon layer are etched using
lithography; and (5) the SiO2 layer beneath the cantilevers is selectively etched.
Section 36.2/Microfabrication Processes
863

Depending on the geometry created, this metallic structure may be (a) the mold used for
producing plastic parts by injection molding, reaction injection molding, or compression
molding. In the case of injection molding, in which thermoplastic parts are produced, these
parts may be used as ‘‘lost molds’’ in investment casting (Section 11.2.4). Alternatively,
(b) the metal part may be a pattern for fabricating plastic molds that will be used to
produce more metallic parts by electrodeposition.
As our description indicates, LIGA can produce parts by several different methods.
Thisisoneofthegreatestadvantagesofthismicrofabricationprocess:(1) LIGA is a versatile
process. Other advantages include (2) high aspect ratios are possible—large height-to-
width ratios in the fabricated part; (3) wide range of part sizes is feasible, with heights
ranging from micrometers to centimeters; and (4) close tolerances can be achieved. A
significant disadvantage of LIGA is that it is a very expensive process, so large quantities of
parts are usually required to justify its application. Also, the required use of x-ray radiation
is a disadvantage.
36.2.3 OTHER MICROFABRICATION PROCESSES
MST research is providing several additional fabrication techniques, most of which are
variations of lithography or adaptations of macro-scale processes. In this section we
discuss several of these additional techniques.
Soft Lithography
This term is used for processes that use an elastomeric flat mold
(similar to a rubber ink stamp) to create a pattern on a substrate surface. The sequence for
creating the mold is illustrated in Figure 36.13. A master pattern is fabricated on a silicon
surface using one of the lithography processes such as UV photolithography or electron
beam lithography. This master pattern is then used to produce the flat mold for the soft
lithography process. The common mold material is polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, a silicon
rubber, Section 8.4.3). After the PDMS has cured, it is peeled away from the pattern and
attached to a substrate for support and handling.
x-ray radiation
Mask
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Resist (PMMA)
Substrate (conductive)
FIGURE 36.12
LIGA processing steps: (1) thick layer of resist applied and x-ray exposure through mask, (2) exposed
portionsofresistremoved,(3)electrodepositiontoﬁllopeningsinresist,(4)resiststrippedtoprovide(a)amoldor(b)ametal
part.
864
Chapter 36/Microfabrication Technologies

Two of the soft lithography processes are micro-imprint lithography and micro-contact
printing. In micro-imprint lithography, the mold is pressed into the surface of a soft resist to
displace the resist away from certain regions of the substrate for subsequent etching. The
process sequence is illustrated in Figure 36.14. The flat mold consists of raised and depressed
regions, and the raised regions correspond to areas on the resist surface that will be displaced
to expose the substrate. The resist material is a thermoplastic polymer that has been softened
by heating before pressing. The alteration of the resist layer is by mechanical deformation
rather than electromagnetic radiation, as in the more traditional lithography methods. The
compressed regions of the resist layer are subsequently removed by anisotropic etching
(Section 34.4.5). The etching process also reduces the thickness of the remaining resist layer,
but enough remains to protect the substrate for subsequent processing. Micro-imprint
lithography can be set up for high production rates at modest cost. A mask is not required
in the imprint procedure, although the mold requires an analogous preparation.
The same type of flat stamp can be used in a printing mode, in which case the process
iscalled micro-contact printing.In this form of softlithography, the moldis used totransfer
a pattern of a substance to a substrate surface, much like ink can be transferred to a paper
surface. This process allows very thin layers to be fabricated onto the substrate.
Nontraditional and Traditional Processes in Microfabrication
A number of non-
traditional machining processes (Chapter 26), as well as conventional manufacturing
processes, are important in microfabrication. Photochemical machining (PCM, Section
26.4.2)isanessentialprocessinICprocessingandmicrofabrication,but wehave referred to
it in our descriptions here and in Chapter 34 as wet chemical etching (combined with
photolithography). PCM is often used with conventional processes of electroplating,
electroforming, and/or electroless plating (Section 28.3) to add layers of metallic materials
according to microscopic pattern masks.
Master pattern
Uncured PDMS
Cured PDMS falt mold
FIGURE 36.13
Steps in mold-making for soft lithography: (1) master pattern fabricated by traditional lithography,
(2) polydimethylsiloxane ﬂat mold is cast from the master pattern, and (3) cured ﬂat mold is peeled off pattern for use.
PDMS flat mold
Resist
Substrate
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
FIGURE 36.14
Steps in micro-imprint lithography: (1) mold positioned above and (2) pressed into resist, (3) mold is lifted,
and (4) remaining resist is removed from substrate surface in deﬁned regions.
Section 36.2/Microfabrication Processes
865

Other nontraditional processes capable of micro-level processing include [5]:
(1) electric discharge machining, used to cut holes as small as 0.3 mm in diameter
with aspect ratios (depth-to-diameter) as high as 100; (2) electron-beam machining, for
cutting holes of diameter smaller than 100 mm in hard-to-machine materials; (3) laser-
beam machining, which can produce complex profiles and holes as small as 10 mm in
diameter with aspect ratios (depth-to-width or depth-to-diameter) approaching 50;
(4) ultrasonic machining, capable of drilling holes in hard and brittle materials as small
as 50 mm in diameter; and (5) wire electric discharge cutting, or wire-EDM, which can cut
very narrow swaths with aspect ratios (depth-to-width) greater than 100.
Trends in conventional machining have included its capabilities for taking smaller
and smaller cut sizes and associated tolerances. Referred to as ultra-high-precision
machining, the enabling technologies have included single-crystal diamond cutting tools
and positioncontrol systemswith resolutions as fine as 0.01mm [5].Figure 36.15 depicts one
reported application, the milling of grooves in aluminum foil using a single-point diamond
fly-cutter. The aluminum foil is 100 mm thick, and the grooves are 85 mm wide and 70 mm
deep. Similar ultra-high-precision machining is being applied today to produce products
such as computer hard discs, photocopier drums, mold inserts for compact disk reader
heads, and high-definition TV projection lenses.
Rapid Prototyping Technologies
Several rapid prototyping (RP) methods (Chapter
33) have been adapted to produce micro-sized parts [7]. RP methods use a layer additive
approach to build three-dimensional components, based on a CAD (computer-aided
design) geometric model of the component. Each layer is very thin, typically as low as
0.05 mm thick, which approaches the scale of microfabrication technologies. By making
the layers even thinner, microcomponents can be fabricated.
One approach is called electrochemical fabrication (EFAB), which involves the
electrochemical deposition of metallic layers in specific areas that are determined by
pattern masks created by ‘‘slicing’’ a CAD model of the object to be made (Section 33.1).
The deposited layers are generally 5 to 10 mm thick, with feature sizes as small as 20 mm in
width. EFAB is carried out at temperatures below 60C (140F) and does not require a
clean room environment. However, the process is slow, requiring about 40 minutes to apply
each layer, or about 36 layers (a height between 180 and 360 mm) per 24-hour period. To
overcome this disadvantage, the mask for each layer can contain multiple copies of the part
slice pattern, permitting many parts to be produced simultaneously in a batch process.
FIGURE 36.15
Ultra-
high-precision milling of
grooves in aluminum foil.
v
Diamond-cutting tool
Toolholder
Aluminum
foil
Vacuum chuck
Spindle
866
Chapter 36/Microfabrication Technologies

Review Questions
867
Another RP approach, called microstereolithography, is based on stereolithography
(STL, Section 33.2.1), but the scale of the processing steps is reduced in size. Whereas the
layer thickness in conventional stereolithography ranges between 75 mm and 500 mm,
microstereolithography (MSTL) uses layer thicknesses between 10 and 20 mm typically,
with even thinner layers possible. The laser spot size in STL is typically around 250 mm in
diameter, whereasMSTLusesaspotsizeassmallas1or2mm.AnotherdifferenceinMSTL
is that the work material is not limited to a photosensitive polymer. Researchers report
success in fabricating 3-D microstructures from ceramic and metallic materials. The
difference is that the starting material is a powder rather than a liquid.
Photofabrication
This term applies to an industrial process in which ultraviolet exposure
through a pattern mask causes a significant modification in the chemical solubility of an
optically clear material. The change is manifested in the form of an increase in solubility to
certain etchants. For example, hydrofluoric acid etches the UV-exposed photosensitive glass
between 15 and 30 times faster than the same glass that has not been exposed. Masking is not
required during etching, the difference in solubility being the determining factor in which
portions of the glass are removed.
Origination of photofabrication actually preceded the microprocessing of silicon.
Now, with the growing interest in microfabrication technologies, there is a renewed interest
in the older technology. Examples of modern materials used in photofabrication include
CorningGlassWorks’FotoformTMglasses andFotoceramTM ceramics, andDuPont’s Dycril
and Templex photosensitive solid polymers. When processing these materials, aspect ratios
of around 3:1 can be obtained with the polymers and 20:1 with the glasses and ceramics.
REFERENCES
[1] Fatikow, S., and Rembold, U. Microsystem Technology
and Microrobotics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1997.
[2] Hornyak, G. L., Moore, J. J., Tibbals, H. F., and
Dutta, J. Fundamentals of Nanotechnology, CRC
Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2009.
[3] Jackson, M. J. Micro and Nanomanufacturing,
Springer, New York, 2007.
[4] Li, G., and Tseng, A. A.‘‘Low Stress Packaging of a
MicromachinedAccelerometer,’’IEEE Transactions
on Electronics Packaging Manufacturing, Vol. 24,
No. 1, January 2001, pp. 18–25.
[5] Madou, M. Fundamentals of Microfabrication.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, 1997.
[6] Madou, M. Manufacturing Techniques for Micro-
fabrication and Nanotechnology. CRC Taylor &
Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2009.
[7] O’Connor, L., and Hutchinson, H.‘‘Skyscrapers in a
Microworld,’’ Mechanical Engineering, Vol. 122,
No. 3, March 2000, pp. 64–67.
[8] National Research Council (NRC). Implications
of Emerging Micro- and Nanotechnologies. Com-
mittee on Implications of Emerging Micro- and
Nanotechnologies, The National Academies Press,
Washington, D.C., 2002.
[9] Paula, G.‘‘An Explosion in Microsystems Technol-
ogy,’’ Mechanical Engineering, Vol. 119, No. 9,
September 1997, pp. 71–74.
[10] Tseng, A. A., and Mon, J-I.‘‘NSF 2001 Workshop on
Manufacturing of Micro-Electro Mechanical Sys-
tems,’’ in Proceedings of the 2001 NSF Design,
Service, and Manufacturing Grantees and Research
Conference, National Science Foundation, 2001.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
36.1.
Define microelectromechanical system.
36.2.
What is the approximate size scale in microsystem
technology?
36.3.
Why is it reasonable to believe that microsystem
products would be available at lower costs than
products of larger, more conventional size?
36.4.
What is a hybrid microsensor?
36.5.
What are some of the basic types of microsystem
devices?
36.6.
Name some products that represent microsystem
technology.

36.7.
Why is silicon a desirable work material in micro-
system technology?
36.8.
What is meant by the term aspect ratio in micro-
system technology?
36.9.
What is the difference between bulk micromachin-
ing and surface micromachining?
36.10.
What are the three steps in the LIGA process?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 14 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
36.1.
Microsystem technology includes which of the fol-
lowing (three best answers): (a) LIGA technology,
(b) microelectromechanical systems, (c) microma-
chines, (d) nanotechnology, (e) and precision
engineering?
36.2.
Which of the following are current applications of
microsystem technology in modern automobiles
(three best answers): (a) air-bag release sensors,
(b) alcohol blood level sensors, (c) driver identifi-
cation sensors for theft prevention, (d) oil pressure
sensors, and (e) temperature sensors for cabin
climate control?
36.3.
The polymer used to make compact discs (CDs)
and digital versatile discs (DVDs) is which one of
the following: (a) amino resin, (b) epoxy resin,
(c)
polyamides,
(d)
polycarbonate,
(e)
poly-
ethylene, or (f) polypropylene?
36.4.
The most common work material used in micro-
system technology is which one of the following:
(a) boron, (b) gold, (c) nickel, (d) potassium hy-
droxide, or (e) silicon?
36.5.
The aspect ratio in microsystem technology is best
defined by which one of the following: (a) degree of
anisotropy in etched features, (b) height-to-width
ratio of the fabricated features, (c) height-to-width
ratio of the MST device, (d) length-to-width ratio
of the fabricated features, or (e) thickness-to-
length ratio of the MST device?
36.6.
Which of the following forms of radiation have
wavelengths shorter than the wavelength of ultra-
violet light used in photolithography (two correct
answers): (a) electron beam radiation, (b) natural
light, and (c) x-ray radiation?
36.7.
Bulk micromachining refers to a relatively deep
wet etching process into a single-crystal silicon
substrate: (a) true or (b) false?
36.8.
In the LIGA process, the letters LIGA stand for
which one of the following: (a) let it go already,
(b) little grinding apparatus, (c) lithographic appli-
cations, (d) lithography, electrodeposition, and
plastic molding, or (e) lithography, grinding, and
alteration?
36.9.
Photofabrication is the same process as photo-
lithography. (a) true or (b) false?
868
Chapter 36/Microfabrication Technologies

37
NANOFABRICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
Chapter Contents
37.1
Nanotechnology Products
37.1.1
Carbon Nanostructures
37.1.2
The National Nanotechnology
Initiative
37.2
Introduction to Nanoscience
37.2.1
Size Matters
37.2.2
Scanning Probe Microscopes
37.3
Nanofabrication Processes
37.3.1
Top-Down Processing Approaches
37.3.2
Bottom-Up Processing Approaches
The trend in miniaturization is continuing beyond the microm-
eter range into the nanometer (nm) scale. Nanotechnology
referstothefabricationandapplicationofentitieswhosefeature
sizes range from less than 1 nm to 100 nm (1 nm ¼ 103 mm ¼
106 mm ¼ 109 m).1 The entities include films, coatings, dots,
lines, wires, tubes, structures, and systems. The prefix nano is
usedfortheseitems;thus,wehavenewwordssuchasnanotube,
nanostructure, nanoscale, andnanoscience enteringour vocab-
ulary. Nanoscience is the field of scientific study that is con-
cerned with objects in the same size range. Nanoscale refers to
dimensionswithinthisrangeandslightlybelow,whichoverlaps
on the lower end with the sizes of atoms and molecules. For
example, the smallest atom is Helium, with a diameter close to
0.1 nm. Uranium has a diameter of about 0.22 nm and is the
largest of the naturally occurring atoms. Molecules tend to be
larger because they consist of multiple atoms. Molecules made
upofabout30atomsareroughly1nminsize,dependingonthe
elements involved. Thus, nanoscience involves the behavior of
individual moleculesandtheprinciples that explainthisbehav-
ior, and nanotechnology involves the application of these prin-
ciples to create useful products.
In the previous chapter, we provided an overview of
the products and devices in microsystem technology. Let us
do the same for nanotechnology. What are the currently
available and potential future products and materials?
Nanotechnology involves not just a reduction in scale by
three orders of magnitude. The science is different when
the sizes of the entities approach the molecular and atomic
levels. We discuss some of these differences in Section 37.2.
Finally, in Section 37.3, we describe the major categories of
fabrication processes used in nanotechnology.
1The dividing line between nanotechnology and microsystem technol-
ogy (Chapter 36) is considered to be 100 nm ¼ 0.1 mm [7]. This is
illustrated approximately in Figure 36.1.
869

37.1
NANOTECHNOLOGY PRODUCTS
Most products in nanotechnology are not just smaller versions of microsystem technology
(MST) products; they also include new materials, coatings, and unique entities that are not
includedwithinthescopeofMST.Nanoscaleproductsandprocessesthathavebeenaround
for a while include the following:

The colorful stained-glass windows of churches built during the Middle Ages were
based on gold particles of nanometer scale embedded in the glass. Depending on
their size, the particles can take on a variety of different colors.

Modern photography has roots dating back more than 150 years and depends on the
formation of silver nanoparticles to create the image in the photograph.

Nanoscale particles of carbon are used as reinforcing fillers in automobile tires.

Catalytic converters required in the exhaust systems of modern automobiles make use of
nanoscale coatings of platinum and palladium on a ceramic honeycomb structure. The
metal coatings act as catalysts to convert harmful emission gases into harmless gases.
We should also mention that the fabrication technology for integrated circuits now includes
featuresizesthatareinthenanotechrange.Ofcourse,integratedcircuitshavebeenproduced
since the 1960s, but only in recent years have nanoscale features been achieved.
Other more recent products exploiting applications of nanotechnology include
cosmetics, sun lotions, car polishes and waxes, coatings for eyeglass lenses, and scratch-
resistant paints. All of these categories contain nanoscale particles (nanoparticles), which
qualifies them as products of nanotechnology. A more complete list of examples of present
and future products and materials based on nanotechnology is presented in Table 37.1. For
TABLE 37.1
Examples of present and future products and materials that are based on nanotechnology.
Computers. Carbon nanotubes (Section 37.1.3) are strong candidates to substitute for silicon-based electronics as the
limits of size reduction are approached in the lithography-based processes used to make integrated circuits on
silicon wafers. These limits are expected to be reached around the year 2015.
Materials. Nanoscale particles (nanodots) and fibers (nanowires) may prove to be useful reinforcing agents for
composite materials. For example, the truck bed for one of General Motors’ Hummer vehicles is made with
nanocomposites. Entirely new material systems, not known today, may be possible with nanotechnology.
Nanoparticle catalysts. Metal nanoparticles and coatings of noble metals (e.g., gold, platinum) on ceramic substrates
act as catalysts for certain chemical reactions. Catalytic converters in automobiles are an important example.
Cancer drugs. Nanoscale drugs are being developed that will be designed to match the specific genetic profile of the
cancer cells of a patient and to attack and destroy the cells. For example, Abraxine is a nanoscale protein-based
medicine produced by American Pharmaceutical that is used to treat metastatic breast cancer.
Solar energy. Nanoscale surface films have the potential to absorb more of the sun’s electromagnetic energy than existing
photovoltaic receptacles. Developments in this area may reduce our reliance on fossil fuels for power generation.
Coatings. Nanoscale coatings and ultra-thin films are being developed that will increase scratch resistance of surfaces
(eyeglass lenses with such coatings are already available), stain resistance of fabrics, and self-cleaning capabilities
for windows and other surfaces (the ‘‘lotus effect’’).
Flat screen displays for television and computer monitors. TV screens based on carbon nanotubes are being
introduced. They are expected to be brighter, less expensive, and more energy efficient than current displays. They
will be produced by Samsung Electronics of South Korea.
Portable medical laboratories. Instruments based on nanotechnology will provide fast analysis of a variety of
ailments such as diabetes and HIV.
Batteries. Carbon nanotubes may be future components in high-powered batteries and storage devices for hydrogen.
Hydrogen storage will no doubt play a role in converting from fossil-fuel motors to hydrogen-based engines.
Light sources. Lamps are being developed based on nanotechnology that use a fraction of the energy of an
incandescent light bulb and never burn out.
Based mostly on [1] and [24].
870
Chapter 37/Nanofabrication Technologies

an extensive list of nanotech products, the interested reader can consult www.nano-
techproject.org/inventories/consumer [27].
An important product category in microsystem technology is microelectrome-
chanical systems (MEMS), which have found quite a few applications in the computer,
medical, and automotive industries (Section 36.1.2). With the advent of nanotechnology,
there has been growing interest in the notion of extending the development of these
kinds of devices into the nanoscale range. Nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) are
the sub-micron sized counterparts of MEMS devices, only their smaller sizes would
result in even greater potential advantages. An important NEMS structural product
currently produced is the probe used in atomic force microscopes (Section 37.2.2). The
sharp point on the probe is of nanoscale size. Nanosensors are another developing
application. Nanosensors would be more accurate, faster responding, and operate with
lower power requirements than larger sensors. Current NEMS sensor applications
include accelerometers and chemical sensors. It has been suggested that multiple
nanosensors could be distributed throughout the subject area to collect data, thus
providing the benefit of multiple readings of the variable of interest, rather than using a
single larger sensor at one location.
Formidable technical problems arise in applications of nanomachines, defined as
nanosystems consisting of movable parts and at least two different materials [7]. The
problems result from the fact that the part surfaces cannot be made smooth at the atomic
and molecular sizes. Other surface characteristics also come into play, as discussed in
Section 37.2.1.
37.1.1 CARBON NANOSTRUCTURES
Two structures of significant scientific and commercial interest in nanotechnology are
carbon buckyballs and nanotubes. They are basically graphite layers that have been
formed into spheres and tubes, respectively.
The name buckyball refers to the molecule C60, which contains exactly 60 carbon
atoms and is shaped like a soccer ball, as in Figure 37.1. The original name of the
molecule was buckministerfullerene, after the architect/inventor R. Buckminister
Fuller, who designed the geodesic dome that resembles the C60 structure. Today,
C60 is simply called a fullerene, which refers to any closed hollow carbon molecules
that consist of 12 pentagonal and various numbers of hexagonal faces. In the case of
FIGURE 37.1
Fullerine
structure of the C60
molecule. (Reprinted by
permission from [17].)
Section 37.1/Nanotechnology Products
871

C60, the 60 atoms are arranged symmetrically into 12 pentagonal faces and 20
hexagonal faces to form a ball. These molecular balls can be bonded together by
van der Waals forces (Section 2.2) to form crystals whose lattice structure is face-
centered cubic (Figure 2.8(b), Section 2.3.1). The separation between any molecule
and its closest neighbor in the C60 lattice structure is 1 nm.
Fullerenes are of interest for a number of reasons. One is their electrical properties
and the capability to alter these properties. AC60 crystal has the properties of an insulator.
However, when doped with an alkaline metal such as potassium (forming K3C60), it is
transformed into an electrical conductor. Moreover, it exhibits properties of a super-
conductor at temperatures of around 18K. Another potential application area for the C60
fullerenes is in the medical field. The C60 molecule has many possible attachment points for
focused drug treatments. Other possible medical applications for buckyballs include
antioxidants, burn creams, and diagnostic imaging.
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are another molecular structure consisting of carbon
atoms bonded together in the shape of a long tube. The atoms can be arranged into a
number of alternative configurations, three of which are illustrated in Figure 37.2. The
nanotubes shown in the figure are all single-walled nanotubes (SWNT), but multi-walled
structures (MWNT) can also be fabricated, which are tubes within a tube. A SWNT has a
typical diameter of a few nanometers (down to 1 nm) and a length of around 100 nm, and it
is closed at both ends.
The electrical properties of nanotubes are unusual. Depending on the structure and
diameter, nanotubes can have metallic (conducting) or semiconducting properties.
Conductivity of metallic nanotubes can be superior to that of copper by six orders of
magnitude [7]. The explanation for this is that nanotubes contain few of the defects
existing in metals that tend to scatter electrons, thus increasing electrical resistance.
Because nanotubes have such low resistance, high currents do not increase their
FIGURE 37.2
Several
possible structures of
carbon nanotubes: (a) arm-
chair, (b) zigzag, and
(c) chiral. (Reprinted by
permission from [17].)
(a)
(b)
(c)
872
Chapter 37/Nanofabrication Technologies

temperature the way metals heat up under the same electrical loads. Thermal conduc-
tivity of metallic nanotubes is also very high. These electrical and thermal properties are
of significant interest to manufacturers of computers and integrated circuits because they
may allow higher clock speeds of processors without the heat buildup problems currently
encountered as the density of components on a silicon chip increases. Clock speeds 104
times faster than current-day processors may be possible [17], along with much higher
densities.
Another electrical property of carbon nanotubes is field emission, in which electrons
are emitted from the ends of the tubes at very high rates when an electrical field is applied
parallel to the axis of a nanotube. The possible commercial applications of field emission
properties of nanotubes include flat panel displays for televisions and computer monitors.
Mechanical properties areanother reason fortheinterest insingle-walled nanotubes.
Compared with steel, density is only 1/6, modulus of elasticity is five times higher, and
tensile strength is 100 times greater [7]. Yet, when SWNTs are bent, they exhibit great
resilience to return to their previous shape without damage. These mechanical properties
present opportunities for using them in applications ranging from reinforcing materials in
polymer matrix composites (Section 9.4) to fiber cloths in bulletproof vests. Ironically,
multi-walled nanotubes are not as strong.
37.1.2 THE NATIONAL NANOTECHNOLOGY INITIATIVE
In the year 2000, a national initiative on nanotechnology was enacted by the U.S. Congress
at a funding level of $400 million starting in 2001. Funding levels have increased in what is
now called the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI). A total of $3.7 billion was
allocated over the 4-year period starting in 2005, making it the largest federally funded
R&D program since the Apollo Space Program. The NNI Act mandated the coordination
of nanotechnology research and development activities in the various federal agencies that
are involved in this technology, including the Departments of Defense and Energy, the
NationalScienceFoundation,NationalInstitutesofHealth,NationalInstituteofStandards
and Technology, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. In addition, the
Act defined nine areas of nanotechnology development (referred to as the NNI Grand
Challenges) that will affect the lives of virtually all U.S. citizens. Table 37.2 briefly describes
the nine areas of nanotechnology development to provide an overview of the future
opportunities envisioned for this technology.
37.2
INTRODUCTION TO NANOSCIENCE
The fields of nanoscience and nanotechnology are interdisciplinary. They rely on the
synergistic contributions of chemistry, physics, various engineering disciplines, and com-
puter science. The fields of biology and medical science are also involved. Biology operates
in the nanoscale range. Proteins, basic substances in living organisms, are large molecules
ranging in size between about 4 nm and 50 nm. Proteins are made up of amino acids
(organic acids containing the amino group NH2), whose molecular size is about 0.5 nm.
Each protein molecule consists of combinations of various amino acid molecules2 con-
nected together to form a long chain (a nanowire). This long macromolecule twists and
turns to compact itself into a mass with a cross section in the 4- to 50-nm range. Other
2There are more than 100 different amino acids that occur naturally, but most of the proteins found in
living organisms consist of only 20 of these amino acid types.
Section 37.2/Introduction to Nanoscience
873

biological entities of nanoscale size include chlorophyll molecules in plants (about 1 nm),
hemoglobin in blood (7 nm), and flu viruses (60 nm). Biological cells are orders of
magnitude larger. For example, a red blood cell is disk-shaped with diameter of about
8000 nm (8 mm) and thickness of about 1500 nm (1.5 mm). The diameter of the human hair
shown in Figure 36.3 is approximately 100,000 nm (0.1 mm).
Our focus in this chapter is on nanoscale entities that are nonbiological. As in biology,
nanotechnology deals with objects that are not much bigger than the atoms and molecules
that comprise them. In Section 37.2.1, we discuss these ‘‘size effects’’ and how material
properties are affected when the dimensions of an entity are measured in nanometers. The
inability to ‘‘see’’ nanoscale objects has inhibited developments in nanotechnology until
TABLE 37.2
Nine areas of nanotechnology development identiﬁed in the National Nanotechnology
Initiative (NNI).
Nanostructured materials by design. The objective is to develop materials that are stronger, harder, lighter, safer,
and smarter; and to also devise materials that possess self-repairing characteristics. The research will focus on
(1) understanding the relationships between a material’s nanostructure and its macroscopic properties and
(2) development of new methods of fabrication and measurement.
Nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, and magnetics. The objectives include developing new devices and fabrication
technologies in these areas for integration into existing systems and new architectures (e.g., new circuit architectures
to address the limits of present trends in silicon-based integrated circuit fabrication technologies).
Advanced health care, therapeutics, and diagnosis. The objectives are to (1) improve health of humans by the
development of new biosensors and medical imaging technologies, (2) develop nano-based devices that can be used
to direct the delivery of medications to targeted sites in the human body, (3) improve biological implants by means of
nanoscale processing of the implant interface with the bone, (4) develop nanoscale-based devices to enable sight and
hearing, and (5) devise improved diagnostic techniques using gene sequencing methods.
Nanoscaled processes for environmental improvement. The objectives are to (1) find new methods to measure
pollutants based on nanotechnology, (2) develop new ways of removing submicroscopic pollutants from the air and
water, and (3) extend scientific knowledge about nanoscale phenomena that are important to maintaining
environmental quality and reducing undesirable emissions.
Efficient energy conversion and storage. The objectives include developing (1) more efficient energy sources using
nanocrystal catalysts, (2) more efficient solar cells, (3) efficient photoactive materials for solar conversion of
materials into fuels, and (4) high-efficiency light sources. Additional activities include exploring the use of carbon
nanotubes for high-density storage of hydrogen and improving the efficiency of heat exchangers using fluids with
suspended nanocrystalline particles.
Microcraft space exploration and industrialization. The objectives are to (1) reduce the size of spacecraft by an order
of magnitude, (2) use the light weight and high strength of nanostructured materials to reduce fuel consumption,
(3) enable autonomous decision making and increased data storage by means of nanoelectronics and nanomagnetics,
and (4) use self-repairing materials to extend the reach of space exploration.
Bionanosensor devices for communicable disease and biological threat detection. The objectives include
(1) improving detection of and response to threats from chemical and biological warfare and from human disease,
(2) increasing human capabilities and improving health by means of nanoscale devices, and (3) performing research
on the compatibility between nanoscale materials and living tissue.
Application to economical and safe transportation. The objectives include developing (1) more efficient
transportation modes using nanomaterials that are lighter and have lower failure rates, (2) more durable materials
for roads and bridges, (3) smart materials and devices capable of detecting imminent failure and performing self-
repair processes, (4) nanoscale coatings with low friction and low corrosion properties, and (5) nanoscale
performance sensors.
National security. The general objective is to achieve military dominance at lower cost and manpower, and to reduce
the risks of personnel engaged in combat. Proposed research and development activities include (1) improving
knowledge superiority by increasing processor speed, storage capacity, access speed, display technology, and
communications capability, (2) use of materials with better properties for military systems, and (3) sensor
technologies to protect combat personnel and enhance their fighting capabilities.
Compiled from [14].
874
Chapter 37/Nanofabrication Technologies

recently. The advent of scanning probe microscopes in the 1980s has allowed objects at the
molecular level to be visualized and measured. These types of microscopes are described in
Section 37.2.2.
37.2.1 SIZE MATTERS
One of the physical effects that occurs with very small objects is that their surface properties
become much more important relative to their bulk properties. Consider the surface-to-
volume ratio of a given amount of material as its dimensions are changed. Let us start with a
cubic block of material that is 1 m on each side. Its total surface area is 6 m2, and its volume is
1 m3, giving it a surface-to-volume ratio of 6-to-1. If that same volume of material were now
compressed into a flat square plate that is 1 mm thick (0.00004 in, or about 1/100 the diameter
of a human hair), its dimensions would be 1000 m on each side, and its total surface area (top,
bottom, and edges) would be 2,000,000.004 m2 (1000  1000 m2 on each of two sides, plus
0.001 m2 on each of the four edges). This would give it a surface-to-volume ratio of slightly
greater than 2,000,000-to-1.
Next, suppose the flat plate were sliced in two directions to create cubes that are
1 mm  1 mm  1 mm. The total number of cubes would be 1018, and the surface area of each
cube would be 6 mm2 or 6(1012) m2. Multiplying the surface area of each cube by the
number of cubes gives a total surface area of 6,000,000 m2, or a surface-to-volume ratio of
6,000,000-to-1 for the original amount of material.
Acubethatis1 mmoneachsideissurelysmall,butinnanometers,itis1000 nmoneach
edge.Supposethemoleculesofthismaterialarecube-shaped,andfromourearlierdiscussion,
eachmoleculemeasures1-nmonaside(admittedly,themolecularcubeshapeisastretch,but
the 1-nm size is plausible). This means that the 1-mm cube contains 109 molecules, of which
6(106) are on the surface of the cube. This leaves 109 – 6(106) ¼ 994(106) molecules that are
internal(beneaththesurface).Theratioofinternaltosurfacemoleculesis994-to-6or165.667-
to-1. Bycomparison,thesameratioforacubewith1monasideisabout1027-to-1.Asthesize
of the cube decreases, the ratio of internal-to-surface molecules continues to get smaller and
smaller, until finally, we have a cube that is1 nm on a side (the size of the molecule itself), and
there are no internal molecules. What this numerical exercise demonstrates is that as the size
of an object decreases, approaching nanometer dimensions, the surface molecules become
increasingly important relative to the internal molecules simply because of their increasing
numerical proportion. Thus, the surface properties of the materials out of which nanometer-
sized objects are made become more influential in determining the behavior of the objects,
and the relative influence of the bulk properties of the material is reduced.
Recall from Section 2.2 that there are two types of atomic bonding: (1) primary bonds
that are generally associated with combining atoms into molecules, and (2) secondary
bondsthatattractmoleculestogethertoformbulkmaterials.One of the implications of the
large surface-to-volume ratio of nanoscale objects is that the secondary bonds that exist
between molecules assume greater importance because the shape and properties of an
object not much bigger than the molecules comprising it tend to depend on these secondary
bonding forces. Accordingly, the material properties and behaviors of nanoscale structures
aredifferentfrom those ofstructureswith dimensionsinthemacroscaleorevenmicroscale.
These differences can sometimes be exploited to create materials and products with
improved electronic, magnetic, and/or optical properties. Two examples of recently
developed materials in this category are (1) carbon nanotubes (Section 37.1.1), and
(2)magnetoresistivematerialsforuseinhigh-densitymagneticmemories.Nanotechnology
will enable the development of entirely new classes of materials.
Another difference that arises between nanoscale objects and their macroscopic
counterparts is that material behavior tends to be influenced by quantum mechanics rather
than bulk properties. Quantum mechanics is a branch of physics that is concerned with the
Section 37.2/Introduction to Nanoscience
875

notion thatall formsof energy (e.g.,electricity, light) occurindiscrete unitsor packetswhen
observed on a small enough scale. The discrete units or packets are called quanta (plural of
quantum), which cannot be further subdivided. For example, electricity is conducted in
units of electrons. An electrical charge of less than one electron is not possible. In light
energy, the quanta are photons. In magnetic energy, they are called magnons. For every
type of energy there are comparable units. All physical phenomena exhibit quantum
behavior at the submicroscopic level. On a macroscopic level, the energy appears to be
continuous because it is being released in very large quantities of quanta.
The movement of electrons in microelectronics is of particular interest because of the
significant reductions in size that continue to be achieved in the fabrication of integrated
circuits. The feature sizes of the devices in integrated circuits produced in 2009 are on the
order of 50 nm. They are projected to decrease in size to about 20 nm by around 2015. At a
feature size of around 10 nm, the effects of quantum mechanics become significant, changing
the way a device operates. As feature size continues to be reduced toward just a few
nanometers, the proportion of surface atoms in the device increases relative to those beneath
the surface, which means that the electrical characteristics are no longer determined exclu-
sivelybythebulkpropertiesofthematerial.Asdevicesizecontinuestodecreaseanddensityof
components on a chip continues to increase, the electronics industry is approaching the limits
of technological feasibility of the current fabrication processes discussed in Chapter 34.
37.2.2 SCANNING PROBE MICROSCOPES
Conventional optical microscopes use visible light focused through optical lenses to provide
enlargedimagesofverysmallobjects.However,thewavelengthofvisiblelightis400to700nm,
which is greater than the dimensions of nanosized objects. Thus, these objects cannot be seen
with conventional optical microscopes. The most powerful optical microscopes provide
magnifications of about 1000 times, allowing resolutions of about 0.0002 mm (200 nm).
Electronmicroscopes,whichallowspecimenstobevisualizedusingabeamofelectronsinstead
of light, were developed in the 1930s. The electron beam can be considered as a form of wave
motion, but one that has a much shorter effective wavelength. (Today’s electron microscopes
permit magnifications of about 1,000,000 times and resolutions of about 1 nm). To obtain an
image of a surface, the electron beam is scanned across the surface of an object in a raster
pattern, similar to the way a cathode ray scans the surface of a television screen.
For making observations on the nanoscale level, an improvement over the electron
microscope is the family of scanning probe instruments that date from the 1980s. They
possess magnification capabilities approximately 10 times greater than an electron micro-
scope. In a scanning probe microscope (SPM), the probe consists of a needle with a very
sharp tip. The point size approaches the size of a single atom. In operation, the probe is
moved along the surface of the specimen at a distance of only one nanometer or so, and any
of several properties of the surface are measured, depending on the type of scanning probe
device. The two scanning probe microscopes of greatest interest in nanotechnology are the
scanning tunneling microscope and the atomic force microscope.
The scanning tunneling microscope (STM) was the first scanning probe instrument
to be developed. It is called a tunneling microscope because its operation is based on the
quantum mechanics phenomenon known as tunneling, in which individual electrons in a
solid material can jump beyond the surface of the solid into space. The probability of
electrons being in this space beyond the surface decreases exponentially in proportion to
the distance from the surface. This sensitivity to distance is exploited in the STM by
positioning the probe tip very close to the surface (i.e., 1 nm) and applying a small voltage
between the two. This causes electrons of surface atoms to be attracted to the small positive
charge of the tip, and they tunnel across the gap to the probe. As the probe is moved along
the surface, variations in the resulting current occur because of the positions of individual
876
Chapter 37/Nanofabrication Technologies

atoms on the surface. Alternatively, if the elevation of the tip abovethe surface isallowed to
float by maintaining a constant current, then the vertical deflection of the tip can be
measured as it traverses the surface. These variations in current or deflection can be used to
create images or topographical maps of the surface on an atomic or molecular scale.
Alimitationofthescanningtunnelingmicroscopeisthatitcanonlybeusedonsurfaces
of conducting materials. By comparison, the atomic force microscope (AFM) can be used on
anymaterial; itusesaprobeattachedtoadelicatecantileverthatdeflectsbecauseoftheforce
exertedbythesurfaceontheprobeasittraversesthespecimensurface.TheAFMrespondsto
various types of forces, depending on the application. The forces include mechanical owing
to physical contact of the probe with the specimen surface, and non-contact, such as van der
Waals forces (Section 2.2), capillary forces, magnetic forces,3 and others. The vertical
deflection of the probe is measured optically, based on the interference pattern of a light
beam or the reflection of a laser beam from the cantilever. Figure 37.3 shows an image
generated by an AFM.
Ourdiscussionherehasfocusedontheuseofscanningprobemicroscopesforobserving
surfaces. In Section 37.3.2, we describe applications of these instruments for manipulating
individual atoms, molecules, and other nanoscale clusters of atoms or molecules.
37.3
NANOFABRICATION PROCESSES
Creating products at least some of whose feature sizes are in the nanometer range requires
fabrication techniques that are often quite different from those used to process bulk
materials and macro-sized products. The fabrication processes for nanometer-scale mate-
rials and structures can be divided into two basic categories:
1. Top-down approaches, which adapt some of the lithography-based microfabrication
techniques discussed in Chapters 34 and 36 to nanoscale object sizes. They involve
mostly subtractive processes (material removal) to achieve the desired geometry.
3The term magnetic force microscope (MFM) is used when the forces are magnetic. The principle of
operation is similar to that of the reading head on a hard disk drive.
FIGURE 37.3
An atomic
force microscope image of
silicon dioxide letters on a
silicon substrate. The oxide
lines of the letters are about
20 nm wide. (Image courtesy
of IBM Corporation.)
Section 37.3/Nanofabrication Processes
877

2. Bottom-up approaches, in which atoms and molecules are manipulated and combined
into larger structures. These might be described as additive processes because they
construct the nanoscale entity from smaller components.
Our organization in this section is based on these two approaches. Because the processing
methods associated with the top-down approaches have been discussed in two previous
chapters, our coverage in Section 37.3.1 will emphasize how these processes must be
modified for the nanoscale. Section 37.3.2 discusses the bottom-up approaches, which are
perhaps of greater interest here because of their uniqueness and special relevance to
nanotechnology.
37.3.1 TOP-DOWN PROCESSING APPROACHES
The top-down approaches for fabricating nanoscale objects involve the processing of bulk
materials (e.g., silicon wafers) and thin films using lithographic techniques like those used in
the fabrication of integrated circuits and microsystems. The top-down approaches also
include other precision machining techniques (Section 36.2.3) that have been adapted for
making nanostructures. The term nanomachining is used for these processes that involve
material removal when applied in the sub-micron scale. Nanostructures have been machined
out of materials such as silicon, silicon carbide, diamond, and silicon nitride [23]. Nano-
machining must often be coupled with thin-film deposition processes such as physical vapor
deposition and chemical vapor deposition (Section 28.5) to achieve the desired structure and
combination of materials.
As the feature sizes of the components in an integrated circuit (IC) become smaller
and smaller, fabrication techniques based on optical lithography become limited because
of the wavelengths of visible light. Ultraviolet light is currently used to fabricate ICs
because its shorter wavelengths permit smaller features to be fabricated, thus allowing
higher densities of components in the IC. The current technology being refined for IC
fabrication is called extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography (Section 34.3.2). It uses UV
light with a wavelength as short as 13 nm, which is certainly within the nanotechnology
range. However, certain technical problems must be addressed when EUV lithography is
used at these very short UV wavelengths. The problems include (1) new photoresists that
are sensitive to this wavelength must be used, (2) focusing systems must be based on all
reflective optics, and (3) plasma sources based on laser irradiation of the element xenon
[14] must be used.
Other lithography techniques are available for use in fabricating nanoscale struc-
tures. These include electron-beam lithography, x-ray lithography, and micro- or nano-
imprint lithography. Electron-beam and x-ray lithography are discussed in the context of
integrated circuit processing in Section 34.3.2. Electron-beam lithography (EBL) operates
by directing a highly focused beam of electrons along the desired pattern across the surface
of a material, thus exposing the surface areas using a sequential process without the need
for a mask. Although EBL is capable of resolutions on the order of 10 nm, its sequential
operation makes it relatively slow compared with masking techniques and thus it is
unsuited to mass production. X-ray lithography can produce patterns with resolutions
around 20 nm, and it uses masking techniques, which makes high production possible.
However, x-rays are difficult to focus and require contact or proximity printing (Section
34.3.1). In addition, the equipment is expensive for production applications, and x-rays are
hazardous to humans.
Two of the processes known as soft lithography are described in our previous chapter
on microfabrication (Section 36.2.3). The processes are micro-imprint lithography, in
which a patterned flat mold (similar to a rubber stamp) is used to mechanically deform a
878
Chapter 37/Nanofabrication Technologies

thermoplastic resist on the surface of a substrate in preparation for etching, and micro-
contact printing, in which the stamp is dipped into a substance and then pressed against a
substrate. This transfers a very thin layer of the substance onto the substrate surface in the
pattern defined by the stamp. These same processes can be applied to nanofabrication, in
which case they are called nano-imprint lithography and nano-contact printing. Nano-
imprint lithography can producepatternresolutionsof approximately5 nm[23]. One of the
originalapplicationsofnano-contactprintingwastotransferathinfilmofthiols(afamilyof
organic compounds derived from hydrogen sulfide) onto a gold surface. The uniqueness of
the application was that the film was only one molecule thick (called a monolayer, Section
37.3.2), which certainly qualifies as nanoscale.
37.3.2 BOTTOM-UP PROCESSING APPROACHES
In the bottom-up approaches, the starting materials are atoms, molecules, and ions. The
processesbringthesebasicbuildingblockstogether,insomecasesoneatatime,tofabricate
the desired nanoscale entity. Our coverage consists of three approaches that are of
considerable interest in nanotechnology: (1) production of carbon nanotubes, (2) nano-
fabrication by scanning probe techniques, and (3) self-assembly.
Production of Carbon Nanotubes
The remarkable properties and potential applica-
tions of carbon nanotubes are discussed in Section 37.1.1. Carbon nanotubes can be
produced by several techniques. In the following paragraphs we discuss three: (1) laser
evaporation, (2) carbon arc techniques, and (3) chemical vapor deposition.
In the laser evaporation method, the starting raw material is a graphite workpiece
containing small amounts of cobalt and nickel. These metal traces perform the role of
catalyst, acting as nucleation sites for the subsequent formation of the nanotubes. The
graphite is placed in a quartz tube filled with argon gas and heated to 1200C (2200F). A
pulsed laser beam is focused on the workpiece, causing the carbon atoms to evaporate from
thebulk graphite. The argon movesthecarbon atoms out of the high-temperatureregion of
the tube and into an area in which a water-cooled copper apparatus is located. The carbon
atoms condense on the cold copper, and as they do, they form nanotubes with diameters of
10 to 20 nm and lengths of about 100 mm.
The carbon arc technique uses two carbon electrodes that are 5 to 20 mm in diameter
andseparatedby1mm.Theelectrodesarelocatedinapartiallyevacuatedcontainer(about
2/3 of 1 atmospheric pressure) with helium flowing in it. To start the process, a voltage of
about 25 Visapplied across thetwoelectrodes, causing carbon atoms to be ejected from the
positive electrode and carried to the negative electrode where they form nanotubes. The
structure of the nanotubes depends on whether a catalyst is used. If no catalyst is used, then
multi-walled nanotubes are produced. If trace amounts of cobalt, iron, or nickel are placed
in the interior of the positive electrode, then the process creates single-walled nanotubes
that are 1 to 5 nm in diameter and about 1 mm long.
Chemical vapor deposition (Section 28.5.2) can be used to produce carbon nano-
tubes. In one variation of CVD, the starting work material is a hydrocarbon gas such as
methane (CH4). The gas is heated to 1100C (2000F), causing it to decompose and release
carbon atoms. The atoms then condense on a cool substrate to form nanotubes with open
ends rather than the closed ends characteristic of the other fabrication techniques. The
substrate may contain iron or other metals that act as catalysts for the process. The metal
catalyst acts as a nucleation site for creation of the nanotube, and it also controls the
orientation of the structure. An alternative CVD process called HiPCO (high-pressure
carbon monoxide decomposition process) starts with carbon monoxide (CO) and uses
carbon pentacarbonyl (Fe(CO)5) as the catalyst to produce high-purity single-walled
nanotubes at 900C to 1100C (1700 to 2000F) and 30 to 50 atm [7].
Section 37.3/Nanofabrication Processes
879

Production of nanotubes by CVD has the advantage that it can be operated
continuously, which makes it economically attractive for mass production.
Nanofabrication by Scanning Probe Techniques
Scanning probe microscopy (SPM)
techniques are described in Section 37.2.2 in the context of measuring and observing
nanometer-scale features and objects. In addition to viewing a surface, the scanning
tunneling microscope (STM) and atomic force microscope (AFM) can also be used to
manipulate individual atoms, molecules, or clusters of atoms or molecules that adhere to
a substrate surface by the forces of adsorption (weak chemical bonds). Clusters of atoms
or molecules are called nanoclusters, and their size is just a few nanometers [23]. Figure
37.4(a) illustrates the variation in either current or deflection of the STM probe tip as it is
moved across a surface upon which is located an adsorbed atom. As the tip moves over
the surface immediately above the adsorbed atom, there is an increase in the signal.
Although the bonding force that attracts the atom to the surface is weak, it is significantly
greater than the force of attraction created by the tip, simply because the distance is
greater. However, if the probe tip is moved close enough to the adsorbed atom so that its
force of attraction is greater than the adsorption force, the atom will be dragged along the
surface, as suggested in Figure 37.4(b). In this way, individual atoms or molecules can be
manipulated to create various nanoscale structures. A notable STM example accom-
plished at the IBM Research Labs was the fabrication of the company logo out of xenon
atoms adsorbed onto a nickel surface in an area 5  16 nm. This scale is considerably
smaller than the lettering in Figure 37.3 (which is also nanoscale, as noted in the caption).
The manipulation of individual atoms or molecules by scanning tunneling microscopy
techniques can be classified as lateral manipulation and vertical manipulation. In lateral
manipulation, atoms or molecules are transferred horizontally along the surface by the
attractive or repulsive forces exerted by the STM tip, as in Figure 37.5(b). In vertical
manipulation, the atoms or molecules are lifted from the surface and deposited at a different
locationtoformastructure.AlthoughthiskindofSTMmanipulationofatomsandmolecules
is of scientific interest, there are technological limitations that inhibit its commercial
FIGURE 37.4
Manipulation of
individual atoms by means of
scanning tunneling microscopy
techniques: (a) probe tip is main-
tained a distance from the surface
that is sufﬁcient to avoid distur-
bance of adsorbed atom and
(b) probe tip is moved closer to the
surfacesothattheadsorbedatomis
attracted to the tip.
Probe
tip
Bonds
Current or
deflection
Adsorbed atom
Surface atoms
Substrate
(a)
(b)
Bond
880
Chapter 37/Nanofabrication Technologies

application, at least in high production of nanotech products. One of the limitations is that it
must be carried out in a very high vacuum environment to prevent stray atoms or molecules
from interfering with the process. Another limitation is that the surface of the substrate must
be cooledto temperatures approaching absolutezero(273C or 460F) toreducethermal
diffusion that would gradually distort the atomic structure being formed. These limitations
make it a very slow and expensive process.
The atomic force microscope is also used for similar nanoscale manipulations. In
comparing the AFM and STM applications, the AFM is more versatile because it is not
restricted to conductive surfaces as is the STM and it can be used under normal room
conditions. On the other hand, the AFM has a lower resolution than the STM. Conse-
quently, the STM can be used to manipulate single atoms, whereas the AFM is better suited
to the manipulation of larger molecules and nanoclusters [23].
Anotherscanningprobetechnique,onethatshowspromiseforpracticalapplications,is
calleddip-pennanolithography.Indip-pennanolithography(DPN),thetipofanatomicforce
microscopeisusedtotransfermoleculestoasubstratesurfacebymeansofasolventmeniscus,
asshowninFigure37.5.Theprocessissomewhatanalogoustousinganold-fashionedquillpen
to transfer ink to a paper surface via capillary forces. In DPN, the AFM tip serves as the nib of
the pen, and the substrate becomes the surface onto which the dissolved molecules (i.e., the
ink) are deposited. The deposited molecules must have a chemical affinity for the substrate
material, just as wet ink adheres to paper. DPN can be used to ‘‘write’’ patterns of molecules
ontoasurface,wherethepatternsareofsubmicrondimension.Inaddition,DPNcanbeusedto
deposit different types of molecules at different locations on the substrate surface.
Self-Assembly
Self-assembly is a fundamental process in nature. The natural formation of
a crystalline structure during the slow cooling of molten minerals is an example of nonliving
self-assembly.Thegrowthoflivingorganismsisanexampleofbiologicalself-assembly.Inboth
instances, entities at the atomic and molecular level combine on their own into larger entities,
proceedingina constructive mannertowardthe creation ofsome deliberatething. If the thing
is a living organism, the intermediate entities are biological cells, and the organism is grown
through an additive process that exhibits massive replication of individual cell formations, yet
the final result is often remarkably intricate and complex (e.g., a human being).
Oneofthepromisingbottom-upapproachesinnanotechnologyinvolvestheemulation
of nature’sself-assembly processtoproduce materialsandsystems that have nanometer-scale
features or building blocks, but the final product may be larger than nanoscale. It may be of
micro- or macro-scale size, at least in some of its dimensions. The term biomimetics describes
this process of building artificial, non-biological entities by imitating nature’s methods.
Desirableattributesofatomicormolecularself-assemblyprocessesinnanotechnologyinclude
the following: (1) they can be carried out rapidly; (2) they occur automatically and do not
require any central control; (3) they exhibit massive replication; and (4) they can be
performed under mild environmental conditions (at or near atmospheric pressure and
FIGURE 37.5
Dip-pen
nanolithography, in
which the tip of an atomic
force microscope is used
to deposit molecules
through the water
meniscus that forms
naturally between the tip
and the substrate.
Molecular
transport
Writing direction
AFM tip
Liquid (solvent) meniscus
Substrate
Section 37.3/Nanofabrication Processes
881

roomtemperature). Self-assemblyislikelytobethemostimportantofthenanofabrication
processes because of its low cost, capacity for producing structures over a range of sizes
(fromnanoscaletomacroscale),andgeneralapplicabilitytoawidevarietyofproducts[18].
An underlying principle behind self-assembly is that of minimum energy. Physical
entities such as atoms and molecules seek out a state that minimizes the total energy of the
system of which they are components. This principle has the following implications for self-
assembly:
1. There must be some mechanism for the movement of the entities (e.g., atoms, molecules,
ions) in the system, thus causing the entities to come into close proximity with one another.
Possiblemechanismsforthismovementincludediffusion,convectioninafluid,andelectric
fields.
2. There must be some form of molecular recognition among the entities. Molecular
recognitionrefers tothetendency ofone molecule(oratomorion)tobeattractedtoand
bind with another molecule (or atom or ion), for example, the way sodium and chlorine
are attracted to each other to form table salt.
3. The molecular recognition among the entities causes them to join in such a way that the
resulting physical arrangement of the entities achieves a state of minimum energy. The
joining process involves chemical bonding, usually the weaker secondary types (e.g., van
der Waals bonds).
We have previously encountered several instances of molecular-level self-assembly
in this book. Let us cite two examples here: (1) crystal formation and (2) polymerization.
Crystal formation in metals, ceramics, and certain polymers is a form of self-assembly.
Growing silicon boules in the Czochralski process (Section 34.2.2) for fabrication of
integrated circuits is a good illustration. Using a starting seed crystal, very pure molten
silicon is formed into a large cylindrical solid whose repeating lattice structure matches
that of the seed throughout its volume. The lattice spacing in the crystal structure is of
nanometer proportions, but the replication exhibits long-range order.
It can be argued that polymers are products of nanometer-scale self-assembly. The
process of polymerization (Section 8.1.1) involves the joining of individual monomers
(individual molecules such as ethylene C2H4) to form very large molecules (macromolecules
such as polyethylene), often in the form of a long chain with thousands of repeating units.
Copolymers (Section 8.1.2) represent a more complex self-assembly process, in which two
differenttypesofstartingmonomersarejoinedinaregularrepeatingstructure.Anexampleis
the copolymer synthesized from ethylene and propylene (C3H6). In these polymer examples,
the repeating units are of nanometer size, and they form by a massive self-assembly process
into bulk materials that have significant commercial value.
The technologies for producing silicon boules and polymers precede the current
scientific interest in nanotechnology. Of greater relevance in this chapter are self-assembly
fabrication techniques that have been developed under the nanotechnology banner. These
self-assembly processes, most of which are still in the research stage, include the following
categories: (1) fabrication of nanoscale objects, including molecules, macromolecules,
clusters of molecules, nanotubes, and crystals; and (2) formation of two-dimensional
arrays such as self-assembled monolayers (surface films that are one molecule thick) and
three-dimensional networks of molecules.
We have already discussed some of the processes in category 1. Let us consider the
self-assembly of surface films as an important example of category 2. Surface films are
two-dimensional coatings formed on a solid (three-dimensional) substrate. Most surface
films are inherently thin, yet the thickness is typically measured in micrometers or even
millimeters (or fractions thereof), well above the nanometer scale. Of interest here are
surface films whose thicknesses are measured in nanometers. Of particular interest in
nanotechnology are surface films that self-assemble, are only one molecule thick, and in
which the molecules are organized in some orderly fashion. These types of films are
882
Chapter 37/Nanofabrication Technologies

called self-assembled monolayers (SAMs). Multilayered structures are also possible that
possess order and are two or more molecules thick.
The substrate materials for self-assembled monolayers and multilayers include a
variety of metallic and other inorganic materials. The list includes gold, silver, copper,
silicon, and silicon dioxide. Noble metals have the advantage of not forming an oxide
surface film that would interfere with the reactions that generate the desired layer of
interest. Layering materials include thiols, sulfides, and disulfides. The layering material
must be capable of being adsorbed onto the surface material. The typical process
sequence in the formation of the monolayer of a thiol on gold is illustrated in Figure
37.6. (We mentioned this combination of thiol on a gold surface in Section 37.3.1 in the
context of nano-contact printing.) Layering molecules move freely above the substrate
surface and are adsorbed onto the surface. Contact occurs between adsorbed molecules
on the surface, and they form stable islands. The islands become larger and gradually join
together through the addition of more molecules laterally on the surface, until the
substrate is completely covered. Bonding to the gold surface is provided by the sulfur
atom in the thiol, sulfide, or disulfide layer. In some applications, self-assembled
monolayers can be formed into desired patterns or regions on the substrate surface
using techniques such as nano-contact printing and dip-pen nanolithography.
REFERENCES
[1] Baker, S., and Aston, A. ‘‘The Business of Nano-
tech,’’ Business Week, February 14, 2005, pp. 64–71.
[2] Balzani, V., Credi, A., and Venturi, M. Molecular
Devices and Machines—A Journey into the Nano
World. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,
Weinheim, Germany, 2003.
[3] Bashir,
R.‘‘Biologically
Mediated
Assembly
of
Artificial
Nanostructures
and
Microstructures,’’
Chapter 5 in Handbook of Nanoscience, Engineer-
ing, and Technology, W. A. Goddard, III, D. W.
Brenner, S. E. Lyshevski and G. J. Iafrate (eds.).
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, 2003.
[4] Chaiko,
D.
J.
‘‘Nanocomposite
Manufacturing,’’
AdvancedMaterials&Processes,June2003,pp.44–46.
[5] Drexler, K. E. Nanosystems: Molecular Machinery,
Manufacturing,andComputation.Wiley-Interscience,
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1992.
[6] Fujita, H. (ed.). Micromachines as Tools for Nano-
technology. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003.
FIGURE 37.6
Typical sequence in the
formation of a monolayer
of a thiol onto a gold
substrate: (1) some of the
layering molecules in
motion above the sub-
strate become attracted
to the surface, (2) they are
adsorbed on the surface,
(3) they form islands,
(4) the islands grow until
the surface is covered.
(Based on a ﬁgure in [9].)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
References
883

[7] Hornyak, G. L., Moore, J. J., Tibbals, H. F., and
Dutta, J. Fundamentals of Nanotechnology, CRC
Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2009.
[8] Jackson, M. L., Micro and Nanomanufacturing,
Springer, New York, 2007.
[9] Kohler, M., and Fritsche, W. Nanotechnology: An
Introduction to Nanostructuring Techniques. Wiley-
VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,
Germany, 2004.
[10] Lyshevski, S. E.‘‘Nano- and Micromachines in
NEMS and MEMS,’’ Chapter 23 in Handbook of
Nanoscience, Engineering, and Technology, W. A.
Goddard, III, D. W. Brenner, S. E. Lyshevski, and
G. J. Iafrate (eds.). CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida,
2003, pp. 23–27.
[11] Maynor, B. W., and Liu, J. ‘‘Dip-Pen Lithogra-
phy,’’Encyclopedia
of
Nanoscience
and
Nano-
technology, American Scientific Publishers, 2004,
pp. 429–441.
[12] Meyyappan, M., and Srivastava, D.‘‘Carbon Nano-
tubes,’’ Chapter 18 in Handbook of Nanoscience,
Engineering, and Technology, W. A. Goddard, III,
D. W. Brenner, S. E. Lyshevski, and G. J. Iafrate
(eds.). CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, 2003. pp. 18–
1 to 18–26.
[13] Morita, S., Wiesendanger, R., and Meyer, E. (eds.).
Noncontact Atomic Force Microscopy. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 2002.
[14] National Research Council (NRC). Implications of
Emerging Micro- and Nanotechnologies. Commit-
tee on Implications of Emerging Micro- and Nano-
technologies,
The
National
Academies
Press,
Washington, D.C., 2002.
[15] Nazarov, A. A., and Mulyukov, R. R.‘‘Nanostructured
Materials,’’ Chapter 22 in Handbook of Nanoscience,
Engineering, and Technology, W. A. Goddard, III,
D. W. Brenner, S. E. Lyshevski, and G. J. Iafrate
(eds.). CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, 2003. 22–1
to 22–41.
[16] Piner,R.D.,Zhu,J.,Xu,F.,Hong,S.,andMirkin, C.A.
‘‘Dip-Pen
Nanolithography,’’
Science,
Vol.
283,
January 29, 1999, pp. 661–663.
[17] Poole, Jr., C. P., and Owens, F. J. Introduction to
Nanotechnology. Wiley-Interscience, John Wiley &
Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2003.
[18] Ratner, M., and Ratner, D. Nanotechnology: A
Gentle Introduction to the Next Big Idea. Prentice
Hall PTR, Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle
River, New Jersey, 2003.
[19] Rietman, E. A. Molecular Engineering of Nano-
systems. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2000.
[20] Rubahn, H.-G. Basics of Nanotechnology, 3rd ed.,
Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 2008.
[21] Schmid, G. (ed.). Nanoparticles: From Theory to
Application. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
KGaA, Weinheim, Germany, 2004.
[22] Torres, C. M. S. (ed.). Alternative Lithography:
Unleashing
the
Potentials
of
Nanotechnology.
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York,
2003.
[23] Tseng, A. A. (ed.), Nanofabrication Fundamentals
and Applications, World Scientific, Singapore, 2008.
[24] Weber, A. ‘‘Nanotech: Small Products, Big Potential,’’
Assembly, February 2004, pp. 54–59.
[25]
Website: en.wikipedia.org/wiki/nanotechnology
[26]
Website: www.nanotechproject.org/inventories/
consumer
[27]
Website: www.research.ibm.com/nanoscience
[28]
Website:www.zurich.ibm.com/st/atomic_manipulation
REVIEW QUESTIONS
37.1.
What is the range of feature sizes of entities asso-
ciated with nanotechnology?
37.2.
Identify some of the present and future products
associated with nanotechnology.
37.3.
What is a buckyball?
37.4.
What is a carbon nanotube?
37.5.
What are the scientific and technical disciplines
associated with nanoscience and nanotechnology?
37.6.
Why is biology so closely associated with nano-
science and nanotechnology?
37.7.
The behavior of nanoscale structures is different
from macroscale and even microscale structures
because of two factors mentioned in the text. What
are those two factors?
37.8.
What is a scanning probe instrument, and why is it
so important in nanoscience and nanotechnology?
37.9.
What is tunneling, as referred to in the scanning
tunneling microscope?
37.10.
What are the two basic categories of approaches
used in nanofabrication?
37.11.
Why is photolithography based on visible light not
used in nanotechnology?
37.12.
What are the lithography techniques used in
nanofabrication?
884
Chapter 37/Nanofabrication Technologies

37.13.
How is nano-imprint lithography different from
micro-imprint lithography?
37.14.
What are the limitations of scanning tunneling
microscope in nanofabrication that inhibit its com-
mercial application?
37.15.
What is self-assembly in nanofabrication?
37.16.
What are the desirable features of atomic or mo-
lecular self-assembly processes in nanotechnology?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 18 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have more than one correct
answer). To achieve a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the total score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number
of answers reduces the score by 1 point. The percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
37.1.
Nanotechnology refers to the fabrication and appli-
cation of entities whose feature sizes are in which of
the following ranges (one best answer): (a) 0.1 nm to
10nm,(b)1nmto100nm,or(c)100nmto1000nm?
37.2.
One nanometer is equivalent to which of the fol-
lowing (two correct answers): (a) 1  103 mm,
(b) 1  106 m, (c) 1  109 m, and (d) 1  106 mm.
37.3.
NNI stands for which one of the following: (a) Nano-
science Naval Institute, (b) Nanoscience Nonsense
and Ignorance, (c) National Nanotechnology Initia-
tive, or (d) Nanotechnology News Identification?
37.4.
The surface-to-volume ratio of a cube that is 1 
106 m on each edge is significantly greater than
the surface-to-volume ratio of a cube that is 1 m on
each edge: (a) true or (b) false?
37.5.
The proportion of surface molecules relative to inter-
nal molecules is significantly greater for a cube that is
1  106 m on each edge than for a cube that is 1 m on
each edge: (a) true or (b) false?
37.6.
Which one of the following microscopes can
achieve the greatest magnification: (a) electron
microscope, (b) optical microscope, or (c) scanning
tunneling microscope?
37.7.
Which of the following are correct statements about a
buckyball (three best answers): (a) it contains
60 atoms, (b) it contains 100 atoms, (c) it contains
600 atoms, (d) it is a carbon atom, (e) it is a carbon
molecule, (f) it is shaped like a basketball, (g) it is
shaped like a tube, and (h) it is shaped like a
volleyball?
37.8.
Whichof the following are considered techniques that
fallwithinthecategorycalledtop-downapproachesto
nanofabrication (three best answers): (a) biological
evolution,(b)electron-beamlithography,(c)micro-
imprint lithography, (d) scanning probe techniques,
(e) self-assembly, and (f) x-ray lithography?
37.9.
Which of the following are considered techniques
that fall within the category called bottom-up
approaches to nanofabrication (three best answers):
(a) electron beam lithography, (b) extreme ultra-
violet lithography, (c) chemical vapor deposition to
produce carbon nanotubes, (d) nano-imprint li-
thography, (e) scanning probe techniques, (f) self-
assembly, and (g) x-ray lithography?
37.10.
Dip-pen nanolithography uses which one of the
following techniques and/or devices: (a) atomic
force microscope, (b) chemical vapor deposition,
(c) electron beam lithography, (d) nano-imprint
lithography, or (e) self-assembly?
37.11.
A self-assembled monolayer has a thickness that is
which one of the following: (a) one micrometer,
(b) one millimeter, (c) one molecule, or (d) one
nanometer?
Multiple Choice Quiz
885

Part X
Manufacturing
Systems
38
AUTOMATION
TECHNOLOGIES FOR
MANUFACTURING
SYSTEMS
Chapter Contents
38.1
Automation Fundamentals
38.1.1
Three Components of an Automated
System
38.1.2
Types of Automation
38.2
Hardware Components for Automation
38.2.1
Sensors
38.2.2
Actuators
38.2.3
Interface Devices
38.2.4
Process Controllers
38.3
Numerical Control
38.3.1
The Technology of Numerical Control
38.3.2
Analysis of NC Positioning Systems
38.3.3
NC Part Programming
38.3.4
Applications of Numerical Control
38.4
Industrial Robotics
38.4.1
Robot Anatomy
38.4.2
Control Systems and Robot
Programming
38.4.3
Applications of Industrial Robots
In this part of the book, we consider the manufacturing
systems that are commonly associated with the production
and assembly processes discussed in preceding chapters. A
manufacturing system can be defined as a collection of inte-
grated equipment and human resources that performs one or
more processing and/or assembly operations on a starting
work material, part, or set of parts. The integrated equipment
consists of production machines, material handling and posi-
tioning devices, and computer systems. Human resources are
required either full-time or part-time to keep the equipment
operating. The position of the manufacturing systems in the
larger production system is shown in Figure 38.1. As the
diagram indicates, the manufacturing systems are located in
the factory. They accomplish the value-added work on the part
or product.
Manufacturing systems include both automated and
manually operated systems. The distinction between the two
categories is not always clear, because many manufacturing
systems consist of both automated and manual work ele-
ments (e.g., a machine tool that operates on a semiautomatic
processing cycle but which must be loaded and unloaded
each cycle by a human worker). Our coverage includes both
categories and is organized into two chapters: Chapter 38 on
automation technologies and Chapter 39 on integrated
manufacturing systems. Chapter 38 provides an introductory
886

treatment of automation technology and the components that make up an automated
system. We also discuss two important automation technologies used in manufacturing:
numericalcontrolandindustrialrobotics.InChapter39,weexaminehow theseautomation
technologies are integrated into more sophisticated manufacturing systems. Topics include
production lines, cellular manufacturing, flexible manufacturing systems, and computer
integrated manufacturing. A more detailed discussion of the topics in these two chapters
can be found in [5].
38.1
AUTOMATION FUNDAMENTALS
Automation can be defined as the technology by which a process or procedure is
performed without human assistance. Humans may be present as observers or even
participants, but the process itself operates under its own self-direction. Automation
is implemented by means of a control system that executes a program of instructions.
To automate a process, power is required to operate the control system and to drive
the process itself.
38.1.1 THREE COMPONENTS OF AN AUTOMATED SYSTEM
As indicated above, an automated system consists of three basic components: (1) power,
(2) a program of instructions, and (3) a control system to carry out the instructions. The
relationship among these components is shown in Figure 38.2.
The form of power used in most automated systems is electrical. The advantages of
electrical power include (1) it is widely available, (2) it can be readily converted to other
forms of power such as mechanical, thermal, or hydraulic, (3) it can be used at very low
power levels for functions such as signal processing, communication, data storage, and
data processing, and (4) it can be stored in long-life batteries [5].
FIGURE 38.1
The
position of the manufac-
turing systems in the
larger production system.
Manufacturing processes and assembly operations
Facilities
Manufacturing
support
Quality control
system
Manufacturing
systems
Manufacturing
support systems
Production system
Finished
products
Engineering
materials
FIGURE 38.2
Elements
of an automated system:
(1) power, (2) program
of instructions, and (3)
control system.
(1) Power
(2) Program of
instructions
(3) Control
system
Process
Process output
Section 38.1/Automation Fundamentals
887

In a manufacturing process, power is required to accomplish the activities associated
with the particular process. Examples of these activities include (1) melting a metal in a
casting operation, (2) driving the motions of a cutting tool relative to a workpiece in a
machining operation, and (3) pressing and sintering parts in a powder metallurgy process.
Power is also used to accomplish any material handling activities needed in the process,
such as loading and unloading parts, if these activities are not performed manually. Finally,
power is used to operate the control system.
The activities in an automated process are determined by a program of instructions. In
the simplest automated processes, the only instruction may be to maintain a certain
controlled variable at a specified level, such as regulating the temperature in a heat treatment
furnace. In more complex processes, a sequence of activities is required during the work
cycle, and the order and details of each activity are defined by the program of instructions.
Each activity involves changes in one or more process parameters, such as changing the x-
coordinate position of a machine tool worktable, opening or closing a valve in a fluid flow
system, or turning a motor on or off. Process parameters are inputs to the process. They may
be continuous (continuously variable over a given range, such as the x-position of a
worktable) or discrete (On or Off). Their values affect the outputs of the process, which
are called process variables. Like process parameters, process variables can be continuous
or discrete. Examples include the actual position of the machine worktable, the rotational
speed of a motor shaft, or whether a warning light is on or off. The program of instructions
specifies the changes in process parameters and when they should occur during the work
cycle, and these changes determine the resulting values of the process variables. For example,
in computer numerical control, the program of instructions is called a part program. The
numerical control (NC) part program specifies the individual sequence of steps required to
machine a given part, including worktable and cutter positions, cutting speeds, feeds, and
other details of the operation.
In some automated processes, the work cycle program must contain instructions for
making decisions or reacting to unexpected events during the work cycle. Examples of
situations requiring this kind of capability include (1) variations in raw materials that
require adjusting certain process parameters to compensate, (2) interactions and com-
munications with human such as responding to requests for system status information,
(3) safety monitoring requirements, and (4) equipment malfunctions.
The program of instructions is executed by a control system, the third basic
component of an automated system. Two types of control system can be distinguished:
closed loop and open loop. A closed loop system, also known as a feedback control system,
is one in which the process variable of interest (output of the process) is compared with the
corresponding process parameter (input to the process), and any difference between them
is used to drive the output value into agreement with the input. Figure 38.3(a) shows the six
elements of a closed loop system: (1) input parameter, (2) process, (3) output variable, (4)
feedback sensor, (5) controller, and (6) actuator. The input parameter represents the
desired value of the output variable. The process is the operation or activity being
controlled; more specifically, the output variable is being controlled by the system. A
sensor is used to measure the output variable and feed back its value to the controller,
which compares output with input and makes the required adjustment to reduce any
difference. The adjustment is made by means of one or more actuators, which are
hardware devices that physically accomplish the control actions.
The other type of control system is an open loop system, presented in Figure 38.3(b).
As shown in the diagram, an open loop system executes the program of instructions
without a feedback loop. No measurement of the output variable is made, so there is no
comparison between output and input in an open loop system. In effect, the controller
relies on the expectation that the actuator will have the intended effect on the output
variable. Thus, there is always a risk in an open loop system that the actuator will not
function properly or that its actuation will not have the expected effect on the output. On
888
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

the other hand, the advantage of an open loop system is that its cost is less than a
comparable closed loop system.
38.1.2 TYPES OF AUTOMATION
Automated systems used in manufacturing can be classified into three basic types:
(1) fixed automation, (2) programmable automation, and (3) flexible automation.
Fixed Automation
In fixed automation, the processing or assembly steps and their
sequence are fixed by the equipment configuration. The program of instructions is deter-
mined by the equipment design and cannot be easily changed. Each step in the sequence
usually involves a simple action, such as feeding a rotating spindle along a linear trajectory.
Although the work cycle consists of simple operations, integrating and coordinating the
actions can result in the need for a rather sophisticated control system, and computer control
is often required.
Typical features of fixed automation include (1) high initial investment for specialized
equipment, (2) high production rates, and (3) little or no flexibility to accommodate product
variety. Automated systems with these features can be justified for parts and products that
are produced in very large quantities. The high investment cost can be spread over many
units, thus making the cost per unit relatively low compared to alternative production
methods. The automated production lines discussed in the following chapter are examples
of fixed automation.
Programmable Automation
As its name suggests, the equipment in programmable
automation is designed with the capability to change the program of instructions to allow
production of different parts or products. New programs can be prepared for new parts, and
the equipment can read each program and execute the encoded instructions. Thus the
features that characterize programmable automation are (1) high investment in general
purpose equipment that can be reprogrammed, (2) lower production rates than fixed
automation, (3) ability to cope with product variety by reprogramming the equipment, and
(4) suitability for batch production of various part or product styles. Examples of program-
mable automation include computer numerical control and industrial robotics, discussed in
Sections 38.3 and 38.4, respectively.
Flexible Automation
Suitability for batch production is mentioned as one of the
features of programmable automation. As discussed in Chapter 1, the disadvantage
FIGURE 38.3
Two basic
types of control systems:
(a) closed loop and
(b) open loop.
Controller
(1)
Input
parameter
(3)
Output
variable
Input
parameter
(5)
(6)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(2)
Actuator
Feedback
sensor
Process
Controller
Actuator
Process
Output
variable
Section 38.1/Automation Fundamentals
889

of batch production is that lost production time occurs between batches due to
equipment and/or tooling changeovers that are required to accommodate the next
batch. Thus, programmable automation usually suffers from this disadvantage.
Flexible automation is an extension of programmable automation in which there
is virtually no lost production time for setup changes and/or reprogramming. Any
required changes in the program of instructions and/or setup can be accomplished
quickly; that is, within the time needed to move the next work unit into position at the
machine. A flexible system is therefore capable of producing a mixture of different
parts or products one right after the other instead of in batches. Features usually
associated with flexible automation include (1) high investment cost for custom-
engineered equipment, (2) medium production rates, and (3) continuous production
of different part or product styles.
Using some terminology developed in Chapter 1, we might say that fixed automa-
tion is applicable in situations of hard product variety, programmable automation is
applicable to medium product variety, and flexible automation can be used for soft
product variety.
38.2
HARDWARE COMPONENTS FOR AUTOMATION
Automation and process control are implemented using various hardware devices that
interact with the production operation and associated processing equipment. Sensors are
required to measure the process variables. Actuators are used to drive the process
parameters. And various additional devices are needed to interface the sensors and
actuators with the process controller, which is usually a digital computer.
38.2.1 SENSORS
A sensor is a device that converts a physical stimulus or variable of interest (e.g.,
temperature, force, pressure, or other characteristic of the process) into a more convenient
physical form (e.g., electrical voltage) for the purpose of measuring the variable. The
conversion allows the variable to be interpreted as a quantitative value.
Sensors of various types are available to collect data for feedback control in
manufacturing automation. They are often classified according to type of stimulus;
thus, we have mechanical, electrical, thermal, radiation, magnetic, and chemical variables.
Within each category, there are multiple variables that can be measured. Within the
mechanical category, the physical variables include position, velocity, force, torque, and
many others. Electrical variables include voltage, current, and resistance. And so on for
the other major categories.
In addition to type of stimulus, sensors are also classified as analog or discrete. An
analog sensor measures a continuous analog variable and converts it into a continuous
signal such as electrical voltage. Thermocouples, strain gages, and ammeters are exam-
ples of analog sensors. A discrete sensor produces a signal that can have only a limited
number of values. Within this category, we have binary sensors and digital sensors. A
binary sensor can take on only two possible values, such as Off and On, or 0 and 1. Limit
switches operate this way. A digital sensor produces a digital output signal, either in the
form of parallel status bits, such as a photoelectric sensor array) or a series of pulses that
can be counted, such as an optical encoder. Digital sensors have an advantage that they can
be readily interfaced to a digital computer, whereas the signals from analog sensors must
be converted to digital in order to be read by the computer.
890
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

For a given sensor, there is a relationship between the value of the physical stimulus
and the value of the signal produced by the sensor. This input/output relationship is called
the sensor’s transfer function, which can be expressed as:
S ¼ f sð Þ
ð38:1Þ
where S ¼ the output signal of the sensor (typically voltage), s ¼ the stimulus or input,
and f(s) is the functional relationship between them. The ideal form for an analog sensor
is a proportional relationship:
S ¼ C þ ms
ð38:2Þ
where C ¼ the value of the sensor output when the stimulus value is zero, and m ¼ the
constant of proportionality between s and S. The constant m indicates how much the
output S is affected by the input s. This is referred to as the sensitivity of the measuring
device. For example, a standard Chromel/Alumel thermocouple produces 40.6 micro-
volts per C change in temperature.
A binary sensor (e.g., limit switch, photoelectric switch) exhibits a binary relation-
ship between stimulus and sensor output:
S ¼ 1 if s > 0 and S ¼ 0 if s  0
ð38:3Þ
Before a measuring device can be used, it must be calibrated, which basically means
determining the transfer function of the sensor; specifically, how is the value of the
stimulus s determined from the value of the output signal S? Ease of calibration is one
criterion by which a measuring device can be selected. Other criteria include accuracy,
precision, operating range, speed of response, reliability and cost.
38.2.2 ACTUATORS
In automated systems, an actuator is a device that converts a control signal into a physical
action, which usually refers to a change in a process input parameter. The action is
typically mechanical, such as a change in position of a worktable or rotational speed of a
motor. The control signal is generally a low level signal, and an amplifier may be required
to increase the power of the signal to drive the actuator.
Actuators can be classified according to type of amplifier as (1) electrical, (2) hy-
draulic, or (3) pneumatic. Electrical actuators include AC and DC electric motors, stepper
motors, and solenoids. The operations of two types of electric motors (servomotors and
stepper motors) are described in Section 38.3.2, which deals with the analysis of positioning
systems. Hydraulic actuators utilize hydraulic fluid to amplify the control signal and are
often specified when large forces are required in the application. Pneumatic actuators are
driven by compressed air, which is commonly used in factories. All three actuator types are
available as linear or rotational devices. This designation distinguishes whether the output
action is a linear motion or a rotational motion. Electric motors and stepper motors are
more common as rotational actuators, whereas most hydraulic and pneumatic actuators
provide a linear output.
38.2.3 INTERFACE DEVICES
Interface devices allow the process to be connected to the computer controller and vice
versa. Sensor signals from the manufacturing process are fed into the computer, and
Section 38.2/Hardware Components for Automation
891

command signals are sent to actuators that operate the process. In this section, we discuss
the hardware devices that enable this communication between the process and the
controller. The devices include analog-to-digital converters, digital-to-analog converters,
contact input/output interfaces, and pulse counters and generators.
Continuous analog signals from sensors attached to the process must be trans-
formed into digital values that can be used by the control computer, a function that is
accomplished by an analog-to-digital converter (ADC). As illustrated in Figure 38.4,
an ADC (1) samples the continuous signal at periodic intervals, (2) converts the
sampled data into one of a finite number of defined amplitude levels, and (3) encodes
each amplitude level into a sequence of binary digits that can be interpreted by the
control computer. Important characteristics of an analog-to-digital converter include
sampling rate and resolution. Sampling rate is the frequency with which the continuous
signal is sampled. A faster sampling rate means that the actual form of the continuous
signal can be more closely approximated. Resolution refers to the precision with which
the analog value can be converted into binary code. This depends on the number of bits
used in the encoding procedure, the more bits, the higher the resolution. Un-
fortunately, using more bits requires more time to make the conversion, which can
impose a practical limit on the sampling rate.
A digital-to-analog converter (DAC) accomplishes the reverse process of the
ADC. It converts the digital output of the control computer into a quasi-continuous
signal capable of driving an analog actuator or other analog device. The DAC performs its
function in two steps: (1) decoding, in which the sequence of digital output values is
transformed into a corresponding series of analog values at discrete time intervals, and
(2) data holding, in which each analog value is changed into a continuous signal during
the duration of the time interval. In the simplest case, the continuous signal consists of a
series of step functions, as in Figure 38.5, which are used to drive the analog actuator.
FIGURE 38.4
An analog-to-digital
converter works by
converting a continuous
analog signal into a series
of discrete sampled data.
Discrete
sampled signal 
Continuous analog signal
Variable
Time
FIGURE 38.5
An analog-to-digital
converter works by
converting a continuous
analog signal into a series
of discrete sampled data.
Time
Series of discrete
step functions
Ideal output envelope
Parameter
892
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

Many automated systems operate by turning on and off motors, switches, and other
devices to respond to conditions and as a function of time. These control devices use
binary variables. They can have either of two possible values, 1 or 0, interpreted as On or
Off, object present or not present, high or low voltage level, and so on. Binary sensors
commonly used in process control systems include limit switches and photocells.
Common binary actuators solenoids, valves, clutches, lights, control relays, and certain
motors.
Contact input/output interfaces are components used to communicate binary data
back and forth between the process and the control computer. A contact input interface
is a device that reads binary data into the computer from an external source. It consists of
a series of binary electrical contacts that indicate the status of a binary device such as a
limit switch attached to the process. The status of each contact is periodically scanned by
the computer to update values used by the control program. A contact output interface is
a device used to communicate on/off signals from the computer to external binary
components such as solenoids, alarms, and indicator lights. It can also be used to turn on
and off constant speed motors.
As mentioned earlier, discrete data sometimes exist in the form of a series of pulses.
For example, an optical encoder (discussed in Section 38.3.2) emits its measurement of
position and velocity as a series of pulses. A pulse counter is a device that converts a series
of pulses from an external source into a digital value, which is entered into the control
computer. In addition to reading the output of an optical encoder, applications of pulse
counters include counting the number of parts flowing along a conveyor past a photo-
electric sensor. The opposite of a pulse counter is a pulse generator, a device that
produces a series of electrical pulses based on digital values generated by a control
computer. Both the number and frequency of the pulses are controlled. An important
pulse generator application is to drive stepper motors, which respond to each step by
rotating through a small incremental angle, called a step angle.
38.2.4 PROCESS CONTROLLERS
Most process control systems use some type of digital computer as the controller.
Whether control involves continuous or discrete parameters and variables, or a
combination of continuous and discrete, a digital computer can be connected to
the process to communicate and interact with it using the interface devices discussed
in Section 38.2.3. Requirements generally associated with real-time computer control
include the following:

The capability of the computer to respond to incoming signals from the process and if
necessary, to interrupt execution of a current program to service the incoming signal.

The capability to transmit commands to the process that are implemented by means
of actuators connected to the process. These commands may be the response to
incoming signals from the process.

The capability to execute certain actions at specific points in time during process
operation.

The capability to communicate and interact with other computers that may be
connected to the process. The term distributed process control is used to describe a
control system in which multiple microcomputers are used to share the process
control workload.

The capability to accept input from operating personnel for purposes such as entering
new programs or data, editing existing programs, and stopping the process in an
emergency.
Section 38.2/Hardware Components for Automation
893

A widely used process controller that satisfies these requirements is a program-
mable logic controller. A programmable logic controller (PLC) is a microcomputer-
based controller that uses stored instructions in programmable memory to implement
logic, sequencing, timing, counting, and arithmetic control functions, through digital or
analog input/output modules, for controlling various machines and processes. The major
components of a PLC, shown in Figure 38.6, are (1) input and output modules, which
connect the PLC to the industrial equipment to be controlled; (2) processor—the central
processing unit (CPU), which executes the logic and sequencing functions to control the
process by operating on the input signals and determining the proper output signals
specified by the control program; (3) PLC memory, which is connected to the processor
and contains the logic and sequencing instructions; (4) power supply—115 V AC is
typically used to drive the PLC. In addition, (5) a programming device (usually
detachable) is used to enter the program into the PLC.
Programming involves entry of the control instructions to the PLC using the
programming device. The most common control instructions include logical operations,
sequencing, counting, and timing. Many control applications require additional instruc-
tions for analog control, data processing, and computations. A variety of PLC program-
ming languages have been developed, ranging from ladder logic diagrams to structured
text. A discussion of these languages is beyond the scope of this text, and the reader is
referred to our references.
Advantages associated with programmable logic controllers include (1) program-
ming a PLC is easier than wiring a relay control panel; (2) PLCs can be reprogrammed,
whereas conventional hard-wired controls must be rewired and are often scrapped
instead because of the difficulty in rewiring; (3) a PLC can be interfaced with the plant
computer system more readily than conventional controls; (4) PLCs require less floor
space than relay controls, and (5) PLCs offer greater reliability and easier maintenance.
38.3
COMPUTER NUMERICAL CONTROL
Numerical control (NC) is a form of programmable automation in which the mechanical
actions of a piece of equipment are controlled by a program containing coded alphanu-
meric data. The data represent relative positions between a workhead and a workpart.
The workhead is a tool or other processing element, and the workpart is the object being
processed. The operating principle of NC is to control the motion of the workhead
FIGURE 38.6
Major
components of a
programmable logic
controller.
External power source
Outputs to
process
Inputs from
process
(3)
(2)
(4)
(5)
(1)
Programming
device
Power 
supply
Memory
Input
module
Output
module
Processor
894
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

relative to the workpart and to control the sequence in which the motions are carried out.
The first application of numerical control was in machining (Historical Note 38.1), and
this is still an important application area. NC machine tools are shown in Figures 22.26
and 22.27. Our video clip on computer numerical control shows the various types of CNC
machines and operations.
VIDEO CLIP
Computer Numerical Control. The clip contains two segments: (1) computer numerical
controls and (2) CNC principles.
38.3.1 THE TECHNOLOGY OF NUMERICAL CONTROL
In this section we define the components of a numerical control system, and then proceed
to describe the coordinate axis system and motion controls.
Components of an NC System
A numerical control system consists of three basic
components: (1) part program, (2) machine control unit, and (3) processing equipment.
The part program (the term commonly used in machine tool technology) is the detailed
set of commands to be followed by the processing equipment. It is the program of
instructions in the NC control system. Each command specifies a position or motion that
is to be accomplished by the work head relative to the workpart. A position is defined by
its x-y-z coordinates. In machine tool applications, additional details in the NC program
include spindle rotation speed, spindle direction, feed rate, tool change instructions, and
Historical Note 38.1
Numerical control [3], [5]
The initial development work on numerical control is
credited to John Parsons and Frank Stulen at the Parsons
Corporation in Michigan in the late 1940s. Parsons was a
machining contractor for the U.S. Air Force and had
devised a means of using numerical coordinate data to
move the worktable of a milling machine for producing
complex parts for aircraft. On the basis of Parson’s work,
the Air Force awarded a contract to the company in 1949
to study the feasibility of the new control concept for
machine tools. The project was subcontracted to the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology to develop a
prototype machine tool that utilized the new numerical
data principle. The M.I.T. study conﬁrmed that the concept
was feasible and proceeded to adapt a three-axis vertical
milling machine using combined analog-digital controls.
The name numerical control (NC) was given to the system
by which the machine tool motions were accomplished.
The prototype machine was demonstrated in 1952.
The accuracy and repeatability of the NC system
was far better than the manual machining methods
then available. The potential for reducing
nonproductive time in the machining cycle was also
apparent. In 1956, the Air Force sponsored the
development of NC machine tools at several different
companies. These machines were placed in operation
at various aircraft plants between 1958 and 1960. The
advantages of NC soon became clear, and aerospace
companies began placing orders for new NC
machines.
The importance of part programming was clear from
the start. The Air Force continued to encourage the
development and application of NC by sponsoring
research at M.I.T. for a part programming language to
control NC machines. This research resulted in the
development of APT in 1958 (APT stands for
Automatically Programmed Tooling). APT is a part
programming language by which a user could write the
machining instructions in simple English-like statements,
and the statements were coded to be interpreted by the
NC system.
Section 38.3/Computer Numerical Control
895

other commands related to the operation. The part program is prepared by a part
programmer, a person who is familiar with the details of the programming language and
also understands the technology of the processing equipment.
The machine control unit (MCU) in modern NC technology is a microcomputer
that stores and executes the program by converting each command into actions by the
processing equipment, one command at a time. The MCU consists of both hardware and
software. The hardware includes the microcomputer, components to interface with the
processing equipment, and certain feedback control elements. The software in the MCU
includes control system software, calculation algorithms, and translation software to
convert the NC part program into a usable format for the MCU. The MCU also permits
the part program to be edited in case the program contains errors, or changes in cutting
conditions are required. Because the MCU is a computer, the term computer numerical
control (CNC) is often used to distinguish this type of NC from its technological
predecessors that were based entirely on hard-wired electronics.
The processing equipment accomplishes the sequence of processing steps to
transform the starting workpart into a completed part. It operates under the control
of the MCU according to the instructions in the part program. We survey the variety of
applications and processing equipment in Section 38.3.4.
Coordinate System and Motion Control in NC
A standard coordinate axis system is
used to specify positions in numerical control. The system consists of the three linear axes
(x, y, z) of the Cartesian coordinate system, plus three rotational axes (a, b, c), as shown in
Figure 38.7(a). The rotational axes are used to rotate the workpart to present different
surfaces for machining, or to orient the tool or workhead at some angle relative to the
part. Most NC systems do not require all six axes. The simplest NC systems (e.g., plotters,
pressworking machines for flat sheet-metal stock, and component insertion machines)
are positioning systems whose locations can be defined in an x-y plane. Programming of
these machines involves specifying a sequence of x-y coordinates. By contrast, some
machine tools have five-axis control to shape complex workpart geometries. These
systems typically include three linear axes plus two rotational axes.
The coordinates for a rotational NC system are illustrated in Figure 38.7(b). These
systems are associated with turning operations on NC lathes. Although the work rotates,
this is not one of the controlled axes in a conventional NC turning system. The cutting
path of the tool relative to the rotating workpiece is defined in the x-z plane, as shown in
our figure.
FIGURE 38.7
Coordinate systems used in numerical control: (a) for ﬂat and prismatic work, and (b) for
rotational work.
896
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

In many NC systems, the relative movements between the processing tool and the
workpart are accomplished by fixing the part to a worktable and then controlling the
positions and motions of the table relative to a stationary or semistationary workhead.
Most machine tools and component insertion machines are based on this method of
operation. In other systems, the workpart is held stationary and the work head is moved
along two or three axes. Flame cutters, x-y plotters, and coordinate measuring machines
operate in this mode.
Motion control systems based on NC can be divided into two types: (1) point-to-
point and (2) continuous path. Point-to-point systems, also called positioning systems,
move the workhead (or workpiece) to a programmed location with no regard for the
path taken to get to that location. Once the move is completed, some processing
action is accomplished by the workhead at the location, such as drilling or punching a
hole. Thus, the program consists of a series of point locations at which operations are
performed.
Continuous path systems provide continuous simultaneous control of more than
one axis, thus controlling the path followed by the tool relative to the part. This permits
the tool to perform a process while the axes are moving, enabling the system to generate
angular surfaces, two-dimensional curves, or three-dimensional contours in the workpart.
This operating scheme is required in drafting machines, certain milling and turning
operations, and flame cutting. In machining, continuous path control also goes by the
name contouring.
An important aspect of continuous path motion is interpolation, which is
concerned with calculating the intermediate points along a path to be followed by
the workhead relative to the part. Two common forms of interpolation are linear and
circular. Linear interpolation is used for straight line paths, in which the part pro-
grammer specifies the coordinates of the beginning point and end point of the straight
line as well as the feed rate to be used. The interpolator then computes the travel speeds
of the two or three axes that will accomplish the specified trajectory. Circular
interpolation allows the workhead to follow a circular arc by specifying the coordinates
of its beginning and end points together with either the center or radius of the arc. The
interpolator computes a series of small straight line segments that will approximate the
arc within a defined tolerance.
Another aspect of motion control is concerned with whether the positions in the
coordinate system are defined absolutely or incrementally. In absolute positioning,
the workhead locations are always defined with respect to the origin of the axis system. In
incremental positioning, the next workhead position is defined relative to the present
location. The difference is illustrated in Figure 38.8.
FIGURE 38.8
Absolute
vs. incremental position-
ing. The workhead is at
point (2,3) and is to be
moved to point (6,8). In
absolute positioning, the
move is speciﬁed by x ¼ 6,
y ¼ 8; while in incremental
positioning, the move is
speciﬁed by x ¼ 4, y ¼ 5.
Section 38.3/Computer Numerical Control
897

38.3.2 ANALYSIS OF NC POSITIONING SYSTEMS
The function of the positioning system is to convert the coordinates specified in the NC
part program into relative positions between the tool and workpart during processing.
Let us consider how a simple positioning system, shown in Figure 38.9, might operate.
The system consists of a worktable on which a workpart is fixtured. The purpose of the
table is to move the part relative to a tool or workhead. To accomplish this purpose, the
worktable is moved linearly by means of a rotating leadscrew that is driven by a motor.
For simplicity, only one axis is shown in our sketch. To provide x-y capability, the
system shown would be piggybacked on top of a second axis perpendicular to the first.
The leadscrew has a certain pitch p, mm/thread (in/thread) or mm/rev (in/rev). Thus,
the table is moved a distance equal to the leadscrew pitch for each revolution. The
velocity at which the worktable moves is determined by the rotational speed of the
leadscrew.
Two basic types of motion control are used in NC: (a) open loop and (b) closed
loop, as shown in Figure 38.10. The difference is that an open-loop system operates
FIGURE 38.9
Motorand
leadscrewarrangementin
an NC positioning system.
FIGURE 38.10
Two
types of motion control in
numerical control: (a)
open loop and (b) closed
loop.
898
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

without verifying that the desired position of the worktable has been achieved. A closed-
loop control system uses feedback measurement to verify that the position of the
worktable is indeed the location specified in the program. Open-loop systems are less
expensive than closed-loop systems and are appropriate when the force resisting the
actuating motion is minimal, as in point-to-point drilling, for example. Closed-loop
systems are normally specified for machine tools that perform continuous path opera-
tions such as milling or turning, in which the resisting forces can be significant.
Open-Loop Positioning Systems
To turn the leadscrew, an open-loop positioning
system typically uses a stepping motor (a.k.a. stepper motor). In NC, the stepping motor
is driven by a series of electrical pulses generated by the machine control unit. Each pulse
causes the motor to rotate a fraction of one revolution, called the step angle. The
allowable step angles must conform to the relationship
a ¼ 360
ns
ð38:1Þ
where a ¼ step angle, degrees; and ns ¼ the number of step angles for the motor, which
must be an integer. The angle through which the motor shaft rotates is given by
Am ¼ anp
ð38:2Þ
where Am ¼ angle of motor shaft rotation, degrees; np ¼ number of pulses received by the
motor; and a ¼ step angle, here defined as degrees/pulse. Finally, the rotational speed of the
motor shaft is determined by the frequency of pulses sent to the motor:
Nm ¼ 60af p
360
ð38:3Þ
where Nm ¼ speed of motor shaft rotation, rev/min; fp ¼ frequency of pulses driving
the stepper motor, Hz (pulses/sec), the constant 60 converts pulses/sec to pulses/min;
the constant 360 converts degrees of rotation to full revolutions; and a ¼ step angle
of the motor, as before.
The motor shaft drives the leadscrew that determines the position and velocity of the
worktable. Theconnectionisoftendesignedusing agear reductiontoincreasetheprecision
of table movement. However, the angle of rotation and rotational speed of the leadscrew
are reduced by this gear ratio. The relationships are as follows:
Am ¼ rgAls
ð38:4aÞ
and
Nm ¼ rgNls
ð38:4bÞ
where Am and Nm are the angle of rotation, degrees, and rotational speed, rev/min, of the
motor, respectively; Als and Nls are the angle of rotation, degrees, and rotational speed,
rev/min, of the leadscrew, respectively; and rg ¼ gear reduction between the motor shaft
and the leadscrew; for example, a gear reduction of 2 means that the motor shaft rotates
through two revolutions for each rotation of the leadscrew.
The linear position of the table in response to the rotation of the leadscrew depends
on the leadscrew pitch p, and can be determined as follows:
x ¼ pAls
360
ð38:5Þ
where x ¼ x-axis position relative to the starting position, mm (in); p ¼ pitch of the
leadscrew, mm/rev (in/rev); and Als/360 ¼ the number of revolutions (and partial
revolutions) of the leadscrew. By combining Eqs. (38.2), (38.4a), and (38.5) and
Section 38.3/Computer Numerical Control
899

rearranging, the number of pulses required to achieve a specified x-position increment in
a point-to-point system can be found:
np ¼ 360rgx
pa
¼ rgnsAls
360
ð38:6Þ
The velocity of the worktable in the direction of the leadscrew axis can be determined as
follows:
vt ¼ f r ¼ Nlsp
ð38:7Þ
where vt ¼ table travel speed, mm/min (in/min); fr ¼ table feed rate, mm/min (in/min);
Nls ¼ rotational speed of the leadscrew, rev/min; and p ¼ leadscrew pitch, mm/rev (in/
rev). The rotational speed of the leadscrew depends on the frequency of pulses driving
the stepping motor:
Nls ¼ 60f p
nsrg
ð38:8Þ
where Nls ¼ leadscrew rotational speed, rev/min; fp ¼ pulse train frequency, Hz (pulses/
sec); ns ¼ steps/rev, or pulses/rev, and rg ¼ gear reduction between the motor and the
leadscrew. For a two-axis table with continuous path control, the relative velocities of the
axes are coordinated to achieve the desired travel direction. Finally, the required pulse
frequency to drive the table at a specified feed rate can be obtained by combining Eqs.
(38.7) and (38.8) and rearranging to solve for fp:
f p ¼ vtnsrg
60 p ¼ f rnsrg
60 p ¼ Nlsnsrg
60
¼ Nmns
60
ð38:9Þ
Example 38.1
Open-Loop
Positioning
A stepping motor has 48 step angles. Its output shaft is coupled to a leadscrew with a 4:1
gear reduction (four turns of the motor shaft for each turn of the leadscrew). The
leadscrew pitch ¼ 5.0 mm. The worktable of a positioning system is driven by the
leadscrew. The table must move a distance of 75.0 mm from its current position at a travel
speed of 400 mm/min. Determine (a) how many pulses are required to move the table the
specified distance and (b) the motor speed and (c) pulse frequency required to achieve
the desired table speed.
Solution: (a) To move a distance x ¼ 75 mm, the leadscrew must rotate through an angle
calculated as follows:
Als ¼ 360x
p
¼ 360 75
ð
Þ
5
¼ 5400
With 48 step angles and a gear reduction of 4, the number of pulses to move the table 75
mm is
np ¼ 4 48
ð
Þ 5400
ð
Þ
360
¼ 2880 pulses
(b) Equation (38.7) can be used to find the leadscrew speed corresponding to the table
speed of 400 mm/min,
Nls ¼ vt
p ¼ 400
5:0 ¼ 80:0 rev/min
900
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

The motor speed will be 4 times as fast:
Nm ¼ rgNls ¼ 4 80
ð
Þ ¼ 320 rev/min
(c) Finally, the pulse rate is given by Eq. (38.13):
f p ¼ 320 48
ð
Þ
60
¼ 256 Hz
n
Closed-Loop Positioning Systems
Closed-loop NC systems, Figure 38.10(b), use
servomotors and feedback measurements to ensure that the desired position is achieved.
A common feedback sensor used in NC (and also industrial robots) is the optical rotary
encoder, illustrated in Figure 38.11. It consists of a light source, a photocell, and a disk
containing a series of slots through which the light source can shine to energize the
photocell. The disk is connected to a rotating shaft, which in turn is connected directly to
the leadscrew. As the leadscrew rotates, the slots cause the light source to be seen by the
photocell as a series of flashes, which are converted into an equivalent series of electrical
pulses. By counting the pulses and computing the frequency of the pulse train, the
leadscrew angle and rotational speed can be determined, and thus worktable position and
speed can be calculated using the pitch of the leadscrew.
The equations describing the operation of a closed-loop positioning system are
analogous to those for an open-loop system. In the basic optical encoder, the angle
between slots in the disk must satisfy the following requirement:
a ¼ 360
ns
ð38:10Þ
where a ¼ angle between slots, degrees/slot; and ns ¼ the number of slots in the disk, slots/
rev; and 360 ¼ degrees/rev. For a certain angular rotation of the leadscrew, the encoder
generates a number of pulses given by
np ¼ Als
a ¼ Alsns
360
ð38:11Þ
where np ¼ pulse count; Als ¼ angle of rotation of the leadscrew, degrees; and a ¼ angle
between slots in the encoder, degrees/pulse. The pulse count can be used to determine the
linear x-axis position of the worktable by factoring in the leadscrew pitch. Thus,
x ¼ pnp
ns
¼ pAls
360
ð38:12Þ
FIGURE 38.11
Optical
encoder: (a) apparatus,
and (b) series of pulses
emitted to measure
rotation of disk.
Section 38.3/Computer Numerical Control
901

Similarly, the feed rate at which the worktable moves is obtained from the frequency of
the pulse train:
vt ¼ f r ¼ 60 pf p
ns
ð38:13Þ
where vt ¼ table travel speed, mm/min (in/min); fr ¼ feed rate, mm/min (in/min);
p ¼ pitch, mm/rev (in/rev); fp ¼ frequency of the pulse train, Hz (pulses/sec); ns ¼
number of slots in the encoder disk, pulses/rev; and 60 converts seconds to minutes.
The speed relationship given by Eq. (38.7) is also valid for a closed-loop positioning
system.
The series of pulses generated by the encoder is compared with the coordinate
position and feed rate specified in the part program, and the difference is used by the
machine control unit to drive a servomotor that in turn drives the leadscrew and worktable.
As with the open-loop system, a gear reduction between the servomotor and the leadscrew
can also be used, so Eqs. (38.4) are applicable. A digital-to-analog converter is used to
convert the digital signals used by the MCU into a continuous analog signal to operate the
drive motor. Closed-loop NC systems of the type described here are appropriate when
there is force resisting the movement of the table. Most metal-machining operations fall
into this category, particularly those involving continuous path control such as milling and
turning.
Example 38.2 NC
Closed-Loop
Positioning
An NC worktable is driven by a closed-loop positioning system consisting of a
servomotor, leadscrew, and optical encoder. The leadscrew has a pitch ¼ 5.0 mm
and is coupled to the motor shaft with a gear ratio of 4:1 (four turns of the motor for
each turn of the leadscrew). The optical encoder generates 100 pulses/rev of the
leadscrew. The table has been programmed to move a distance of 75.0 mm at a feed
rate ¼ 400 mm/min. Determine (a) how many pulses are received by the control system
to verify that the table has moved exactly 75.0 mm; and (b) the pulse rate and (c) motor
speed that correspond to the specified feed rate.
Solution: (a) Rearranging Eq. (38.12) to find np,
np ¼ xns
p ¼ 75 100
ð
Þ
5
¼ 1500 pulses
(b) The pulse rate corresponding to 400 mm/min can be obtained by rearranging
Eq. (38.13):
f p ¼ f rns
60 p ¼ 400 100
ð
Þ
60 5
ð Þ
¼ 133:33 Hz
(c) Leadscrew rotational speed is the table velocity divided by the pitch:
Nls ¼ f r
p ¼ 80 rev/min
With a gear ratio rg ¼ 4.0, the motor speed N ¼ 4 80
ð
Þ ¼ 320 rev/min
n
Precision in Positioning
Three critical measures of precision in positioning are control
resolution, accuracy, and repeatability. These terms are most easily explained by con-
sidering a single axis of the position system.
902
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

Control resolution refers to the system’s ability to divide the total range of the axis
movement into closely spaced points that can be distinguished by the control unit.
Control resolution is defined as the distance separating two adjacent control points in
the axis movement. Control points are sometimes called addressable points because
they are locations along the axis to which the worktable can be directed to go. It is
desirable for the control resolution to be as small as possible. This depends on
limitations imposed by (1) the electromechanical components of the positioning
system, and/or (2) the number of bits used by the controller to define the axis coordinate
location.
The electromechanical factors that limit resolution include leadscrew pitch, gear
ratiointhedrivesystem,andthestepangleinasteppingmotor(foranopen-loopsystem)or
the angle between slots in an encoder disk (for a closed-loop system). Together, these
factors determine a control resolution, or minimum distance that the worktable can be
moved. For example, the control resolution for an open-loop system driven by a stepper
motor with a gear reduction between the motor shaft and the leadscrew is given by
CR1 ¼
p
nsrg
ð38:14aÞ
where CR1 ¼ control resolution of the electromechanical components, mm (in); p ¼
leadscrew pitch, mm/rev (in/rev); ns ¼ number of steps/rev; and rg ¼ gear reduction.
The corresponding expression for a closed-loop positioning system is similar but
does not include the gear reduction because the encoder is connected directly to the
leadscrew. There is no gear reduction. Thus, control resolution for a closed-loop system is
defined as follows:
CR1 ¼ p
ns
ð38:14bÞ
where ns in this case refers to the number of slots in the optical encoder.
Although unusual in modern computer technology, the second possible factor that
could limit control resolution is the number of bits defining the axis coordinate value. For
example, this limitation may be imposed by the bit storage capacity of the controller. If
B ¼ the number of bits in the storage register for the axis, then the number of control
points into which the axis range can be divided ¼ 2B. Assuming that the control points are
separated equally within the range, then
CR2 ¼
L
2B  1
ð38:15Þ
where CR2 ¼ control resolution of the computer control system, mm (in); and L ¼ axis
range, mm (in). The control resolution of the positioning system is the maximum of the
two values; that is,
CR ¼ Max CR1; CR2
f
g
ð38:16Þ
It is generally desirable for CR2  CR1, meaning that the electromechanical system is the
limiting factor in control resolution.
When a positioning system is directed to move the worktable to a given control
point, the capability of the system to move to that point will be limited by mechanical
errors. These errors are due to a variety of inaccuracies and imperfections in the
mechanical system, such as play between the leadscrew and the worktable, backlash
in the gears, and deflection of machine components. It is convenient to assume that the
errors form a statistical distribution about the control point that is an unbiased normal
distribution with mean ¼ 0. If we further assume that the standard deviation of the
distribution is constant over the range of the axis under consideration, then nearly all of
the mechanical errors (99.73%) are contained within 3 standard deviations of the
Section 38.3/Computer Numerical Control
903

control point. This is pictured in Figure 38.12 for a portion of the axis range, which
includes three control points.
Given these definitions of control resolution and mechanical error distribution, let
us now consider accuracy and repeatability. Accuracy is defined in a worst-case scenario
in which the desired target point lies exactly between two adjacent control points. Since
the system can only move to one or the other of the control points, there will be an error
in the final position of the worktable. If the target were closer to one of the control points,
then the table would be moved to the closer control point and the error would be smaller.
It is appropriate to define accuracy in the worst case. The accuracy of any given axis of a
positioning system is the maximum possible error that can occur between the desired
target point and the actual position taken by the system; in equation form,
Accuracy ¼ 0:5 CR þ 3s
ð38:17Þ
where CR ¼ control resolution, mm (in); and s ¼ standard deviation of the error
distribution, mm (in).
Repeatability refers to the capability of a positioning system to return to a given
control point that has been previously programmed. This capability can be measured in
terms of the location errors encountered when the system attempts to position itself at the
control point. Location errors are a manifestation of the mechanical errors of the
positioning system, which are defined by an assumed normal distribution, as described
above. Thus, the repeatability of any given axis of a positioning system can be defined as
the range of mechanical errors associated with the axis; this reduces to
Repeatability ¼ 3s
ð38:18Þ
Example 38.3
Control
Resolution,
Accuracy, and
Repeatability
Referring back to Example 38.1, the mechanical inaccuracies in the open-loop positioning
system can be described by a normal distribution whose standard deviation ¼ 0.005 mm.
The range of the worktable axis is 550 mm, and there are 16 bits in the binary register used
by the digital controller to store the programmed position. Determine (a) control
resolution, (b) accuracy, and (c) repeatability for the positioning system.
Solution: (a) Control resolution is the greater of CR1 and CR2 as defined by Eqs.
(38.14a) and (38.15):
CR1 ¼
p
nsrg
¼ 5:0
48 4
ð Þ ¼ 0:0260 mm
CR2 ¼
L
2B  1 ¼
550
216  1
¼
550
65; 535 ¼ 0:0084 mm
CR ¼ Max 0:0260; 0:0084
f
g ¼ 0:0260 mm
FIGURE 38.12
A portion of a linear
positioning system axis,
with deﬁnition of control
resolution, accuracy, and
repeatability.
Control resolution
= CR
Repeatablity = ±3
Axis
CR + 3
1
2
Accuracy =
Control
point
Control
point
Desired target
point
Distribution of
mechanical errors
904
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

(b) Accuracy is given by Eq. (38.17):
Accuracy ¼ 0:5 0:0260
ð
Þ þ 3 0:005
ð
Þ ¼ 0:0280 mm
(c) Repeatability ¼  3(0.005) ¼  0.015 mm.
n
38.3.3 NC PART PROGRAMMING
In machine tool applications, the task of programming the system is called NC part
programming because the program is prepared for a given part. It is usually accom-
plished by someone familiar with the metalworking process who has learned the
programming procedure for the particular equipment in the plant. For other processes,
other terms may be used for programming, but the principles are similar and a trained
individual is needed to prepare the program. Computer systems are used extensively to
prepare NC programs.
Part programming requires the programmer to define the points, lines, and surfaces of
the workpart in the axis system, and to control the movement of the cutting tool relative to
these defined part features. Several part programming techniques are available, the most
important of which are (1) manual part programming, (2) computer-assisted part program-
ming, (3) CAD/CAM-assisted part programming, and (4) manual data input.
Manual Part Programming
For simple point-to-point machining jobs, such as drilling
operations, manual programming is often the easiest and most economical method.
Manual part programming uses basic numerical data and special alphanumeric codes to
define the steps in the process. For example, to perform a drilling operation, a command
of the following type is entered:
n010x70:0 y85:5 f175 s500
Each ‘‘word’’ in the statement specifies a detail in the drilling operation.The n-word(n010)
is simply a sequence number for the statement. The x- and y-words indicate the x and y
coordinate positions (x ¼ 70.0 mm and y ¼ 85.5 mm). The f-word and s-word specify the
feedrateandspindlespeedtobeusedinthe drilling operation(feedrate¼ 175mm/minand
spindle speed ¼ 500 rev/min). The complete NC part program consists of a sequence of
statements similar to the above command.
Computer-Assisted Part Programming
Computer-assisted part programming in-
volves the use of a high-level programming language. It is suited to the programming
of more complex jobs than manual programming. The first part programming language
was APT (Automatically Programmed Tooling), developed as an extension of the
original NC machine tool research and first used in production around 1960.
In APT, the part programming task is divided into two steps: (1) definition of part
geometry and (2) specification of tool path and operation sequence. In step 1, the part
programmer defines the geometry of the workpart by means of basic geometric elements
such as points, lines, planes, circles, and cylinders. These elements are defined using APT
geometry statements, such as
P1 ¼ POINT=25:0; 150:0
L1 ¼ LINE=P1; P2
P1 is a point defined in the x-y plane located at x ¼ 25 mm and y ¼ 150 mm. L1 is a line
that goes through points P1 and P2. Similar statements can be used to define circles,
Section 38.3/Computer Numerical Control
905

cylinders, and other geometry elements. Most workpart shapes can be described using
statements like these to define their surfaces, corners, edges, and hole locations.
Specification of the tool path is accomplished with APT motion statements.
A typical statement for point-to-point operation is
GOTO=P1
This directs the tool to move from its current location to a position defined by P1,
where P1 has been defined by a previous APT geometry statement. Continuous path
commands use geometry elements such as lines, circles, and planes. For example, the
command
GORGT=L3; PAST; L4
directs the tool to go right (GORGT) along line L3 until it is positioned just past line L4
(of course, L4 must be a line that intersects L3).
Additional APT statements are used to define operating parameters such as feed
rates, spindle speeds, tool sizes, and tolerances. When completed, the part programmer
enters the APT program into the computer, where it is processed to generate low-level
statements (similar to statements prepared in manual part programming) that can be
used by a particular machine tool.
CAD/CAM-Assisted Part Programming
The use of CAD/CAM takes computer-
assisted part programming a step further by using a computer graphics system (CAD/
CAM system) to interact with the programmer as the part program is being prepared. In
the conventional use of APT, a complete program is written and then entered into the
computer for processing. Many programming errors are not detected until computer
processing. When a CAD/CAM system is used, the programmer receives immediate visual
verification when each statement is entered, to determine whether the statement is
correct. When part geometry is entered by the programmer, the element is graphically
displayed on the monitor. When the tool path is constructed, the programmer can see
exactly how the motion commands will move the tool relative to the part. Errors can be
corrected immediately rather than after the entire program has been written.
Interaction between programmer and programming system is a significant benefit
of CAD/CAM-assisted programming. There are other important benefits of using CAD/
CAM in NC part programming. First, the design of the product and its components may
have been accomplished on a CAD/CAM system. The resulting design database,
including the geometric definition of each part, can be retrieved by the NC programmer
to use as the starting geometry for part programming. This retrieval saves valuable time
compared to reconstructing the part from scratch using the APT geometry statements.
Second, special software routines are available in CAD/CAM-assisted part pro-
gramming to automate portions of the tool path generation, such as profile milling
around the outside periphery of a part, milling a pocket into the surface of a part, surface
contouring, and certain point-to-point operations. These routines are called by the part
programmer as special macro commands. Their use results in significant savings in
programming time and effort.
Manual Data Input
Manual data input (MDI) is a method in which a machine operator
enters the part program in the factory. The method involves use of a CRT display with
graphics capability at the machine tool controls. NC part programming statements are
entered using a menu-driven procedure that requires minimum training of the machine
tool operator. Because part programming is simplified and does not require a special staff
of NC part programmers, MDI is a way for small machine shops to economically
implement numerical control into their operations.
906
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

38.3.4 APPLICATIONS OF NUMERICAL CONTROL
Machining is an important application area for numerical control, but the operating
principle of NC can be applied to other operations as well. There are many industrial
processes in which the position of a workhead must be controlled relative to the part or
product being worked on. We divide the applications into two categories: (1) machine
tool applications, and (2) nonmachine tool applications. It should be noted that the
applications are not all identified by the name numerical control in their respective
industries.
In the machine tool category, NC is widely used for machining operations such as
turning, drilling, and milling (Sections 22.2, 22.3, and 22.4, respectively). The use of NC in
these processes has motivated the development of highly automated machine tools called
machining centers, which change their own cutting tools to perform a variety of
machining operations under NC program control (Section 22.5). In addition to machin-
ing, other numerically controlled machine tools include (1) grinding machines (Section
25.1); (2) sheet metal pressworking machines (Section 20.5.2); (3) tube-bending machines
(Section 20.7); and (4) thermal cutting processes (Section 26.3).
In the nonmachine tool category, NC applications include (1) tape-laying machines
and filament-winding machines for composites (Section 15.2.3 and Section 15.4);
(2) welding machines, both arc welding (Section 31.1) and resistance welding (Section
31.2); (3) component-insertion machines in electronics assembly (Sections 35.3 and 35.4);
(4) drafting machines; and (5) coordinate measuring machines for inspection (Section
42.6.1).
Benefits of NC relative to manually operated equipment in these applications
include (1) reduced nonproductive time, which results in shorter cycle times, (2) lower
manufacturing lead times, (3) simpler fixturing, (4) greater manufacturing flexibility, (5)
improved accuracy, and (6) reduced human error.
38.4
INDUSTRIAL ROBOTICS
An industrial robot is a general-purpose programmable machine possessing certain anthro-
pomorphic features. The most obvious anthropomorphic, or human-like, feature is the
robot’s mechanical arm, or manipulator. The control unit for a modern industrial robot is a
computer that can be programmed to execute rather sophisticated subroutines, thus
providing the robot with an intelligence that sometimes seems almost human. The robot’s
manipulator, combined with a high-level controller, allows an industrial robot to perform a
variety of tasks such as loading and unloading production machine, spot welding, and spray
painting. Robots are typically used as substitutes for human workers in these tasks. The first
industrial robot was installed in a die-casting operation at Ford Motor Company. The robot’s
job was to unload die castings from the die-casting machine.
In this section, we consider various aspects of robot technology and applications,
including how industrial robots are programmed to perform their tasks.
38.4.1 ROBOT ANATOMY
An industrial robot consists of a mechanical manipulator and a controller to move it and
perform other related functions. The mechanical manipulator consists of joints and links
that can position and orient the end of the manipulator relative to its base. The controller
unit consists of electronic hardware and software to operate the joints in a coordinated
fashion to execute the programmed work cycle. Robot anatomy is concerned with the
Section 38.4/Industrial Robotics
907

mechanical manipulator and its construction. Figure 38.13 shows one of the common
industrial robot configurations.
Manipulator Joints and Links
A joint in a robot is similar to a joint in a human body. It
provides relative movement between two parts of the body. Connected to each joint are
an input link and an output link. Each joint moves its output link relative to its input link.
The robot manipulator consists of a series of link–joint–link combinations. The output
link of one joint is the input link for the next joint. Typical industrial robots have five or
six joints. The coordinated movement of these joints gives the robot its ability to move,
position, and orient objects to perform useful work. Manipulator joints can be classified
as linear or rotating, indicating the motion of the output link relative to the input link.
Manipulator Design
Using joints of the two basic types, each joint separated from the
previous by a link, the manipulator is constructed. Most industrial robots are mounted to
the floor. We can identify the base as link 0; this is the input link to joint 1 whose output is
link 1, which is the input to joint 2 whose output link is link 2; and so forth, for the number
of joints in the manipulator.
Robot manipulators can usually be divided into two sections: arm-and-body
assembly and wrist assembly. There are typically three joints associated with the arm-
and-body assembly, and two or three joints associated with the wrist. The function of the
FIGURE 38.13
The
manipulator of a modern
industrial robot. (Photo
courtesy of Adept
Technology, Inc.,
Pleasanton, California.)
908
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

arm-and-body is to position an object or tool, and the wrist function is to properly orient
the object or tool. Positioning is concerned with moving the part or tool from one location
to another. Orientation is concerned with precisely aligning the object relative to some
stationary location in the work area.
To accomplish these functions, arm-and-body designs differ from those of the wrist.
Positioning requires large spatial movements, while orientation requires twisting and
rotating motions to align the part or tool relative to a fixed position in the workplace. The
arm-and-body consists of large links and joints, whereas the wrist consists of short links.
The arm-and-body joints often consist of both linear and rotating types, while the wrist
joints are almost always rotating types.
There are five basic arm-and-body configurations available in commercial robots,
identified in Figure 38.14. The design shown in part (e) of the figure and in Figure 38.13 is
called a SCARA robot, which stands for ‘‘selectively compliant assembly robot arm.’’ It
is similar to a jointed arm anatomy, except that the shoulder and elbow joints have
vertical axes of rotation, thus providing rigidity in the vertical direction but relative
compliance in the horizontal direction.
FIGURE 38.14
Five common anatomies of commercial industrial robots: (a) polar, (b) cylindrical, (c) Cartesian
coordinate, (d) jointed-arm, and (e) SCARA, or selectively compliant assembly robot arm.
Section 38.4/Industrial Robotics
909

The wrist is assembled to the last link in any of these arm-and-body con-
figurations. The SCARA is sometimes an exception because it is almost always
used for simple handling and assembly tasks involving vertical motions. Therefore,
a wrist is not usually present at the end of its manipulator. Substituting for the wrist on
the SCARA is usually a gripper to grasp components for movement and/or assembly.
Work Volume and Precision of Motion
One of the important technical considerations
of an industrial robot is the size of its work volume. Work volume is defined as the
envelope within which a robot manipulator can position and orient the end of its wrist.
This envelope is determined by the number of joints, as well as their types and ranges, and
the sizes of the links. Work volume is important because it plays a significant role in
determining which applications a robot can perform.
The definitions of control resolution, accuracy, and repeatability developed in
Section 38.3.2 for NC positioning systems apply to industrial robots. A robot manipulator
is, after all, a positioning system. In general, the links and joints of robots are not nearly as
rigid as their machine tool counterparts, and so the accuracy and repeatability of their
movements are not as good.
End Effectors
An industrial robot is a general-purpose machine. For a robot to be useful
in a particular application, it must be equipped with special tooling designed for the
application. An end effector is the special tooling that connects to the robot’s wrist-end to
perform the specific task. There are two general types of end effector: tools and grippers.
A tool is used when the robot must perform a processing operation. The special tools
include spot-welding guns, arc-welding tools, spray-painting nozzles, rotating spindles,
heating torches, and assembly tools (e.g., automatic screwdriver). The robot is pro-
grammed to manipulate the tool relative to the workpart being processed.
Grippers are designed to grasp and move objects during the work cycle. The objects
are usually workparts, and the end effector must be designed specifically for the part.
Grippers are used for part placement applications, machine loading and unloading, and
palletizing. Figure 38.15 shows a typical gripper configuration.
38.4.2 CONTROL SYSTEMS AND ROBOT PROGRAMMING
The robot’s controller consists of the electronic hardware and software to control the joints
during execution of a programmed work cycle. Most robot control units today are based on
a microcomputer system. The control systems in robotics can be classified as follows:
FIGURE 38.15
A robot
gripper: (a) open and
(b) closed to grasp a
workpart.
910
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

1. Playback with point-to-point (PTP) control. As in numerical control, robot motion
systems can be divided into point-to-point and continuous path. The program for a
point-to-point playback robot consists of a series of point locations and the sequence in
which these points must be visited during the work cycle. During programming, these
points are recorded into memory, and then subsequently played back during execution
of the program. In a point-to-point motion, the path taken to get to the final position is
not controlled.
2. Playback with continuous path (CP) control. Continuous path control is similar to
PTP, except motion paths rather than individual points are stored in memory. In certain
types of regular CP motions, such as a straight line path between two point locations,
the trajectory required by the manipulator is computed by the controller unit for each
move. For irregular continuous motions, such as a path followed in spray painting, the
path is defined by a series of closely spaced points that approximate the irregular
smooth path. Robots capable of continuous path motions can also execute point-to-
point movements.
3. Intelligent control. Modern industrial robots exhibit characteristics that often make
them appear to be acting intelligently. These characteristics include the ability to
respond to sophisticated sensors such as machine vision, make decisions when things go
wrong during the work cycle, make computations, and communicate with humans.
Robot intelligence is implemented using powerful microprocessors and advanced
programming techniques.
Robots execute a stored program of instructions that define the sequence
of motions and positions in the work cycle, much like a part program in NC. In addition
to motion instructions, the program may include instructions for other functions such as
interacting with external equipment, responding to sensors, and processing data.
There are two basic methods used to teach modern robots their programs: lead-
through programming and computer programming languages. Leadthrough programming
involves a ‘‘teach-by-showing’’ method in which the manipulator is moved by the program-
mer through the sequence of positions in the work cycle. The controller records each
position inmemory forsubsequentplayback.Twoprocedures forleadingtherobot through
the motion sequence are available: powered leadthrough and manual leadthrough. In
powered leadthrough, the manipulator is driven by a control box that has toggle switches or
press buttons to control the movements of the joints. Using the control box, the program-
mer moves the manipulator to each location, recording the corresponding joint positions
into memory. Powered leadthrough is the common method for programming playback
robots with point-to-point control. Manual leadthrough is typically used for playback
robots with continuous path control. In this method, the programmer physically moves the
manipulatorwrist throughthemotioncycle. Forspraypainting and certainotherjobs, this is
a more convenient means of programming the robot.
Computer programming languages for programming robots have evolved from the
use of microcomputer controllers. The first commercial language was introduced around
1979. Computer languages provide a convenient way to integrate certain nonmotion
functions into the work cycle, such as decision logic, interlocking with other equipment,
and interfacing with sensors. A more thorough discussion of robot programming is
presented in reference [6].
38.4.3 APPLICATIONS OF INDUSTRIAL ROBOTS
Some industrial work lends itself to robot applications. The following are the important
characteristics of a work situation that tend to promote the substitution of a robot in place
of a human worker: (1) the work environment is hazardous for humans, (2) the work cycle
Section 38.4/Industrial Robotics
911

is repetitive, (3) the work is performed at a stationary location, (4) part or tool handling
would be difficult for humans, (5) it is a multishift operation, (6) there are long
production runs and infrequent changeovers, and (7) part positioning and orientation
are established at the beginning of the work cycle, since most robots cannot see.
Applications of industrial robots that tend to match these characteristics can be
divided into three basic categories: (1) material handling, (2) processing operations, and
(3) assembly and inspection.
Material handling applications involve the movement of materials or parts from
one location and orientation to another. To accomplish this relocation task, the robot is
equipped with a gripper. As noted earlier, the gripper must be custom-designed to
grasp the particular part in the application. Material handling applications include
material transfer (part placement, palletizing, depalletizing) and machine loading and/
or unloading (e.g., machine tools, presses, and plastic molding).
Processing operations require the robot to manipulate a tool as its end effector. The
applications include spot welding, continuous arc welding, spray coating, and certain
metal cutting and deburring operations in which the robot manipulates a special tool. In
each of these operations, the tool is used as the robot’s end effector. An application of
spot welding is illustrated in Figure 38.16. Spot welding is a common application of
industrial robots in the automotive industry.
Assembly and inspection applications cannot be classified neatly in either of the
previous categories; they sometimes involve part handling and other times manipulation
of a tool. Assembly applications often involve the stacking of one part onto another
part—basically a part handling task. In other assembly operations a tool is manipulated,
such as an automatic screwdriver. Similarly, inspection operations sometimes require the
robot to position a workpart relative to an inspection device, or to load a part into an
inspection machine; other applications involve the manipulation of a sensor to perform
an inspection.
FIGURE 38.16
Aportionofanautomobile
assembly line in which
robots perform spot-
welding operations.
(Photo courtesy of Ford
Motor Company,
Dearborn, Michigan.)
912
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

REFERENCES
[1] Asfahl, C. R. Robots and Manufacturing Automa-
tion. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1992.
[2] Bollinger, J. G., and Duffie N. A. Computer Control
of Machines and Processes. Addison-Wesley Long-
man, Inc., New York, 1989.
[3] Chang, C-H., and Melkanoff, M. A. NC Machine
Programming and Software Design, 3rd ed. Prentice
Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2005.
[4] Engelberger, J. F. Robotics in Practice: Manage-
ment and Applications of Robotics in Industry.
AMACOM, New York, 1985.
[5] Groover, M. P. Automation, Production Systems,
and Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 3rd ed.
Pearson/Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New
Jersey, 2008.
[6] Groover, M. P., Weiss, M., Nagel, R. N., and Odrey,
N. G. Industrial Robotics: Technology, Program-
ming, and Applications. McGraw-Hill, New York,
1986.
[7] Hughes, T. A., Programmable Controllers, 4th ed.
Instrumentation, Systems, and Automation Society,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, 2005.
[8] Pessen, D. W. Industrial Automation. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., New York, 1989.
[9] Seames W. Computer Numerical Control, Concepts
and
Programming.
Delmar-Thomson
Learning,
Albany, New York, 2002.
[10] Webb, J. W., and Reis, R. A. Programmable Logic
Controllers: Principles and Applications, 5th ed.
Pearson/Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New
Jersey, 2003.
[11] Weber, A.‘‘Robot Dos and Don’ts,’’ Assembly, Feb-
ruary 2005, pp. 50–57.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
38.1.
Define the term manufacturing system.
38.2.
What are the three basic components of an auto-
mated system?
38.3.
What are some of the advantages of using electrical
power in an automated system?
38.4.
What is the difference between a closed-loop con-
trol system and an open-loop control system?
38.5.
What is the difference between fixed automation
and programmable automation?
38.6.
What is a sensor?
38.7.
What is an actuator in an automated system?
38.8.
What is a contact input interface?
38.9.
What is a programmable logic controller?
38.10.
Identify and briefly describe the three basic com-
ponents of a numerical control (NC) system.
38.11.
What is the difference between point-to-point and
continuous path in a motion control system?
38.12.
What is the difference between absolute position-
ing and incremental positioning?
38.13.
What is the difference between an open-loop posi-
tioning system and a closed-loop positioning
system?
38.14.
Under what circumstances is a closed-loop posi-
tioning system preferable to an open-loop system?
38.15.
Explain the operation of an optical encoder.
38.16.
Why should the electromechanical system rather
than the controller storage register be the limiting
factor in control resolution?
38.17.
WhatismanualdatainputinNCpartprogramming?
38.18.
Identify some of the non-machine tool applications
of numerical control.
38.19.
What are some of the benefits usually cited for NC
compared to using manual alternative methods?
38.20.
What is an industrial robot?
38.21.
How is an industrial robot similar to numerical
control?
38.22.
What is an end effector?
38.23.
In robot programming, what is the difference between
powered leadthrough and manual leadthrough?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 21 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point.
Each omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct
number of answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct
answers.
Multiple Choice Quiz
913

38.1.
The three components of an automated system are
which of the following: (a) actuators, (b) commu-
nication system, (c) control system, (d) feedback
loop, (e) humans, (f) power, (g) program of instruc-
tions, and (h) sensors?
38.2.
The three basic types of automated systems used in
manufacturing are fixed automation, programma-
ble automation, and flexible automation. Flexible
automation is an extension of programmable auto-
mation in which there is virtually no lost produc-
tion time for setup changes or reprogramming:
(a) true or (b) false?
38.3.
The input/output relationship of a sensor is called
which one of the following: (a) analog, (b) con-
verter, (c) sensitivity, or (d) transfer function?
38.4.
A stepper motor is which one of the following types
of devices: (a) actuator, (b) interface device,
(c) pulse counter, or (d) sensor?
38.5.
A contact input interface is a device that reads
analog data into the computer from an external
source: (a) true of (b) false?
38.6.
A programmable logic controller normally replaces
which one of the following in control applications:
(a) computer numerical control, (b) distributed
process control, (c) humans, (d) industrial robots,
or (e) relay control panel?
38.7.
The standard coordinate system for numerical con-
trol machine tools is based on which one of the
following: (a) Cartesian coordinates, (b) cylindrical
coordinates, or (c) polar coordinates?
38.8.
Identify which of the following applications are
point-to-point and not continuous path operations
(three correct answers): (a) arc welding, (b)
drilling, (c) hole punching in sheet metal, (d) mill-
ing, (e) spot welding, and (f) turning?
38.9.
The ability of a positioning system to return to a
previously defined location is measured by which
one of the following terms: (a) accuracy, (b) control
resolution, or (c) repeatability?
38.10.
The APT command GORGTis which of the follow-
ing (two best answers): (a) continuous path com-
mand, (b) geometry statement involving a volume
of revolution about a central axis, (c) name of the
humanoid in the latest Star Wars movie, (d) point-
to-point command, and (e) tool path command in
which the tool must go right in the next move?
38.11.
The arm-and-body of a robot manipulator gener-
ally performs which one of the following functions
in an application: (a) holds the end effector, (b)
orients the end effector within the work volume, or
(c) positions the wrist within the work volume?
38.12.
A SCARA robot is normally associated with which
one of the following applications: (a) arc welding,
(b) assembly, (c) inspection, (d) machine loading
and unloading, or (e) resistance welding?
38.13.
In robotics, spray-painting applications are classi-
fied as which of the following: (a) continuous path
operation or (b) point-to-point operation?
38.14.
Which of the following are characteristics of work
situations that tend to promote the substitution of a
robot in place of a human worker (three best
answers): (a) frequent job changeovers, (b) hazard-
ous work environment, (c) repetitive work cycle,
(d) multiple work shifts, and (e) task requires
mobility?
PROBLEMS
Open-Loop Positioning Systems
38.1.
A leadscrew with a 7.5 mm pitch drives a worktable
in a numerical control positioning system. The lead-
screw is powered by a stepping motor which has 200
step angles. The worktable is programmed to move
a distance of 120 mm from its present position at a
travel speed of 300 mm/min. Determine (a) the
number of pulses required to move the table the
specified distance and (b) the required motor speed
and pulse rate to achieve the desired table speed.
38.2.
Referring to Problem 38.1, the mechanical inaccu-
racies in the open-loop positioning system can be
described by a normal distribution whose standard
deviation ¼ 0.005 mm. The range of the worktable
axis is 500 mm, and there are 12 bits in the binary
register used by the digital controller to store the
programmed position. For the positioning system,
determine (a) control resolution, (b) accuracy, and
(c) repeatability. (d) What is the minimum number
of bits that the binary register should have so that
the mechanical drive system becomes the limiting
component on control resolution?
38.3.
A stepping motor has 200 step angles. Its output
shaft is directly coupled to leadscrew with pitch ¼
0.250 in. A worktable is driven by the leadscrew.
The table must move a distance of 5.00 in from its
present position at a travel speed of 20.0 in/min.
Determine (a) the number of pulses required to
move the table the specified distance and (b) the
required motor speed and pulse rate to achieve the
specified table speed.
914
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

38.4.
A stepping motor with 100 step angles is coupled to a
leadscrew through a gear reduction of 9:1 (9 rotations
of the motor for each rotation of the leadscrew). The
leadscrew has 5 threads/in. The worktable driven by
the leadscrew must move a distance ¼ 10.00 in at a
feed rate of 30.0 in/min. Determine (a) number of
pulses required to move the table, and (b) the re-
quired motor speed and pulse rate to achieve the
desired table speed.
38.5.
The drive unit for a positioning table is driven by a
leadscrew directly coupled to the output shaft of a
stepping motor. The pitch of the leadscrew ¼ 0.18
in. The table must have a linear speed ¼ 35 in/min,
and a positioning accuracy ¼ 0.001 in. Mechanical
errors in the motor, leadscrew, and table connec-
tion are characterized by a normal distribution with
standard deviation ¼ 0.0002 in. Determine (a) the
minimum number of step angles in the stepping
motor to achieve the accuracy, (b) the associated
step angle, and (c) the frequency of the pulse train
required to drive the table at the desired speed.
38.6.
The positioning table for a component insertion
machine uses a stepping motor and leadscrew
mechanism. The design specifications require a
table speed of 40 in/min and an accuracy ¼ 0.0008
in. The pitch of the leadscrew ¼ 0.2 in, and the
gear ratio ¼ 2:1 (two turns of the motor for each
turn of the leadscrew). The mechanical errors in
the motor, gear box, leadscrew, and table con-
nection are characterized by a normal distribu-
tion
with
standard
deviation
¼
0.0001
in.
Determine (a) the minimum number of step
angles in the stepping motor, and (b) the fre-
quency of the pulse train required to drive the
table at the desired maximum speed.
38.7.
The drive unit of a positioning table for a compo-
nent insertion machine is based on a stepping
motor and leadscrew mechanism. The specifica-
tions are for the table speed to be 25 mm/s over
a 600 mm range and for the accuracy to be 0.025
mm. The pitch of the leadscrew ¼ 4.5 mm, and the
gear ratio ¼ 5:1 (five turns of the motor for each
turn of the leadscrew). The mechanical errors in
the motor, gear box, leadscrew, and table connec-
tion are characterized by a normal distribution with
standard deviation ¼ 0.005 mm. Determine (a) the
minimum number of step angles in the stepping
motor, and (b) the frequency of the pulse train
required to drive the table at the desired maximum
speed for the stepping motor in part (a).
38.8.
The two axes of an x-y positioning table are each
driven by a stepping motor connected to a leadscrew
with a 10:1 gear reduction. The step angle on each
stepping motor is 7.5. Each leadscrew has a pitch ¼
5.0 mm and provides an axis range ¼ 300.0 mm.
There are 16 bits in each binary register used by the
controller to store position data for the two axes.
(a) What is the control resolution of each axis?
(b) What are the required rotational speeds and
corresponding pulse train frequencies of each step-
ping motor in order to drive the table at 600 mm/
min in a straight line from point (25,25) to point
(100,150)? Ignore acceleration.
38.9.
The y-axis of an x-y positioning table is driven by a
stepping motor that is connected to a leadscrew
with a 3:1 gear reduction (three turns of the motor
for each turn of the leadscrew). The stepping motor
has 72 step angles. The leadscrew has 5 threads/in
and provides an axis range ¼ 30.0 in. There are 16
bits in each binary register used by the controller to
store position data for the axis. (a) What is the
control resolution of the y-axis? Determine (b) the
required rotational speed of the y-axis stepping
motor and (c) the corresponding pulse train fre-
quency to drive the table in a straight line from
point (x ¼ 20 in, y ¼ 25 in) to point (x ¼ 4.5 in, y ¼
7.5 in) in exactly 30 sec. Ignore acceleration.
38.10.
The two axes of an x-y positioning table are each
driven by a stepping motor connected to a lead-
screw with a 4:1 gear reduction. The number of step
angles on each stepping motor is 200. Each lead-
screw has a pitch ¼ 5.0 mm and provides an axis
range ¼ 400.0 mm. There are 16 bits in each binary
register used by the controller to store position
data for the two axes. (a) What is the control
resolution of each axis? (b) What are the required
rotational speeds and corresponding pulse train
frequencies of each stepping motor in order to
drive the table at 600 mm/min in a straight line
from point (25,25) to point (300,150)? Ignore
acceleration.
Closed-Loop Positioning Systems
38.11.
A numerical control (NC) machine tool table is
powered by a servomotor, leadscrew, and optical
encoder. The leadscrew has a pitch ¼ 5.0 mm and is
connected to the motor shaft with a gear ratio of
16:1 (16 turns of the motor for each turn of the
leadscrew). The optical encoder is connected
directly to the leadscrew and generates 200 pulses/
rev of the leadscrew. The table must move a dis-
tance ¼ 100 mm at a feed rate ¼ 500 mm/min.
Determine (a) the pulse count received by the
control system to verify that the table has moved
exactly 100 mm; and (b) the pulse rate and (c)
Problems
915

motor speed that correspond to the feed rate of 500
mm/min.
38.12.
The worktable of a numerical control machine tool
is driven by a closed-loop positioning system which
consists of a servomotor, leadscrew, and optical
encoder. The leadscrew has 4 threads/in and is
coupled directly to the motor shaft (gear ratio ¼
1:1). The optical encoder generates 200 pulses per
motor revolution. The table has been programmed
to move a distance of 7.5 in at a feed rate ¼ 20.0 in/
min. (a) How many pulses are received by the
control system to verify that the table has moved
the programmed distance? What are (b) the pulse
rate and (c) motor speed that correspond to the
specified feed rate?
38.13.
A leadscrew coupled directly to a dc servomotor is
used to drive one of the table axes of an NC milling
machine. The leadscrew has 5 threads/in. The opti-
cal encoder attached to the leadscrew emits 100
pulses/rev of the leadscrew. The motor rotates at a
maximum speed of 800 rev/min. Determine (a) the
control resolution of the system, expressed in linear
travel distance of the table axis; (b) the frequency
of the pulse train emitted by the optical encoder
when the servomotor operates at maximum speed;
and (c) the travel speed of the table at the maxi-
mum rpm of the motor.
38.14.
Solve the previous problem only the servomotor is
connected to the leadscrew through a gear box
whose reduction ratio ¼ 12:1 (12 revolutions of
the motor for each revolution of the leadscrew).
38.15.
A leadscrew connected directly to a DC servo-
motor is the drive system for a positioning table.
The leadscrew pitch ¼ 4 mm. The optical encoder
attached to the leadscrew emits 250 pulses/rev of
the leadscrew. Determine (a) the control resolution
of the system, expressed in linear travel distance of
the table axis, (b) the frequency of the pulse train
emitted by the optical encoder when the servo-
motor operates at 14 rev/s, and (c) the travel speed
of the table at the operating speed of the motor.
38.16.
A milling operation is performed on an NC machin-
ing center. Total travel distance ¼ 300 mm in a
direction parallel to one of the axes of the worktable.
Cutting speed ¼ 1.25 m/s and chip load ¼ 0.05 mm.
The end milling cutter has four teeth and its diameter
¼ 20.0 mm. The axis uses a DC servomotor whose
output shaft is coupled to a leadscrew with pitch ¼
6.0 mm. The feedback sensing device connected to
the leadscrew is an optical encoder that emits 250
pulses per revolution. Determine (a) feed rate and
time to complete the cut, and (b) rotational speed of
the motor and the pulse rate of the encoder at the
feed rate indicated.
38.17.
An end milling operation is carried out along a
straight line path that is 325 mm long. The cut is in a
direction parallel to the x-axis on an NC machining
center. Cutting speed ¼ 30 m/min and chip load ¼
0.06 mm. The end milling cutter has two teeth and
its diameter ¼ 16.0 mm. The x-axis uses a DC
servomotor connected directly to a leadscrew
whose pitch ¼ 6.0 mm. The feedback sensing
device is an optical encoder that emits 400 pulses
per revolution. Determine (a) feed rate and time to
complete the cut, and (b) rotational speed of the
motor and the pulse rate of the encoder at the feed
rate indicated.
38.18.
A DC servomotor drives the x-axis of a NC milling
machine table. The motor is coupled to the table lead
screw using a 4:1 gear reduction (four turns of the
motor for each turn of the lead screw). The lead
screw pitch ¼ 6.25 mm. An optical encoder is con-
nected to the lead screw. The optical encoder emits
500 pulses per revolution. To execute a certain pro-
grammed instruction, the table must move from
point (x ¼ 87.5 mm, y ¼ 35.0) to point (x ¼ 25.0
mm, y ¼ 180.0 mm) in a straight-line trajectory at a
feed rate ¼ 200 mm/min. Determine (a) the control
resolution of the system for the x-axis only, (b) the
corresponding rotational speed of the motor, and (c)
frequency of the pulse train emitted by the optical
encoder at the desired feed rate.
38.19.
A DC servomotor drives the y-axis of a NC milling
machine table. The motor is coupled to the table
lead screw with a gear reduction of 2:1 (two turns of
the motor shaft for each single rotation of the lead
screw). There are 2 threads/cm in the lead screw.
An optical encoder is directly connected to the lead
screw (1:1 gear ratio). The optical encoder emits
100 pulses per revolution. To execute a certain
programmed instruction, the table must move
from point (x ¼ 25.0 mm, y ¼ 28.0) to point (x
¼ 155.0 mm, y ¼ 275.0 mm) in a straight-line
trajectory at a feed rate ¼ 200 mm/min. For the
y-axis only, determine: (a) the control resolution of
the mechanical system, (b) rotational speed of the
motor, and (c) frequency of the pulse train emitted
by the optical encoder at the desired feed rate.
Industrial Robotics
38.20.
The largest axis of a Cartesian coordinate robot has
a total range of 750 mm. It is driven by pulley
system capable of a mechanical accuracy ¼ 0.25
mm and repeatability ¼ 0.15 mm. Determine the
minimum number of bits required in the binary
register for the axis in the robot’s control memory.
916
Chapter 38/Automation Technologies for Manufacturing Systems

38.21.
A stepper motor serves as the drive unit for the
linear joint of an industrial robot. The joint must
have an accuracy of 0.25 mm. The motor is attached
to a leadscrew through a 2:1 gear reduction (two
turns of the motor for one turn of the leadscrew).
The pitch of the leadscrew is 5.0 mm. The mechan-
ical errors in the system (due to backlash of the
leadscrew and the gear reducer) can be repre-
sented by a normal distribution with standard
deviation ¼ 0.05 mm. Specify the number of
step angles that the motor must have in order to
meet the accuracy requirement.
38.22.
The designer of a polar configuration robot is
considering a portion of the manipulator consisting
of a rotational joint connected to its output link.
The output link is 25 in long and the rotational joint
has a range of 75. The accuracy of the joint–link
combination, expressed as a linear measure at the
end of the link which results from rotating the joint,
is specified as 0.030 in. The mechanical inaccura-
cies of the joint result in a repeatability error
¼ 0.030 of rotation. It is assumed that the link
is perfectly rigid, so there are no additional errors
due to deflection. (a) Show that the specified
accuracy can be achieved, given the repeatability
error. (b) Determine the minimum number of bits
required in the binary register of the robot’s con-
trol memory to achieve the specified accuracy.
Problems
917

39
INTEGRATED
MANUFACTURING
SYSTEMS
Chapter Contents
39.1
Material Handling
39.2
Fundamentals of Production Lines
39.2.1
Methods of Work Transport
39.2.2
Product Variations
39.3
Manual Assembly Lines
39.3.1
Cycle Time Analysis
39.3.2
Line Balancing and Repositioning
Losses
39.4
Automated Production Lines
39.4.1
Types of Automated Lines
39.4.2
Analysis of Automated Production
Lines
39.5
Cellular Manufacturing
39.5.1
Part Families
39.5.2
Machine Cells
39.6
Flexible Manufacturing Systems and Cells
39.6.1
Integrating the FMS Components
39.6.2
Applications of Flexible
Manufacturing Systems
39.7
Computer Integrated Manufacturing
The manufacturing systems discussed in this chapter consist
of multiple workstations and/or machines whose operations
are integrated by means of a material handling subsystem
that moves parts or products between stations. In addition,
mostofthesesystemsusecomputercontroltocoordinatethe
actions of the stations and material handling equipment and
to collect data on overall system performance. Thus, the
components of an integrated manufacturing system are
(1) workstationsand/ormachines,(2) materialhandlingequip-
ment,and(3)computer control. In addition,human workers
are required to manage the system, and workers may be
used to operate the individual workstations and machines.
Integrated manufacturing systems include manual and
automated production lines, manufacturing cells (from
which the term ‘‘cellular manufacturing’’ is derived), and
flexible manufacturing systems, all of which are described in
this chapter. In the final section we define computer inte-
grated manufacturing (CIM), the ultimate integrated man-
ufacturing system. Let us begin by providing a concise
overview of material handling, the physical integrator in
integrated manufacturing systems.
39.1
MATERIAL HANDLING
Material handling is defined as ‘‘the movement, storage,
protection and control of materials throughout the manufac-
turing and distribution process’’1 The term is usually associ-
ated with activities that occur inside a facility, as contrasted
with transportation between facilities that involves rail, truck,
air, or waterway delivery of goods.
Materials must be moved during the sequence of man-
ufacturing operations that convert them into final product.
1This definition is published each year in the Annual Report of the
Material Handling Industry of America (MHIA), the trade association
for material handling companies doing business in North America.
918

Materialhandlingfunctionsinmanufacturinginclude(1)loadingand positioning work units
at each workstation, (2) unloading work units from the station, and (3) transporting work
units between workstations. Loading involves moving the work units into the production
machine from a location inclose proximityto or within the workstation. Positioning means
locating the work units in a fixed orientation relative to the processing or assembly
operation. At the end of the operation, the work units are unloaded or removed from the
station. Loading and unloading are accomplished manually or by automated devices such
as industrial robots. If the manufacturing operations require multiple workstations, then
the units must be transported from one station to the next in the sequence. In many cases, a
temporary storage function must also be provided by the material handling system, as
work units await their turn ateach workstation. The purpose of storage in this instance is to
make sure that work is always present at each station, so that idle time of workers and
equipment is avoided.
Material handling equipment and methods used in manufacturing can be divided
into the following general categories: (1) material transport, (2) storage, and (3) unitizing.
Material transport equipment is used to move parts and materials between work-
stations in the factory. This movement may include intermediate stops for temporary storage
of work-in-process. There are five main types of material transport equipment: (1) industrial
trucks, the most important of which are fork lift trucks, (2) automated guided vehicles,
(3) rail-guided vehicles, (4) conveyors, and (5) hoists and cranes. This equipment is briefly
described in Table 39.1.
Two general categories of material transport equipment can be distinguished,
according to the type of routing between workstations: fixed and variable. In fixed routing,
all of the work units are moved through the same sequence of stations. This implies that the
processing sequence required on all work units is either identical or very similar. Fixed
routing is used on manual assembly lines and automated production lines. Typical material
handling equipment used in fixed routing includes conveyors and rail-guided vehicles. In
variable routing, different work units are moved through different workstation sequences,
meaning that the manufacturing system processes or assembles different types of parts or
products. Manufacturing cells and flexible manufacturing systems usually operate this way.
Typical handling equipmentfound in variable routing includesindustrial trucks, automated
guided vehicles, and hoists and cranes.
Storage systems in factories are used for temporary storage of raw materials, work-in-
process, and finished products. Storage systems can be classified into two general categories:
TABLE 39.1
Five types of material transport equipment.
Type
Description
Typical Production Applications
Industrial trucks
Powered trucks include fork lift trucks as in
Figure 39.1(a). Hand trucks include
wheeled platforms and dollies
Movement of pallet and container loads in
factories and warehouses. Hand trucks used
for small loads over short distances
Automated guided
vehicles
Independently operated, self-propelled
vehicles guided along defined pathways,
as in Figure 39.1(b). Powered by on-board
batteries
Movement of parts and products in assembly
lines and flexible manufacturing systems
Rail-guided
vehicles
Motorized vehicles guided by a fixed rail
system. Powered by electrified rail
Monorails used for overhead delivery of large
components and subassemblies
Conveyors
Apparatus to move items along fixed path
using chain, moving belt, rollers (Figure
39.1(c), or other mechanical drive
Movement of large quantities of items between
specific locations. Movement of product on
production lines
Hoists and cranes
Apparatus used for vertical lifting (hoists)
and horizontal movement (cranes)
Lifting and transporting heavy materials and
loads
Section 39.1/Material Handling
919

(1) conventional storage methods and equipment, which include bulk storage in an open
area, rack systems, and shelves; and (2) automated storage systems, which include rack
systems served by automatic cranes that store and retrieve pallet loads.
Finally, unitizing refers to containers used to hold individual items during transport
and storage, as well as equipment used to make up such unit loads. Containers include
pallets, tote pans, boxes, and baskets that hold parts during handling. Unitizing equipment
includes palletizers that are used to load and stack cartons onto pallets and depalletizers
that are used to accomplish the unloading operation. Palletizers and depalletizers are
generally associated with cartons of finished product leaving a facility and boxes of raw
materials coming into the facility, respectively.
In Section 1.4.1, we described four types of plant layout: (1) fixed position layout,
(2) process layout, (3) cellular layout, and (4) product layout. In general, different types of
material handling methods and equipment are associated with these four types, as
summarized in Table 39.2.
39.2
FUNDAMENTALS OF PRODUCTION LINES
Production lines are an important class of manufacturing system when large quantities of
identicalorsimilarproductsaretobemade.Theyaresuitedtosituationswherethetotalwork
to be performed on the product or part consists of many separate steps. Examples include
TABLE 39.2
Types of material handling methods and systems generally associated with the four types of plant
layout.
Layout Type
Features
Typical Methods and Equipment
Fixed-position
Product is large and heavy, low production rates
Cranes, hoists, fork lift trucks
Process
Medium and hard product variety, low and
medium production rates
Fork lift trucks, automated guided vehicles,
manual loading at workstations
Cellular
Soft product variety, medium production rates
Conveyors, manual handling for loading and
moving between stations
Product
No product variety or soft product variety, high
production rates
Conveyors for product flow, fork lift trucks or
automated guided vehicles to deliver parts to
stations
FIGURE 39.1
Several
types of material
handling equipment:
(a) fork lift truck, (b) auto-
matedguidedvehicle,and
(c) roller conveyor.
Deck for
unit loads
Bumper
Drive
wheels
Rolls
Frame
(c)
(a)
Fork carriage
Forks
Mast
Overhead safety
guard
(b)
920
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

assembled products (e.g., automobiles and appliances) and mass-produced machined parts
on which multiple machining operations are required (e.g., engine blocks and transmission
housings). In a production line, the total work is divided into small tasks, and workers or
machines perform these tasks with great efficiency. For purposes of organization we divide
production lines into two basic types: manual assembly lines and automated production lines.
However, hybrid lines consisting of both manual and automated operations are not
uncommon. Before examining these particular systems, let us consider some of the general
issues involved in production line design and operation.
A production line consists of a series of workstations arranged so that the product
moves from one station to the next, and at each location a portion of the total work is
performed on it, as depicted in Figure 39.2. The production rate of the line is limited by its
sloweststation.Workstationswhosepaceisfasterthantheslowestwillultimatelybelimited
by that bottleneck station. Transfer of the product along the line is usually accomplished by
a conveyor system or mechanical transfer device, although some manual lines simply pass
the product from worker to worker by hand. Production lines are associated with mass
production. If the product quantities are high and the work can be divided into separate
tasks that can be assigned to individual workstations, then a production line is the most
appropriate manufacturing system.
39.2.1 METHODS OF WORK TRANSPORT
There are various ways of moving work units from one workstation to the next. The two
basic categories are manual and mechanized.
Manual Methods of Work Transport
Manual methods involve passing the work
units between stations by hand. These methods are associated with manual assembly
lines. In some cases, the output of each station is collected in a box or tote pan; when the
box is full it is moved to the next station. This can result in a significant amount of in-
process inventory, which is undesirable. In other cases, work units are moved individually
along a flat table or unpowered conveyor (e.g., a roller conveyor). When the task is
finished at each station, the worker simply pushes the unit toward the downstream
station. Space is usually allowed for one or more units to collect between stations, thereby
relaxing the requirement for all workers to perform their respective tasks in sync. One
problem associated with manual methods of work transport is the difficulty in controlling
the production rate on the line. Workers tend to work at a slower pace unless some
mechanical means of pacing them is provided.
Mechanized Methods of Work Transport
Powered mechanical systems are com-
monlyused tomoveworkunits along a production line. These systems include lift-and-carry
devices, pick-and-place mechanisms, powered conveyors (e.g., overhead chain conveyors,
belt conveyors, and chain-in-floor conveyors), and other material handling equipment,
FIGURE 39.2
General
conﬁguration of a
production line.
Workpart transport system
Partially completed work units
Starting work units
Stations:
1
2
3
n – 1
n
Finished parts
or products
Workstations
Section 39.2/Fundamentals of Production Lines
921

sometimes combining several types on the same line. Three major types of work transfer
systemsareusedonproductionlines:(1) continuous transfer, (2) synchronous transfer, and
(3) asynchronous transfer.
Continuoustransfersystemsconsistofacontinuouslymovingconveyorthatoperatesat
aconstantvelocity.Thecontinuoustransfersystemismostcommononmanualassemblylines.
Twocasesaredistinguished:(1)partsarefixedtotheconveyorand(2)partscanberemoved
fromtheconveyor. Inthefirstcase,theproductisusuallylargeandheavy(e.g.,automobile,
washing machine) and cannot be removed from the line. The worker must therefore walk
along with the moving conveyor to complete the assigned task for that unit while it is in the
station. In the second case, the product is small enough that it can be removed from the
conveyor to facilitate the work at each station. Some of the pacing benefits are lost in this
arrangement, since each worker is not required to finish the assigned tasks within a fixed
time period. On the other hand, this case allows greater flexibility to each worker to deal
with any technical problems that may be encountered on a particular work unit.
Insynchronoustransfersystems,workunitsaresimultaneouslymovedbetweenstations
with a quick, discontinuous motion. These systems are also known by the name intermittent
transfer, which characterizes the type of motion experienced by the work units. Synchronous
transferincludespositioningoftheworkatthestations,whichisarequirementforautomated
lines that use this mode of transfer. Synchronous transfer is not common for manual lines,
becausethetaskateachandeverystationmustbefinishedwithinthecycletimeortheproduct
will leave the station as an incomplete unit. This rigid pacing discipline is stressful to human
workers. By contrast, this type of pacing lends itself to automated operation.
Asynchronous transfer allows each work unit to depart its current station when
processing has been completed. Each unit moves independently, rather than synchro-
nously. Thus, at any given moment, some units on the line are moving between stations,
while others are positioned at stations. Associated with the operation of an asynchronous
transfer system is the tactical use of queues between stations. Small queues of work units
are permitted to form in front of each station, so that variations in worker task times will be
averaged and stations will always have work waiting for them. Asynchronous transfer is
used for both manual and automated production systems.
39.2.2 PRODUCT VARIATIONS
Production lines can be designed to cope with variations in product models. Three types of
line can be distinguished: (1) single model line, (2) batch model line, and (3) mixed model
line. A single model line is one that produces only one model, and there is no variation in
the model. Thus, the tasks performed at each station are the same on all product units.
Batch model and mixed model lines are designed to produce two or more different
product models on the same line, but they use different approaches for dealing with the
model variations. As its name suggests, a batch model line produces each model in batches.
The workstations are set up to produce the desired quantity of the first model; then the
stations are reconfigured to produce the desired quantity of the next model; and so on.
Production time is lost between batches due to the setup changes. Assembled products are
often made using this approach when the demand for each product is medium and the
product variety is also medium. The economics in this case favor the use of one production
line for several products rather than using many separate lines for each model.
A mixed model line also produces multiple models; however, the models are
intermixed on the same line rather than being produced in batches. While a particular
model is being worked on at one station, a different model is being processed at the next
station. Each station is equipped with the necessary tools and is sufficiently versatile to
perform the variety of tasks needed to produce any model that moves through it. Many
consumer products are assembled on mixedmodel lineswhen the levelof product variety is
922
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

soft. Prime examples are automobiles and major appliances, which are characterized by
variations in models and options.
39.3
MANUAL ASSEMBLY LINES
The manual assembly line was an important development in integrated manufacturing
systems. It is of global importance today in the manufacture of assembled products
including automobiles and trucks, consumer electronic products, appliances, power tools,
and other products made in large quantities.
A manual assembly line consists of multiple workstations arranged sequentially, at
which assembly operations are performed by human workers, as in Figure 39.3. The usual
procedureona manual linebegins with ‘‘launching’’ a base part ontothe front endof theline.
Awork carrier is often required to hold the part during its movement along the line. The base
parttravelsthrougheachofthestationswhereworkersperformtasksthatprogressivelybuild
theproduct.Componentsareaddedtothebasepartateachstation,sothatalltaskshavebeen
completed when the product exits the final station. Processes accomplished on manual
assembly lines include mechanical fastening operations (Chapter 32), spot welding (Section
30.2), hand soldering (Section 31.2), and adhesive joining (Section 31.3).
39.3.1 CYCLE TIME ANALYSIS
Equations can be developed to determine the required number of workers and work-
stations on a manual assembly line to meet a given annual demand. Suppose the problem is
to design a single model line to satisfy annual demand for a certain product. Management
must decide how many shifts per week the line will operate and the number of hours per
shift. If we assume 50 weeks per year, then the required hourly production rate of the line
will be given by
Rp ¼
Da
50SwHsh
ð39:1Þ
FIGURE 39.3
A portion
of a manual assembly
line. Each worker
performs a task at his/her
workstation. A conveyor
moves parts on work
carriers from one station
to the next.
Section 39.3/Manual Assembly Lines
923

where Rp ¼ the actual average production rate, units/hr; Da ¼ annual demand for the
product, units/yr; Sw ¼ number of shifts/wk; and Hsh ¼ hr/shift. If the line operates 52 weeks
rather than 50, then Rp ¼ Da/52SwHsh. The corresponding average production time per unit
is the reciprocal of Rp
Tp ¼ 60
Rp
ð39:2Þ
where Tp ¼ actual average production time, converted to minutes.
Unfortunately, the line may not be able to operate for the entire time given by 50
SwHsh, because of lost time due to reliability problems. These reliability problems include
mechanical and electrical failures, tools wearing out, power outages, and similar malfunc-
tions. Accordingly, the line must operate at a faster time than Tp to compensate for these
problems. If E ¼ line efficiency, which is the proportion of uptime on the line, then the cycle
time of the line Tc is given by
Tc ¼ ETp ¼ 60E
Rp
ð39:3Þ
Anyproductcontainsacertainworkcontentthatrepresentsallofthetasksthat are to
be accomplished on the line. This work content requires an amount of time called the work
content time Twc. This is the total time required to make the product on the line. If we
assume that the work content time can be divided evenly among the workers, so that every
worker has anequalworkloadwhose time toperformequals Tc, then theminimumpossible
number of workers wmin in the line can be determined as
wmin ¼ Minimum Integer  Twc
Tc
ð39:4Þ
If each worker is assigned to a separate workstation, then the number of workstations is
equal to the number of workers; that is nmin ¼ wmin.
There are two practical reasons why this minimum number of workers cannot be
achieved: (1) imperfect balancing, in which some workers are assigned an amount of work
that requires less time than Tc, and this inefficiency increases the total number of workers
needed on the line; and (2) repositioning losses, in which some time is lost at each station
to reposition the work or the worker, so that the service time actually available at each
station is less than Tc, and this will also increase the number of workers on the line.
39.3.2 LINE BALANCING AND REPOSITIONING LOSSES
One of the biggest technical problems in designing and operating a manual assembly line is
line balancing. This is the problem of assigning tasks to individual workers so that all workers
haveanequalamountofwork.Recallthattheentiretyofworktobeaccomplishedontheline
is given by the work content. This total work content can be divided into minimum rational
work elements, each element concerned with adding a component or joining them or
performing some other small portion of the total work content. The notion of a minimum
rational work element is that it is the smallest practical amount of work into which the total
job can be divided. Different work elements require different times, and when they are
grouped into logical tasks and assigned to workers, the task times will not be equal. Thus,
simplyduetothevariablenatureofelementtimes,someworkerswillendupwithmorework,
while other workers will have less. The cycle time of the assembly line is determined by the
station with the longest task time.
One might think that although the work element times are different, it should be
possible to find groups of elements whose sums (task times) are nearly equal, if not
924
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

perfectly equal. What makes it difficult to find suitable groups is that there are several
constraints on this combinatorial problem. First, the line must be designed to achieve some
desired production rate, which establishes the cycle time Tc at which the line must operate,
as provided by Eq. (39.3). Therefore, the sum of the work element times assigned to each
station must be less than or equal to Tc.
Second, there are restrictions on the order in which the work elements can be
performed. Some elements must be done before others. For example, a hole must be drilled
before it can be tapped. A screw that will use the tapped hole to attach a mating component
cannot be fastened before the hole has been drilled and tapped. These kinds of requirements
on the work sequence are called precedence constraints. They complicate the line balancing
problem. A certain element that might be allocated to a worker to obtain a task time ¼ Tc
cannot be added because it violates a precedence constraint.
These and other limitations make it virtually impossible to achieve perfect balancing of
the line, which means that some workers will require more time to complete their tasks than
others. Methods of solving the line balancing problem, that is, allocating work elements to
stations, are discussed in other references—excellent references indeed, such as [10]. The
inabilitytoachieveperfectbalancingresultsinsomeidletimeatmoststations.Becauseofthis
idletime,theactualnumberofworkersrequiredonthelinewillbegreaterthanthenumberof
workstations given by Eq. (39.4).
A measure of the total idle time on a manual assembly line is given by the balancing
efficiencyEb,definedasthetotalworkcontenttimedividedbythetotalavailableservicetime
on the line. The total work content time is equal to the sum of the times of all work elements
that are to be accomplished on the line. The total available service time on the line ¼ wTs,
wherew¼ numberofworkersontheline;andTs¼ thelongestservicetimeontheline;thatis,
Ts ¼ Max{Tsi} for i ¼ 1, 2, . . . n, where Tsi ¼ the service time (task time) at station i, min.
The reader may wonder why we are using a new term Ts rather than the previously
defined cycle time Tc. The reason is that there is another time loss in the operation of a
production line in addition to idle time from imperfect balancing. Let us call it the
repositioning time Tr. It is the time required in each cycle to reposition the worker, or
the work unit, or both. On a continuous transfer line where work units are attached to the
line and move at a constant speed, Tr is the time taken by the worker to walk from the unit
just completed to the next unit coming into the station. In all manual assembly lines, there
will be some lost time due to repositioning. We assume that Tr is the same for all workers,
although in fact repositioning may require different times at different stations. We can relate
Ts, Tc, and Tr as follows:
Tc ¼ Ts þ Tr
ð39:5Þ
The definition of balancing efficiency Eb can now be written in equation form as follows:
Eb ¼ Twc
wTs
ð39:6Þ
A perfect line balance yields a value of Eb ¼ 1.00. Typical line balancing efficiencies in
industry range between 0.90 and 0.95.
Equation (39.6) can be rearranged to obtain the actual number of workers required
on a manual assembly line:
w ¼ Minimum Integer  Twc
TsEb
ð39:7Þ
The utility of this relationship suffers from the fact that the balancing efficiency Eb depends
on w in Eq. (39.6). Unfortunately, we have an equation where the thing to be determined
depends on a parameter that, in turn, depends on the thing itself. Notwithstanding this
drawback, Eq. (39.7) defines the relationship among the parameters in a manual assembly
Section 39.3/Manual Assembly Lines
925

line.UsingatypicalvalueofEbbasedonsimilarpreviouslines,itcanbeusedtoestimatethe
number of workers required to produce a given assembly.
Example 39.1
Manual Assembly
Line
A manual assembly line is being planned for a product whose annual demand ¼ 90,000
units. A continuously moving conveyor will be used with work units attached. Work
content time ¼ 55 min. The line will run 50 wk/yr, 5 shifts/wk, and 8 hr/day. Each worker
will be assigned to a separate workstation. Based on previous experience, assume line
efficiency ¼ 0.95, balancing efficiency ¼ 0.93, and repositioning time ¼ 9 sec. Determine
(a) hourly production rate to meet demand, (b) number of workers and workstations
required, and (c) for comparison, the ideal minimum value as given by wmin as given by
Eq. (39.4).
Solution:
(a) Hourly production rate required to meet annual demand is given by
Eq. (39.1):
Rp ¼ 90; 000
50(5)(8) ¼ 45 units=hr
(b) With a line efficiency of 0.95, the ideal cycle time is
Tc ¼ 60(0:95)
45
¼ 1:2667 min
Given that repositioning time Tr ¼ 9 sec ¼ 0.15 min, the service time is
Ts ¼ 1:2667  0:150 ¼ 1:1167 min
Workers required to operate the line, by Eq. (39.7) equals
w ¼ Minimum Integer 
55
1:1167(0:93) ¼ 52:96 ! 53 workers
With one worker per station, n ¼ 53 workstations.
(c) This compares with the ideal minimum number of workers given by Eq. (39.4):
wmin ¼ Minimum Integer 
55
1:2667 ¼ 43:42 ! 44 workers
It is clear that lost time due to repositioning and imperfect line balancing take their toll in
the overall efficiency of a manual assembly line.
n
Thenumberofworkstations onamanual assembly linedoes not necessarilyequalthe
numberof workers. Forlargeproducts, itmaybepossibletoassign morethan one worker to
a station. This practice is common in final assembly plants that build cars and trucks. For
example, two workers in a station might perform assembly tasks on opposite sides of the
vehicle. The number of workers in a given station is called the station manning level Mi.
Averaging the manning levels over the entire line,
M ¼ w
n
ð39:8Þ
where M ¼ average manning level for the assembly line; w ¼ number of workers on the line;
and n ¼ number of stations. Naturally, w and n must be integers. Multiple manning conserves
valuable floor space in the factory because it reduces the number of stations required.
Another factor that affects manning level on an assembly line is the number of
automated stations on the line, including stations that employ industrial robots (Section
38.4). Automation reduces the required labor force on the line, although it increases the
need for technically trained personnel to service and maintain the automated stations. The
926
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

automobile industry makes extensive use of robotic workstations to perform spot welding
and spray painting on sheet-metal car bodies. The robots accomplish these operations with
greater repeatability than human workers can, which translates into higher product quality.
39.4
AUTOMATED PRODUCTION LINES
Manual assembly lines generally use a mechanized transfer system to move parts between
workstations, but the stations themselves are operated by human workers. An automated
production line consists of automated workstations connected by a parts transfer system
that is coordinated with the stations. In the ideal, no human workers are on the line, except
to perform auxiliary functions such as tool changing, loading and unloading parts at the
beginning and end of the line, and repair and maintenance activities. Modern automated
lines are highly integrated systems, operating under computer control.
Operations performed by automated stations tend to be simpler than those per-
formed by humans on manual lines. The reason is that simpler tasks are easier to automate.
Operations that are difficult to automate are those requiring multiple steps, judgment, or
human sensory capability. Tasks that are easy to automate consist of single work elements,
quick actuating motions, and straight-line feed motions as in machining.
39.4.1 TYPES OF AUTOMATED LINES
Automated production lines can be divided into two basic categories: (1) those that
perform processing operations such as machining, and (2) those that perform assembly
operations. An important type in the processing category is the transfer line.
Transfer Lines and Similar Processing Systems
A transfer line consists of a
sequence of workstations that perform production operations, with automatic transfer
of work units between stations. Machining is the most common processing operation, as
depicted in Figure 39.4. Automatic transfer systems for sheet metalworking and assembly
are also available. In the case of machining, the workpiece typically starts as a metal
casting or forging, and a series of machining operations are performed to accomplish the
high-precision details (e.g., holes, threads, and finished flat surfaces).
FIGURE 39.4
A machining transfer line,
an important type of
automated production
line.
Section 39.4/Automated Production Lines
927

Transfer lines are usually expensive pieces of equipment, sometimes costing millions of
dollars; they aredesigned forhighpart quantities. The amount of machining accomplishedon
the workpart is often significant, but since the work is divided among many stations,
productionratesare high and unitcosts arelow compared toalternative productionmethods.
Synchronous transfer of work units between stations is commonly used on automated
machining lines.
Avariation of the automated transfer line is the dial indexing machine, Figure 39.5,
in which workstations are arranged around a circular worktable, called a dial. The work-
table is actuated by a mechanism that provides partial rotation of the table on each work
cycle. The number of rotational positions is designed to match the number of workstations
around the periphery of the table. Although the configuration of a dial-indexing machine is
quite different from a transfer line, its operation and application are quite similar.
Automated Assembly Systems
Automated assembly systems consist of one or more
workstations that perform assembly operations, such as adding components and/or affixing
them to the work unit. Automated assembly systems can be divided into single station cells
and multiple station systems. Single station assembly cells are often organized around an
industrial robot that has been programmed to perform a sequence of assembly steps. The
robot cannot work as fast as a series of specialized automatic stations, so single station cells
are used for jobs in the medium production range.
Multiple station assembly systems are appropriate for high production. They are
widely used formass production of small products such as ball-point pens, cigarette lighters,
flashlights, and similar items consisting of a limited number of components. The number of
components and assembly steps is limited because system reliability decreases rapidly with
increasing complexity.
Multiple station assembly systems are available in several configurations, pictured in
Figure39.6:(a)in-line,(b)rotary,and(c)carousel.Thein-lineconfigurationistheconventional
FIGURE 39.5
Conﬁguration of a
dial-indexing machine.
Workstations
Workstations
Rotary
transfer
table
In-line transfer
vc
(a)
(b)
(c)
Carousel
FIGURE 39.6
Three common conﬁgurations of multiple station assembly systems: (a) in-line, (b) rotary,
and (c) carousel.
928
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

transfer line adapted to perform assembly work. These systems are not as massive as their
machining counterparts. Rotary systems are usually implemented as dial indexing machines.
Carouselassemblysystemsarearrangedasaloop.Theycanbedesignedwithagreaternumber
ofworkstationsthanarotarysystem.Owingtotheloopconfiguration,thecarouselallowsthe
workcarrierstobeautomaticallyreturnedtothestartingpointforreuse,anadvantageshared
with rotary systems but not with transfer lines unless provision for their return is made in the
design.
39.4.2 ANALYSIS OF AUTOMATED PRODUCTION LINES
Line balancing is a problem on an automated line, just as it is on a manual assembly line.
The total work content must be allocated to individual workstations. However, since the
tasks assigned to automated stations are generally simpler, and the line often contains
fewer stations, the problem of defining what work should be done at each station is not as
difficult for an automated line as for a manual line.
Amoresignificantprobleminautomatedlinesisreliability.Thelineconsistsofmultiple
stations, interconnected by a work transfer system. It operates as an integrated system, and
when one station malfunctions, the entire system is adversely affected. To analyze the
operation of an automated production line, let us assume a system that performs processing
operations and uses synchronous transfer. This model includes transfer lines as well as dial
indexing machines. It does not include automated assembly systems, which require an
adaptationofthemodel[10].Ourterminologywillborrowsymbolsfromthefirsttwosections:
n ¼ number of workstations on the line; Tc ¼ ideal cycle time on the line; Tr ¼ repositioning
time, called the transfer time in a transfer line; and Tsi ¼ the service time at station i. The ideal
cycle time Tc is the service time (processing time) for the slowest station on the line plus the
transfer time; that is,
Tc ¼ Tr þ MaxfTsig
ð39:9Þ
In the operation of a transfer line, periodic breakdowns cause downtime on the entire
line. Let F ¼ frequency with which breakdowns occur, causing a line stoppage; and Td ¼
average time the line is down when a breakdown occurs. The downtime includes the time for
therepaircrewtoswingintoaction,diagnosethecauseofthefailure,fixit,andrestarttheline.
Based on these definitions, we can formulate the following expression for the actual
average production time Tp:
Tp ¼ Tc þ FTd
ð39:10Þ
where F ¼ downtime frequency, line stops/cycle; and Td ¼ downtime inminutes per line stop.
Thus, FTd ¼ average downtime per cycle. The actual average production rate Rp ¼ 60/Tp, as
previously given in Eq. (39.2). It is of interest to compare this rate with the ideal production
rate given by
Rc ¼ 60
Tc
ð39:11Þ
where Rp and Rc are expressed in pc/hr, given that Tp and Tc are expressed in minutes.
Based on these definitions, we can define the line efficiency E for a transfer line. In
the context of automated production systems, E refers to the proportion of uptime on the
line and is more a measure of reliability than efficiency:
E ¼
Tc
Tc þ FTd
ð39:12Þ
Section 39.4/Automated Production Lines
929

This is the same relationship as earlier Eq. (39.3), since Tp ¼ Tc þ FTd. It should be noted
that the same definition of line efficiency applies to manual assembly lines, except that
technological breakdowns are not as much of a problem on manual lines (human workers
are more reliable than electromechanical equipment, at least in the sense we are
discussing here).
Line downtime is usually associated with failures at individual workstations.
Reasons for downtime include scheduled and unscheduled tool changes, mechanical
and electrical malfunctions, hydraulic failures, and normal equipment wear. Let pi ¼
probability or frequency of a failure at station i, then
F ¼
X
n
i1
pi
ð39:13Þ
If all pi are assumed equal, or an average value of pi is computed, in either case calling it p,
then
F ¼ np
ð39:14Þ
Both of these equations clearly indicate that the frequency of line stops increases with the
number ofstationsontheline. Stated anotherway, reliability oftheline decreasesas weadd
more stations.
Example 39.2
Automated
Transfer Line
An automated transfer line has 20 stations and an ideal cycle time of 1.0 min. Probability of
a station failure is p ¼ 0.01, and the average downtime when a breakdown occurs is 10 min.
Determine (a) average production rate Rp and (b) line efficiency E.
Solution:
The frequency of breakdowns on the line is given by F ¼ pn ¼ 0.01(20) ¼ 0.20.
The actual average production time is therefore
Tp ¼ 1:0 þ 0:20(10) ¼ 3:0 min
(a) Production rate is therefore
Rp ¼ 60
Tp
¼ 60
3:0 ¼ 20 pc/hr
Note that this is far lower than the ideal production rate:
Rc ¼ 60
Tc
¼ 60
1:0 ¼ 60 pc/hr
(b) Line efficiency is computed as
E ¼ Tc
Tp
¼ 1:0
3:0 ¼ 0:333(or 33:3%)
Fromthisexampleweseethatifaproductionlineoperateslikethis,itspendsmoretimedown
than up. Achieving high efficiencies is a real problem in automated production lines.
n
The cost of operating an automated production line is the investment cost of the
equipment and installation, plus the cost of maintenance, utilities, and labor assigned
to the line. These costs are converted to an equivalent uniform annual cost and
divided by the number of hours of operation per year to provide an hourly rate. This
hourly cost rate can be used to figure the unit cost of processing a workpart on the
line
Cp ¼ CoTp
60
ð39:15Þ
930
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

where Cp ¼ unit processing cost, $/part; Co ¼ hourly rate of operating the line, as defined
above, $/hr; Tp ¼ actual average production time per workpart, min/part; and the
constant 60 converts the hourly cost rate to $/min for consistency of units.
39.5
CELLULAR MANUFACTURING
Cellular manufacturing refers to the use of work cells that specialize in the production of
families of parts or products made in medium quantities. Parts (and products) in this
quantity range are traditionally made in batches, and batch production requires downtime
forsetupchangeoversandhashighinventorycarryingcosts.Cellularmanufacturingisbased
on an approach called group technology (GT), which minimizes the disadvantages of batch
productionbyrecognizingthatalthoughthepartsaredifferent,theyalsopossesssimilarities.
When these similarities are exploited in production, operating efficiencies are improved.
The improvement is typically achieved by organizing the production around manufacturing
cells. Each cell is designed to produce one part family (or a limited number of part families),
thereby following the principle of specialization of operations. The cell includes special
production equipment and custom-designed tools and fixtures, so that the production of the
part families can be optimized. In effect, each cell becomes a factory within the factory.
39.5.1 PART FAMILIES
A central feature of cellular manufacturing and group technology is the part family. A part
family is a group of parts that possess similarities in geometric shape and size, or in the
processing steps used in their manufacture. It is not unusual for a factory that produces 10,000
different parts to be able to group most of those parts into 20 to 30 part families. In each part
familytheprocessingstepsaresimilar.Therearealwaysdifferencesamongpartsinafamily,but
thesimilaritiesarecloseenoughthatthepartscanbegroupedintothesamefamily.Figures39.7
and39.8showtwodifferentpartfamilies.ThepartsshowninFigure39.7havethesamesizeand
shape; however, their processing requirements are quite different because of differences in
work material, production quantities, and design tolerances. Figure 39.8 shows several parts
with geometries that differ, but their manufacturing requirements are quite similar.
There are several ways by which part families are identified in industry. One method
involvesvisualinspectionofallthepartsmadeinthefactory(orphotosoftheparts)andusing
best judgment to group them into appropriate families. Another approach, calledproduction
flow analysis, uses information contained on route sheets (Section 40.1.1) to classify parts. In
effect, parts with similar manufacturing steps are grouped into the same family.
A third method, usually the most expensive but most useful, is parts classification and
coding. Parts classification and coding involve the identification of similarities and differ-
ences among parts and relating these parts by means of a numerical coding scheme. Most
classification and coding systems are one of the following: (1) systems based on part design
FIGURE 39.7
Two parts
that are identical in shape
and size but quite
different in manufacturing:
(a) 1,000,000 units/yr, tol-
erance=0.010in,1015CR
steel, nickel plate; and (b)
100/yr, tolerance = 0.001
in, 18-8 stainless steel.
Section 39.5/Cellular Manufacturing
931

attributes, (2) systems based on part manufacturing attributes, and (3) systems based on
both design and manufacturing attributes.
Common part design and manufacturing
attributes used in GT systems are presented in Table 39.3. Because each company
produces a unique set of parts and products, a classification and coding system that
may be satisfactory for one company is not necessarily appropriate for another company.
Each company must design its own coding scheme. Parts classification and coding systems
are described more thoroughly in several of our references [8], [10], [11].
Benefits often cited for a well-designed classification and coding system include
(1) facilitates formation of part families, (2) permits quick retrieval of part design
drawings, (3) reduces design duplication because similar or identical part designs can
be retrieved and reused rather than designed from scratch, (4) promotes design standard-
ization, (5) improves cost estimating and cost accounting, (6) facilitates numerical control
(NC) part programming by allowing new parts to use the same basic part program as
existing parts in the same family, (7) allows sharing of tools and fixtures, and (8) aids
computer-aided process planning (Section 40.1.3) because standard process plans can be
correlated to part family code numbers, so that existing process plans can be reused or
edited for new parts in the same family.
FIGURE 39.8
Ten parts
that are different in size
and shape, but quite
similar in terms of
manufacturing. All parts
are machined from
cylindrical stock by
turning; some parts
require drilling and/or
milling.
TABLE 39.3
Design and manufacturing attributes typically included in a parts
classiﬁcation and coding system.
Part Design Attributes
Part Manufacturing Attributes
Major dimensions
Material type
Major process
Major dimensions
Basic external shape
Part function
Operation sequence
Basic external shape
Basic internal shape
Tolerances
Batch size
Length/diameter ratio
Length/diameter ratio
Surface finish
Annual production
Material type
Machine tools
Tolerances
Cutting tools
Surface finish
932
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

39.5.2 MACHINE CELLS
To fully exploit the similarities among parts in a family, production should be organized using
machine cells designed to specialize in making those particular parts. One of the principles in
designing a group technology machine cell is the composite part concept.
Composite Part Concept
Members of a part family possess similar design and/or
manufacturing features. There is usually a correlation between part design features and
the manufacturing operations that produce those features. Round holes are made by drilling;
cylindrical shapes are made by turning; and so on.
Thecompositepartforagivenfamily(nottobeconfusedwithapartmadeofcomposite
material) is a hypothetical part that includes all of the design and manufacturing attributes of
the family. In general, an individual part in the family will have some of the features that
characterize the family, but not all of them. A production cell designed for the part family
would include those machines required to make the composite part. Such a cell would be
capable of producing any member of the family, simply by omitting those operations
correspondingtofeaturesnotpossessedbytheparticularpart.Thecellwouldalsobedesigned
to allow for size variations within the family as well as feature variations.
To illustrate, consider the composite part in Figure 39.9(a). It represents a family of
rotational parts with features defined in part (b) of the figure. Associated with each feature
is a certain machining operation, as summarized in Table 39.4. A machine cell to produce
FIGURE 39.9
Composite part concept: (a) the composite part for a family of machined rotational parts,
and (b) the individual features of the composite part.
TABLE 39.4
Design features of the composite part in Figure 39.3
and the manufacturing operations required to shape those features.
Label
Design Feature
Corresponding Manufacturing
Operation
1
External cylinder
Turning
2
Face of cylinder
Facing
3
Cylindrical step
Turning
4
Smooth surface
External cylindrical grinding
5
Axial hole
Drilling
6
Counterbore
Bore, counterbore
7
Internal threads
Tapping
Section 39.5/Cellular Manufacturing
933

this part family would be designed with the capability to accomplish all of the operations in
the last column of the table.
Machine Cell Designs
Machine cells can be classified according to number of machines
and level of automation. The possibilities are (a) single machine, (b) multiple machines with
manual handling, (c) multiple machines with mechanized handling, (d) flexible manu-
facturing cell, or (e) flexible manufacturing system. These production cells are depicted in
Figure 39.10.
Thesinglemachinecellhasonemachinethatismanuallyoperated.Thecell wouldalso
include fixtures and tools to allow for feature and size variations within the part family
produced by the cell. The machine cell required for the part family of Figure 39.9 would
probably be of this type.
Multiple machine cells have two or more manually operated machines. These cells are
distinguishedbythemethodof workpart handling inthe cell, manual or mechanized. Manual
handling means that parts are moved within the cell by workers, usually the machine
operators. Mechanized handling refers to conveyorized transfer of parts from one machine
tothenext.Thismayberequiredbythesizeandweightofthepartsmadeinthecell,orsimply
toincreaseproductionrate.Oursketchdepictstheworkflowasbeingaline;otherlayoutsare
also possible, such as U-shaped or loop.
Flexible manufacturing cells and flexible manufacturing systems consist of auto-
mated machines with automated handling. Given the special nature of these integrated
manufacturing systems and their importance, we devote Section 39.6 to their discussion.
FIGURE 39.10
Types of
group technology
machine cells: (a) single
machine, (b) multiple
machines with manual
handling, (c) multiple
machines with mecha-
nized handling, (d) ﬂexible
manufacturing cell, and
(e) ﬂexible manufacturing
system. Key: Man ¼
manual operation; Aut ¼
automated station.
934
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

Beneﬁts and Problems in Group Technology
The use of machine cells and group
technology provide substantial benefits to companies that have the discipline and perse-
verance to implement it. The potential benefits include the following: (1) GT promotes
standardization of tooling, fixturing, and setups; (2) material handling is reduced because
parts are moved within a machine cell rather than the entire factory; (3) production
scheduling is simplified; (4) manufacturing lead time is reduced; (5) work-in-process is
reduced; (6) process planning is simpler; (7) worker satisfaction usually improves working
in a cell; and (8) higher quality work is accomplished.
There are several problems in implementing machine cells, however. One obvious
problemisrearrangingproductionmachinesintheplantintotheappropriatemachinecells.It
takes time to plan and accomplish this rearrangement, and the machines are not producing
during the changeover. The biggest problem in starting a GT program is identifying the part
families. If the plant makes 10,000 different parts, reviewing all of the part drawings and
grouping the parts into families are substantial tasks that consume a significant amount
of time.
39.6
FLEXIBLE MANUFACTURING SYSTEMS AND CELLS
A flexible manufacturing system (FMS) is a highly automated GT machine cell, consisting of
a group of processing stations (usually computer numerical control [CNC] machine tools),
interconnected by an automated material handling and storage system, and controlled by an
integratedcomputersystem.AnFMSiscapableofprocessingavarietyofdifferentpartstyles
simultaneously under NC program control at the different workstations.
An FMS relies on the principles of group technology. No manufacturing system can
be completely flexible. It cannot produce an infinite range of parts or products. There are
limits to how much flexibility can be incorporated into an FMS. Accordingly, a flexible
manufacturing system is designed to produce parts (or products) within a range of styles,
sizes, and processes. In other words, an FMS is capable of producing a single part family or a
limited range of part families.
Flexible manufacturing systems vary in terms of number of machine tools and level of
flexibility. When the system has only a few machines, the term flexible manufacturing cell
(FMC) is sometimes used. Both cell and system are highly automated and computer
controlled. The difference between an FMS and an FMC is not always clear, but it is
sometimes based on the number of machines (workstations) included. The flexible manu-
facturing system consists of four or more machines, while a flexible manufacturing cell
consists of three or fewer machines [10].
To qualify as being flexible, a manufacturing system should satisfy several criteria. The
tests of flexibility in an automated production system are the capability to (1) process
different part styles in a nonbatch mode, (2) accept changes in production schedule,
(3) respond gracefully to equipment malfunctions and breakdowns in the system, and
(4) accommodate the introduction of new part designs. These capabilities are made
possible by the use of a central computer that controls and coordinates the components of
the system. The most important criteria are (1) and (2); criteria (3) and (4) are softer and
can be implemented at various levels of sophistication.
39.6.1 INTEGRATING THE FMS COMPONENTS
An FMS consists of hardware and software that must be integrated into an efficient and
reliable unit. It also includes human personnel. In this section we examine these
components and how they are integrated.
Section 39.6/Flexible Manufacturing Systems and cells
935

Hardware Components
FMS hardware includes workstations, material handling
system, and central control computer. The workstations are CNC machines in a machining
type system, plus inspection stations, parts cleaning and other stations, as required. A
central chip conveyor system is often installed below floor level.
The material handling system is the means by which parts are moved between stations.
The material handling system usually includes a limited capability to store parts. Handling
systems suitable for automated manufacturing include roller conveyors, automated guided
vehicles,andindustrialrobots.Themostappropriatetypedependsonpartsizeandgeometry,as
well as factors relating to economics and compatibility with other FMS components. Non-
rotational parts are often moved in a FMS on pallet fixtures, so the pallets are designed for
the particular handling system, and the fixtures are designed to accommodate the various
part geometries in the family. Rotational parts are often handled by robots, if weight is not a
limiting factor.
The handling system establishes the basic layout of the FMS. Five layout types can be
distinguished: (1) in-line, (2) loop, (3) ladder, (4) open field, and (5) robot-centered cell.
Types 1, 3, 4, and 5 are shown in Figure 39.11. Type 2 is shown in Figure 39.10(e). The in-
line layout uses a linear transfer system to move parts between processing stations and
load/unload station(s). The in-line transfer system is usually capable of two-directional
movement; if not, then the FMS operates much like a transfer line, and the different part
styles made on the system must follow the same basic processing sequence due to the one-
direction flow. The loop layout consists of a conveyor loop with workstations located
around its periphery. This configuration permits any processing sequence, because any
station is accessible from any other station. This is also true for the ladder layout, in which
workstations are located on the rungs of the ladder. The open field layout is the most
complex FMS configuration, and consists of several loops tied together. Finally, the robot-
centered cell consists of a robot whose work volume includes the load/unload positions of
the machines in the cell.
The FMS also includes a central computer that is interfaced to the other hardware
components. In addition to the central computer, the individual machines and other
components generally have microcomputers as their individual control units. The function
of the central computer is to coordinate the activities of the components so as to achieve a
smooth overall operation of the system. It accomplishes this function by means of software.
FMS Software and Control Functions
FMS software consists of modules associated
with the various functions performed by the manufacturing system. For example, one
function involves downloading NC part programs to the individual machine tools; another
function is concerned with controlling the material handling system; another is concerned
with tool management; and so on. Table 39.5 lists the functions included in the operation of
a typical FMS. Associated with each function is one or more software modules. Terms other
than those in our table may be used in a given installation. The functions and modules are
largely application specific.
Human Labor
An additional component in the operation of a flexible manufacturing
system or cell is human labor. Duties performed by human workers include (1) loading and
unloading parts from the system, (2) changing and setting cutting tools, (3) maintenance
and repair of equipment, (4) NC part programming, (5) programming and operating the
computer system, and (6) overall management of the system.
39.6.2 APPLICATIONS OF FLEXIBLE MANUFACTURING SYSTEMS
Flexible manufacturing systems are typically used for midvolume, midvariety production.
If the part or product is made in high quantities with no style variations, then a transfer line
936
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

FIGURE 39.11
Four of
the ﬁve FMS layout types:
(a) in-line, (b) ladder,
(c) open ﬁeld, and (d)
robot-centered cell. Key:
Aut ¼ automated station;
L/UL ¼ load/unload
station; Insp ¼ inspection
station; AGV ¼ automated
guided vehicle; AGVS ¼
automated guided vehicle
system.
Conveyor
Conveyor
AGVS guidewire
AGV
Machines
Machine
Machine
Inspection
station
Parts in
Parts in/out
Parts in
Parts out
Parts out
v
v
v
v
v
v
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Aut.
Aut.
Aut.
Aut.
Aut.
Aut.
Aut.
AGV
Aut.
Insp.
Aut.
Aut.
Aut.
Aut.
Aut.
Aut.
L/UL
L/UL
Section 39.6/Flexible Manufacturing Systems and cells
937

or similar dedicated manufacturing system is most appropriate. If the parts are low volume
with high variety, then a stand-alone NC machine or even manual methods would be more
appropriate. These application characteristics are summarized in Figure 39.12.
Flexible machining systems comprise the most common application of FMS technol-
ogy. Owing to the inherent flexibilities and capabilities of computer numerical control, it is
possible to connect several CNC machine tools to a small central computer, and to devise
automated material handling methods for transferring parts between machines. Figure 39.13
shows a flexible machining system consisting of five CNC machining centers and an in-line
transfer system to pick up parts from a central load/unload station and move them to the
appropriate machining stations.
In addition to machining systems, other types of flexible manufacturing systems have
also been developed, although the state of technology in these other processes has not
TABLE 39.5
Typical computer functions implemented by application software modules in a ﬂexible
manufacturing system.
Function
Description
NC part programming
Development of NC programs for new parts introduced into the system. This includes a
language package such as APT
Production control
Product mix, machine scheduling, and other planning functions
NC program download
Part program commands must be downloaded to individual stations from the central
computer
Machine control
Individual workstations require controls, usually computer numerical control
Workpart control
Monitor status of each workpart in the system, status of pallet fixtures, orders on loading/
unloading pallet fixtures
Tool management
Functions include tool inventory control, tool status relative to expected tool life, tool
changing and resharpening, and transport to and from tool grinding
Transport control
Scheduling and control of workpart handling system
System management
Compiles management reports on performance (utilization, piece counts, production
rates, etc.). FMS simulation sometimes included
NC, numerical control; APT, automatically programmed tool; FMS, flexible manufacturing system.
FIGURE 39.12
Application
characteristics of ﬂexible
manufacturing systems
and cells relative to other
types of manufacturing
systems.
938
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

permitted the rapid implementation that has occurred in machining. The other types of
systems include assembly, inspection, sheet-metal processing (punching, shearing, bending,
and forming), and forging.
Most of the experience in flexible manufacturing systems has been gained in
machining applications. For flexible machining systems, the benefits usually given are
(1) higher machine utilization than a conventional machine shop—relative utilizations are
40% to 50% for conventional batch-type operations and about 75% for a FMS due to
better work handling, off-line setups, and improved scheduling; (2) reduced work-in-
process due to continuous production rather than batch production; (3) lower manufac-
turing lead times; and (4) greater flexibility in production scheduling.
39.7
COMPUTER INTEGRATED MANUFACTURING
Distributed computer networks are widely used in modern manufacturing plants to monitor
and/or control the integrated systems described in this chapter. Even though some of the
operations are manually accomplished (e.g., manual assembly lines and manned cells),
computer systems are utilized for production scheduling, data collection, record keeping,
performance tracking, and other information-related functions. In the more automated
systems (e.g., transfer lines and flexible manufacturing cells), computers directly control the
operations. The term computer integrated manufacturing refers to the pervasive use of
computer systems throughout the organization, not only to monitor and control the
operations, but also to design the product, plan the manufacturing processes, and accomplish
the business functions related to production. One might say that CIM is the ultimate
integrated manufacturing system. In this final section of Part X, we outline the scope of CIM
and provide a bridge to Part XI on manufacturing support systems.
FIGURE 39.13
A ﬁve-
station ﬂexible
manufacturing system.
(Photo courtesy of
Cincinnati Milacron,
Batavia, Ohio.)
Section 39.7/Computer Integrated Manufacturing
939

To begin, let us identify four general functions that have to be accomplished in most
manufacturingenterprises:(1)productdesign,(2)manufacturingplanning,(3)manufactur-
ing control, and (4) business functions. Product design is usually an iterative process that
includes recognition of a need for a product, problem definition, creative synthesis of a
solution,analysisandoptimization,evaluation,anddocumentation.Theoverallqualityofthe
resulting design is likely to be the most important factor upon which the commercial success
of a product depends. In addition, a very significant portion of the final cost of the product is
determined by decisions made during product design. Manufacturing planning is concerned
with converting the engineering drawings and specifications that define the product design
into a plan for producing the product. Manufacturing planning includes decisions on which
parts will be purchased (the ‘‘make-or-buy decision’’), how each ‘‘make’’ part will be
produced, the equipment that will be used, how the work will be scheduled, and so on.
Most of these decisions are discussed in Chapter 40 on manufacturing engineering and
Chapter 41 on production planning. Manufacturing control includes not only control of the
individual processes and equipment in the plant, but also the supporting functions such as
shop floor control and quality control, discussed in Chapters 41 and 42, respectively. Finally,
the business functions include order entry, cost accounting, payroll, customer billing, and
other business-oriented information activities related to manufacturing.
Computer systems play an important role in these four general functions, and their
integration within the organization is a distinguishing feature of computer integrated
manufacturing, as depicted in Figure 39.14. Computer systems associated with product design
are called CAD systems (for computer-aided design). Design systems and software include
geometric modeling, engineering analysis packages such as finite element modeling, design
review and evaluation, and automated drafting. Computer systems that support manufactur-
ing planning are called CAM systems (for computer-aided manufacturing) and include
computer-aided process planning, NC part programming, production scheduling, and plan-
ning packages such as manufacturing resource planning (discussed in Chapter 41). Manu-
facturing control systems include those used in process control, shop floor control, inventory
control, and computer-aided inspection for quality control. And computerized business
systems are used for order entry, customer billing, and other business functions. Customer
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
CIM
CAD
Geometric modeling
Engineering analysis
Design review/eval.
Automated drafting
Customer feedback to design
CAPP
NC part program.
Production schedule
Mfg resource
   planning
Computerized
Business Systems
Order entry
Customer billing
Payroll
Accounting, etc.
Process control
Quality control
Shop floor control
Inventory control
CAM
CAM
Product
design
Manufacturing
planning
Manufacturing
control
Business
functions
Customer
market
Factory
operations
FIGURE 39.14
Four general functions in a manufacturing organization and how computer integrated
manufacturing systems support these functions.
940
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

orders are entered by the company’s sales force or by the customers themselves into the
computerized order entry system. The orders include product specifications that provide the
inputs to the design department. Based on these inputs, new products are designed on the
company’s CAD system. The design details serve as inputs to the manufacturing engineering
group, where computer-aided process planning, computer-aided tool design, and related
activities are performed in advance of actual production. The output from manufacturing
engineering provides much of the input data required for manufacturing resource planning
and production scheduling. Thus, computer integrated manufacturing provides the informa-
tion flows required to accomplish the actual production of the product.
Today, computer integrated manufacturing is implemented in many companies using
enterprise resource planning (ERP), an extension of manufacturing resource planning that
organizesandintegratestheinformationflowsinacompanythroughasingle,centraldatabase.
The functions covered by ERP spread well beyond manufacturing operations; they include
sales, marketing, purchasing, logistics, distribution, inventory control, finance, and human
resources. ERP users within a company access and interact with the system using personal
computers at their own workplaces, whether they are located in offices or in the factory.
REFERENCES
[1] Black, J. T. The Design of the Factory with a Future.
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1990.
[2] Black, J. T.‘‘An Overview of Cellular Manufactur-
ing Systems and Comparison to Conventional Sys-
tems,’’ Industrial Engineering, November 1983,
pp. 36–84.
[3] Boothroyd, G., Poli, C., and Murch, L. E. Automatic
Assembly. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1982.
[4] Buzacott, J. A.‘‘Prediction of the Efficiency of Pro-
duction Systems without Internal Storage,’’ Interna-
tional Journal of Production Research, Vol. 6, No. 3,
1968, pp. 173–188.
[5] Buzacott, J. A., and Shanthikumar, J. G. Stochastic
Models of Manufacturing Systems. Prentice-Hall,
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 1993.
[6] Chang, T-C., Wysk, R. A., and Wang, H-P. Com-
puter-Aided Manufacturing, 3rd ed. Prentice-Hall,
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2005.
[7] Chow, W-M. Assembly Line Design. Marcel Dekker,
New York, 1990.
[8] Gallagher, C. C., and Knight, W. A. Group Technol-
ogy. Butterworth & Co., Ltd., London, 1973.
[9] Groover,
M.
P.‘‘Analyzing
Automatic
Transfer
Lines,’’ Industrial Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 11,
1975, pp. 26–31.
[10] Groover, M. P. Automation, Production Systems, and
Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 3rd ed. Pearson
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2008.
[11] Ham, I., Hitomi, K., and Yoshida, T. Group Tech-
nology. Kluwer Nijhoff Publishers, Hingham, Mas-
sachusetts, 1985.
[12] Houtzeel, A.‘‘The Many Faces of Group Technology,’’
American Machinist, January 1979, pp. 115–120.
[13] Luggen, W. W. Flexible Manufacturing Cells and
Systems. Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey, 1991.
[14] Maleki, R. A. Flexible Manufacturing Systems: The
Technology and Management. Prentice Hall, Inc.,
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1991.
[15] Moodie, C., Uzsoy, R., and Yih, Y. Manufacturing
Cells: A Systems Engineering View. Taylor &
Francis, Ltd., London, 1995.
[16] Parsai, H., Leep, H., and Jeon, G. The Principles of
Group Technology and Cellular Manufacturing.
John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2006.
[17] Riley, F. J. Assembly Automation, A. Management
Handbook, 2nd ed. Industrial Press, New York,
1999.
[18] Weber, A.‘‘Is Flexibility a Myth?’’ Assembly, May
2004, pp. 50–59.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
39.1.
What are the main components of an integrated
manufacturing system?
39.2.
What are the principal material handling functions
in manufacturing?
39.3.
Name the five main types of material transport
equipment.
39.4.
What is the difference between fixed routing and
variable routing in material transport systems?
Review Questions
941

39.5.
What is a production line?
39.6.
What are the advantages of a mixed model line
over a batch model line for producing different
product styles?
39.7.
What are some of the limitations of a mixed model
line compared to a batch model line?
39.8.
Describe how manual methods are used to
move parts between workstations on a produc-
tion line.
39.9.
Briefly define the three types of mechanized work-
part transfer systems used in production lines.
39.10.
Why are parts sometimes fixed to the conveyor in a
continuous transfer system in manual assembly?
39.11.
Why must a production line be paced at a rate
higher than that required to satisfy the demand for
the product?
39.12.
Repositioning time on a synchronous transfer line
is known by a different name; what is that name?
39.13.
Why are single station assembly cells generally not
suited to high-production jobs?
39.14.
What are some of the reasons for downtime on a
machining transfer line?
39.15.
Define group technology.
39.16.
What is a part family?
39.17.
Define cellular manufacturing.
39.18.
What is the composite part concept in group
technology?
39.19.
What is a flexible manufacturing system?
39.20.
What are the criteriathatshouldbesatisfiedtomake
an automated manufacturing system flexible?
39.21.
Name some of the flexible manufacturing system
software and control functions.
39.22.
What are the advantages of flexible manufacturing
system technology, compared to conventional
batch operations?
39.23.
Define computer integrated manufacturing.
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 21 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
39.1.
Material handling is usually not associated with
transportation between facilities that involves rail,
truck, air, or waterway delivery of goods: (a) true or
(b) false?
39.2.
Fixed routing is associated with which of the fol-
lowing types of manufacturing systems (two best
answers): (a) automated production lines, (b) au-
tomated storage systems, (c) cellular manufactur-
ing systems, (d) flexible manufacturing systems,
(e) job shops, and (f) manual assembly lines?
39.3.
Which of the following types of material handling
equipment are typically used in a process type layout
(two best answers): (a) conveyors, (b) cranes and
hoists, (c) fork lift trucks, and (d) rail-guided
vehicles?
39.4.
Batch model production lines are most suited to
which one of the following production situations:
(a) job shop, (b) mass production, or (c) medium
production?
39.5.
Precedenceconstraintsarebestdescribedbywhichone
of the following: (a) launching sequence in a mixed
model line, (b) limiting value of the sum of element
times that can be assigned to a worker or station,
(c)orderofworkstationsalongtheline,or(d)sequence
in which the work elements must be done?
39.6.
Which of the following phrases are most appropri-
ate to describe the characteristics of tasks that are
performed at automated workstations (three best
answers): (a) complex, (b) consists of multiple
work elements, (c) involves a single work element,
(d) involves straight-line motions, (e) requires sen-
sory capability, and (f) simple?
39.7.
The transfer line is most closely associated with
which one of the following types of production
operations: (a) assembly, (b) automotive chassis
fabrication, (c) machining, (d) pressworking, or
(e) spot welding?
39.8.
A dial indexing machine uses which one of the
following types of workpart transfer: (a) asynchro-
nous, (b) continuous, (c) parts passed by hand, or
(d) synchronous?
39.9.
Production flow analysis is a method of identifying
part families that uses data from which one of the
following sources: (a) bill of materials, (b) engi-
neering drawings, (c) master schedule, (d) produc-
tion schedule, or (e) route sheets?
39.10.
Most parts classification and coding systems are
based on which of the following types of part
attributes (two best answers): (a) annual produc-
tion rate, (b) date of design, (c) design, (d) man-
ufacturing, and (e) weight?
39.11.
What is the dividing line between a manufacturing
cell and a flexible manufacturing system: (a) two
machines, (b) four machines, or (c) six machines?
942
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

39.12.
Amachinecapable ofproducingdifferentpartstyles
in a batch mode of operation qualifies as a flexible
manufacturing system: (a) true or (b) false?
39.13.
The physical layout of a flexible manufacturing
system is determined principally by which one of
the following: (a) computer system, (b) material
handling system, (c) part family, (d) processing
equipment, or (e) weight of parts processed?
39.14.
Industrial robots can, in general, most easily handle
which one of the following part types in a flexible
machining system: (a) heavy parts, (b) metal parts,
(c) nonrotational parts, (d) plastic parts, or (e)
rotational parts?
39.15.
Flexible manufacturing systems and cells are gen-
erally applied in which one of the following areas:
(a) high-variety, low-volume production, (b) low
variety, (c) low volume, (d) mass production,
(e) medium-volume, medium-variety production?
39.16.
Which one of the following technologies is most
closely associated with flexible machining systems:
(a) lasers, (b) machine vision, (c) manual assembly
lines, (d) numerical control, or (e) transfer lines?
PROBLEMS
Manual Assembly Lines
39.1.
A manual assembly line is being designed for a
product with annual demand ¼ 100,000 units. The
line will operate 50 wk/yr, 5 shifts/wk, and 7.5 hr/
shift. Work units will be attached to a continuously
moving conveyor. Work content time ¼ 42.0 min.
Assume line efficiency ¼ 0.97, balancing efficiency
¼ 0.92, and repositioning time ¼ 6 sec. Determine
(a) hourly production rate to meet demand,
(b) number of workers required, and (c) the num-
ber of workstations required if the estimated man-
ning level is 1.4.
39.2.
A manual assembly line produces a small appliance
whose work content time ¼ 25.9 min. Desired pro-
duction rate ¼ 50 units/hr. Repositioning time ¼ 6
sec, line efficiency ¼ 95%, and balancing efficiency
is 93%. How many workers are on the line?
39.3.
A single model manual assembly line produces a
product whose work content time ¼ 47.8 min. The
line has 24 workstations with a manning level ¼
1.25. Available shift time per day ¼ 8 hr, but
downtime during the shift reduces actual produc-
tion time to 7.6 hr on average. This results in an
average daily production of 256 units/day. Reposi-
tioning time per worker is 8% of cycle time. De-
termine (a) line efficiency, (b) balancing efficiency,
and (c) repositioning time.
39.4.
A final assembly plant for a certain automobile
model is to have a capacity of 240,000 units annually.
The plant will operate 50 wk/yr, 2 shifts/day, 5 days/
wk, and 8.0 hr/shift. It will be divided into three
departments: (1) body shop, (2) paint shop, (3) trim-
chassis-final department. The body shop welds the
car bodies using robots, and the paint shop coats the
bodies. Both of these departments are highly auto-
mated. Trim-chassis-final has no automation. There
are 15.5 hr of direct labor content on each car in this
department, where cars are moved by a continuous
conveyor. Determine (a) hourly production rate of
the plant, (b) number of workers and workstations
required in trim-chassis-final if no automated sta-
tions are used, the average manning level is 2.5,
balancing efficiency ¼ 93%, proportion uptime ¼
95%, and a repositioning time of 0.15 min is allowed
for each worker.
39.5.
A product whose total work content time ¼ 50 min
is to be assembled on a manual production line.
The required production rate is 30 units/hr. From
previous experience with similar products, it is
estimated that the manning level will be close to
1.5. Assume that the uptime proportion and line
balancing efficiency are both ¼ 1.0. If 9 sec will be
lost from the cycle time for repositioning, deter-
mine (a) the cycle time and (b) the numbers of
workers and stations that will be needed on the
line.
39.6.
A manual assembly line has 17 workstations with
one operator per station. Total work content time
to assemble the product ¼ 22.2 min. The produc-
tion rate of the line ¼ 36 units/hr. A synchronous
transfer system is used to advance the products
from one station to the next, and the transfer
time ¼ 6 sec. The workers remain seated along
the line. Proportion uptime ¼ 0.90. Determine the
balance efficiency.
39.7.
A production line with four automatic worksta-
tions (the other stations are manual) produces a
certain product whose total assembly work content
time ¼ 55.0 min of direct manual labor. The pro-
duction rate on the line is 45 units/hr. Because of
the automated stations, uptime efficiency ¼ 89%.
The manual stations each have one worker. It is
known that 10% of the cycle time is lost due to
repositioning. If the balancing efficiency ¼ 0.92 on
the manual stations, find (a) cycle time, (b) number
Problems
943

of workers and (c) workstations on the line.
(d) What is the average manning level on the
line, where the average includes the automatic
stations?
39.8.
Production rate for a certain assembled product
is 47.5 units/hr. The total assembly work content
time ¼ 32 min of direct manual labor. The line
operates at 95% uptime. Ten workstations have
two workers on opposite sides of the line so that
both sides of the product can be worked on simulta-
neously. The remaining stations have one worker.
Repositioning time lost by each worker is 0.2 min/
cycle. It is known that the number of workers on the
line is two more than the number required for
perfect balance. Determine (a) number of workers,
(b) number of workstations, (c) the balancing effi-
ciency, and (d) average manning level.
39.9.
The total work content for a product assembled on
a manual production line is 48 min. The work is
transported using a continuous overhead conveyor
that operates at a speed of 3 ft/min. There are
24 workstations on the line, one-third of which
have two workers; the remaining stations each
have one worker. Repositioning time per worker
is 9 sec, and uptime efficiency of the line is 95%. (a)
What is the maximum possible hourly production
rate if line is assumed to be perfectly balanced? (b)
If the actual production rate is only 92% of the
maximum possible rate determined in part (a),
what is the balance efficiency on the line?
Automated Production Lines
39.10.
An automated transfer line has 20 stations and
operates with an ideal cycle time of 1.50 min.
Probability of a station failure ¼ 0.008 and average
downtime when a breakdown occurs is 10.0 min.
Determine (a) the average production rate and
(b) the line efficiency.
39.11.
A dial-indexing table has six stations. One station is
used for loading and unloading, which is accom-
plished by a human worker. The other five perform
processing operations. The longest process takes 25
sec and the indexing time ¼ 5 sec. Each station has
a frequency of failure ¼ 0.015. When a failure
occurs it takes an average of 3.0 min to make
repairs and restart. Determine (a) hourly produc-
tion rate and (b) line efficiency.
39.12.
A seven-station transfer line has been observed
over a 40-hour period. The process times at each
station are as follows: station 1, 0.80 min; station 2,
1.10 min; station 3, 1.15 min; station 4, 0.95 min;
station 5, 1.06 min; station 6, 0.92 min; and station
7, 0.80 min. The transfer time between stations ¼
6 sec. The number of downtime occurrences ¼ 110,
and hours of downtime ¼ 14.5 hr. Determine
(a) the number of parts produced during the
week, (b) the average actual production rate in
parts/hr, and (c) the line efficiency. (d) If the
balancing efficiency were computed for this line,
what would its value be?
39.13.
A 12-station transfer line was designed to operate
with an ideal production rate ¼ 50 parts/hr. How-
ever, the line does not achieve this rate, since the
line efficiency ¼ 0.60. It costs $75/hr to operate the
line, exclusive of materials. The line operates 4000
hr/yr. A computer monitoring system has been
proposed that will cost $25,000 (installed) and
will reduce downtime on the line by 25%. If the
value added per unit produced ¼ $4.00, will the
computer system pay for itself within 1 year of
operation? Use expected increase in revenues re-
sulting from the computer system as the criterion.
Ignore material costs in your calculations.
39.14.
An automated transfer line is to be designed.
Based on previous experience, the average down-
time per occurrence ¼ 5.0 min, and the probability
of a station failure that leads to a downtime occur-
rence p ¼ 0.01. The total work content time ¼
9.8 min and is to be divided evenly amongst the
workstations, so that the ideal cycle time for each
station ¼ 9.8/n. Determine (a) the optimum num-
ber of stations on the line n that will maximize
production rate, and (b) the production rate and
proportion uptime for your answer to part (a).
944
Chapter 39/Integrated Manufacturing Systems

Part XI
Manufacturing
Support Systems
40
MANUFACTURING
ENGINEERING
Chapter Contents
40.1
Process Planning
40.1.1
Traditional Process Planning
40.1.2
Make or Buy Decision
40.1.3
Computer-Aided Process Planning
40.2
Problem Solving and Continuous
Improvement
40.3
Concurrent Engineering and Design for
Manufacturability
40.3.1
Design for Manufacturing and
Assembly
40.3.2
Concurrent Engineering
This final part of the book is concerned with manufacturing
support systems, which are the set of procedures and systems
used by a company to solve the technical and logistics prob-
lems encountered in planning the processes, ordering materi-
als, controlling production, and ensuring that the company’s
products meet required quality specifications. The position of
the manufacturing support systems in the overall operations
of the company is portrayed in Figure 40.1. As with the
manufacturing systems in the factory, the manufacturing
support systems include people. People make the systems
work. Unlike the manufacturing systems in the factory, most
of the support systems do not directly contact the product
during its processing and assembly. Instead, they plan and
control the activities in the factory to ensure that the products
are completed and delivered to the customer on time, in the
right quantities, and to the highest quality standards.
The quality control system is one of the manufacturing
support systems, but it also consists of facilities located in the
factory—inspection equipment used to measure and gage the
materials being processed and products being assembled. We
coverthequalitycontrolsysteminChapter42onqualitycontrol
and inspection. Many of the traditional measurement and
gagingtechniquesusedininspectionaredescribedinChapter5.
Othermanufacturingsupportsystemscoveredinthispartofthe
book are production planning and control, Chapter 41, and
manufacturing engineering in the present chapter.
Manufacturing engineering is a technical staff func-
tion that is concerned with planning the manufacturing
processes for the economic production of high-quality
945

products. Its principal role is to engineer the transition of the product from design
specification to physical product. Its overall goal is to optimize production in a particular
organization. The scope of manufacturing engineering includes many activities and
responsibilities that depend on the type of production operations accomplished by the
organization. The usual activities include the following:

Process planning. As our definition suggests, this is the principal activity of manu-
facturing engineering. Process planning includes (a) deciding what processes and
methods should be used and in what sequence, (b) determining tooling requirements,
(c) selecting production equipment and systems, and (d) estimating costs of production
for the selected processes, tooling, and equipment.

Problem solving and continuous improvement. Manufacturing engineering provides
staff support to the operating departments (parts fabrication and product assembly) to
solve technical production problems. It should also be engaged in continuous efforts to
reduce production costs, increase productivity, and improve product quality.

Design for manufacturability. In this function, which chronologically precedes the
other two, manufacturing engineers serve as manufacturability advisors to product
designers. The objective isto developproductdesignsthat not onlymeetfunctional and
performance requirements, but that also can be produced at reasonable cost with
minimum technical problems at highest possible quality in the shortest possible time.
Manufacturing engineering must be performed in any industrial organization that is
engaged in production. The manufacturing engineering department usually reports to the
managerofmanufacturinginacompany.Insomecompaniesthedepartmentisknownbyother
names, such as process engineering or production engineering. Often included under man-
ufacturing engineering are tool design, tool fabrication, and varioustechnical support groups.
40.1
PROCESS PLANNING
Process planning involves determining the most appropriate manufacturing processes
and the order in which they should be performed to produce a given part or product
specified by design engineering. If it is an assembled product, process planning includes
deciding the appropriate sequence of assembly steps. The process plan must be devel-
oped within the limitations imposed by available processing equipment and productive
capacity of the factory. Parts or subassemblies that cannot be made internally must be
FIGURE 40.1
The position of the
manufacturing support
systems in the
production system.
Manufacturing processes and assembly operations
Facilities
Manufacturing
support
Quality control
system
Manufacturing
systems
Manufacturing
support systems
Production system
Finished
products
Engineering
materials
946
Chapter 40/Manufacturing Engineering

purchased from external suppliers. In some cases, items that can be produced internally
may be purchased from outside vendors for economic or other reasons.
40.1.1 TRADITIONAL PROCESS PLANNING
Traditionally, process planning has been accomplished by manufacturing engineers who are
knowledgeableintheparticularprocessesusedinthefactoryandareabletoreadengineering
drawings. Based on their knowledge, skill, and experience, they develop the processing steps
in the most logical sequence required to make each part. Table 40.1 lists the many details and
decisions usually included within the scope of process planning. Some of these details are
often delegated to specialists, such as tool designers; but manufacturing engineering is
responsible for them.
Process Planning for Parts
The processes needed to manufacture a given part are
determined largely by the material out of which it is to be made. The material is selected by
the product designer based on functional requirements. Once the material has been
selected, the choice of possible processes is narrowed considerably. In our coverage of
engineering materials, we provided guides to the processing of the four material groups:
metals(Section6.5),ceramics(Section7.6),polymers(Section8.5),andcompositematerials
(Section 9.5)
A typical processing sequence to fabricate a discrete part consists of (1) a basic process,
(2) one or more secondary processes, (3) operations to enhance physical properties, and
(4) finishing operations, illustrated in Figure 40.2. Basic and secondary processes are shaping
processes (Section 1.3.1) which alter the geometry of a workpart. A basic process establishes
TABLE 40.1
Decisions and details required in process planning.
Processes and sequence. The process plan should briefly describe all processing steps used on the work unit (e.g., part,
assembly) in the order in which they are performed.
Equipment selection. In general, manufacturing engineers try to develop process plans that utilize existing equipment.
When this is not possible, the component in question must be purchased (Section 40.1.2), or new equipment must be
installed in the plant.
Tools, dies, molds, fixtures, and gages. The process planner must decide what tooling is needed for each process.
Actual design is usually delegated to the tool design department, and fabrication is accomplished by the tool room.
Cutting tools and cutting conditions for machining operations. These are specified by the process planner, industrial
engineer, shop foreman, or machine operator, often with reference to standard handbook recommendations.
Methods. Methods include hand and body motions, workplace layout, small tools, hoists for lifting heavy parts, and so
forth. Methods must be specified for manual operations (e.g., assembly) and manual portions of machine cycles (e.g.,
loading and unloading a production machine). Methods planning is traditionally done by industrial engineers.
Work standards. Work measurement techniques are used to establish time standards for each operation.
Estimating production costs. This is often accomplished by cost estimators with help from the process planner.
Finishing
operations
Property-enhancing
processes
Secondary
processes
Basic
process
Starting raw
material
Finished
product
FIGURE 40.2
Typical sequence of processes required in part fabrication.
Section 40.1/Process Planning
947

the initial geometry of the part. Examples include metal casting, forging, and sheet-metal
rolling.Inmostcases,thestartinggeometrymustberefinedbyaseriesofsecondaryprocesses.
These operations transform the basic shape into the final geometry. There is a correlation
between the secondary processes that might be used and the basic process that provides the
initial form. For example, when sand casting or forging are the basic processes, machining
operations are generally the secondary processes. When a rolling mill produces strips or coils
of sheet metal, the secondary processes are stamping operations such as blanking, punching,
andbending.Selectionofcertainbasicprocessesminimizestheneedforsecondaryprocesses.
For example,if plastic injectionmoldingis thebasicprocess, secondaryoperationsareusually
not required because molding is capable of providing the detailed geometric features with
good dimensional accuracy.
Shaping operations are generally followed by operationsto enhancephysical propert-
ies and/or finish the product. Operations to enhance properties include heat treating
operations on metal components and glassware. In many cases, parts do not require these
property-enhancing steps in their processing sequence. This is indicated by the alternate
arrow path in our figure. Finishing operations are the final operations in the sequence; they
usuallyprovideacoatingontheworkpart(orassembly)surface.Examplesoftheseprocesses
are electroplating and painting.
In some cases, property-enhancing processes are followed by additional secondary
operationsbeforeproceedingtofinishing, assuggestedbythereturnloopinFigure40.2.An
example is a machined part that is hardened by heat treatment. Prior to heat treatment, the
part is left slightly oversized to allow for distortion. After hardening, it is reduced to final
size and tolerance by finish grinding. Another example, again in metal parts fabrication, is
when annealing is used to restore ductility to the metal after cold working to permit further
deformation of the workpiece.
Table 40.2 presents some of the typical processing sequences for various materials and
basic processes. The task of the process planner usually begins after the basic process has
provided the initial shape of the part. Machined parts begin as bar stock or castings or
forgings, and the basic processes for these starting shapes are often external to the fabricating
plant. Stampings begin as sheet metal coils or strips purchased from the mill. These are the
raw materials supplied from external suppliers for the secondary processes and subsequent
operations to be performed in the factory. Determining the most appropriate processes and
the order in which they must be accomplished relies on the skill, experience, and judgment of
theprocessplanner.Someofthebasicguidelinesandconsiderationsusedbyprocessplanners
to make these decisions are outlined in Table 40.3.
The Route Sheet
The process plan is prepared on a form called a route sheet, a typical
exampleofwhichisshowninFigure40.3(somecompaniesuseothernamesforthisform).It
TABLE 40.2
Some typical process sequences.
Basic Process
Secondary Process(es)
Property-Enhancing Processes
Finishing Operations
Sand casting
Machining
(none)
Painting
Die casting
(none, net shape)
(none)
Painting
Casting of glass
Pressing, blow molding
(none)
(none)
Injection molding
(none, net shape)
(none)
(none)
Rolling of bar stock
Machining
Heat treatment (optional)
Electroplating
Rolling of sheet metal
Blanking, bending, drawing
(none)
Electroplating
Forging
Machining (near net shape)
(none)
Painting
Extrusion of aluminum
Cut to length
(none)
Anodize
Atomize metal powders
Pressing of powder metal part
Sintering
Painting
Compiled from [5].
948
Chapter 40/Manufacturing Engineering

TABLE 40.3
Guidelines and considerations in deciding processes and their sequence in process planning.
Design requirements. The sequence of processes must satisfy the dimensions, tolerances, surface finish, and other
specifications established by product design.
Quality requirements. Processes must be selected that satisfy quality requirements in terms of tolerances, surface
integrity, consistency and repeatability, and other quality measures.
Production volume and rate. Is the product in the category of low, medium, or high production? The selection of
processes and systems is strongly influenced by volume and production rate.
Available processes. If the product and its components are to be made in-house, the process planner must select
processes and equipment already available in the factory.
Material utilization. It is desirable for the process sequence to make efficient use of materials and minimize waste.
When possible, net shape or near net shape processes should be selected.
Precedence constraints. These are technological sequencing requirements that determine or restrict the order in which
the processing steps can be performed. A hole must be drilled before it can be tapped; a powder-metal part must be
pressed before sintering; a surface must be cleaned before painting; and so on.
Reference surfaces. Certain surfaces of the part must be formed (usually by machining) near the beginning of the
sequence so they can serve as locating surfaces for other dimensions that are formed subsequently. For example, if a
hole is to be drilled a certain distance from the edge of a given part, that edge must first be machined.
Minimize setups. The number of separate machine setups should be minimized. Wherever possible, operations should
be combined at the same workstation. This saves time and reduces material handling.
Eliminate unnecessary steps. The process sequence should be planned with the minimum number of processing steps.
Unnecessary operations should be avoided. Design changes should be requested to eliminate features not absolutely
needed, thereby eliminating the processing steps associated with those features.
Flexibility. Where feasible, the process should be sufficiently flexible to accommodate engineering design changes.
This is often a problem when special tooling must be designed to produce the part; if the part design is changed, the
special tooling may be rendered obsolete.
Safety. Worker safety must be considered in process selection. This makes good economic sense, and it is the law
(Occupational Safety and Health Act).
Minimum cost. The process sequence should be the production method that satisfies all of the above requirements and
also achieves the lowest possible product cost.
FIGURE 40.3
Typical
route sheet for specifying
the process plan.
Section 40.1/Process Planning
949

is called a route sheet because it specifies the sequence of operations and equipment that
will be visited by the part during its production. The route sheet is to the process planner
what the engineering drawing is to the product designer. It is the official document that
specifies the details of the process plan. The route sheet should include all manufacturing
operations to be performed on the workpart, listed in the proper order in which they are to
be accomplished. For each operation, the following should be listed: (1) a brief description
of the operation indicating the work to be done, surfaces to be processed with references to
the part drawing, and dimensions (and tolerances, if not specified on part drawing) to
be achieved; (2) the equipment on which the work is to be performed; and (3) any
special tooling required, such as dies, molds, cutting tools, jigs or fixtures, and gages. In
addition, some companies include cycle time standards, setup times, and other data on
the route sheet.
Sometimes amore detailed operationsheet is alsopreparedfor eachoperationlistedin
the routing. This is retained in the particular department where the operation is performed. It
indicatesthespecificdetailsoftheoperation,suchascuttingspeeds,feeds,andtools,andother
instructions useful to the machine operator. Setup sketches are sometimes also included.
Process Planning for Assemblies
For low production, assembly is generally done at
individual workstations and a worker or team of workers performs the assembly work
elements to complete the product. In medium and high production, assembly is usually
performed on production lines (Section 39.4). In either case, there is a precedence order in
which the work must be accomplished.
Process planning for assembly involves preparation of the assembly instructions that
must be performed. For single stations, thedocumentation is similar to theprocessing route
sheetinFigure40.3.Itcontains a list oftheassembly stepsintheorder inwhichtheymust be
accomplished. For assembly line production, process planning consists of allocating work
elements to particular stations along the line, a procedure called line balancing (Section
39.3.2). In effect, the assembly line routes the work units to individual stations, and the line
balancing solution determines what assembly steps must be performed at each station. As
with process planning for parts, any tools and fixtures needed to accomplish a given
assembly work element must be decided, and the workplace layout must be designed.
40.1.2 MAKE OR BUY DECISION
Inevitably, the question arises as to whether a given part should be purchased from an
outside vendor or made internally. First of all, it should be recognized that virtually all
manufacturers purchase their starting materials from suppliers. A machine shop buys bar
stock from a metals distributor and castings from a foundry. A plastic molder obtains
molding compound from a chemical company. A pressworking company purchases sheet
metal from a rolling mill. Very few companies are vertically integrated all the way from raw
materials to finished product.
Given that a company purchases at least some of its starting materials, it is reasonable
to ask whether the company should purchase at least some of the parts that would otherwise
bemadeinitsownfactory.Theanswertothequestionisthemakeorbuydecision.Themake
versus buy question is probably appropriate to ask for every component used by the
company.
Cost is the most important factor in deciding whether a part should be made in-house
or purchased. If the vendor is significantly more proficient in the processes required to
make the component, it is likely that the internal production cost will be greater than the
purchase price even when a profit is included for the vendor. On the other hand, if
purchasingthe partresultsinidleequipmentinthefactory, thenanapparent costadvantage
forthevendormaybeadisadvantageforthehomefactory.Considerthefollowingexample.
950
Chapter 40/Manufacturing Engineering

Example 40.1
Make or Buy Cost
Comparison
Suppose that the quoted price for a certain component from a vendor is $8.00 per unit for
1000 units. The same part made in the home factory would cost $9.00. The cost break-
down on the make alternative is as follows:
Unit material cost ¼ $2:25 per unit
Direct labor ¼ $2:00 per unit
Labor overhead at 150% ¼ $3:00 per unit
Equipment fixed cost ¼ $1:75 per unit
Total ¼ $9:00 per unit
Should the component by bought or made in-house?
Solution:
Although the vendor’s quote seems to favor the buy decision, let us consider
the possible effect on the factory if we decide to accept the quote. The equipment fixed
costisanallocatedcostbasedonaninvestmentthathasalreadybeenmade.Ifitturnsout
that the equipment is rendered idle by the decision to buy the part, then one might argue
that the fixed cost of $1.75 continues even if the equipment is not in use. Similarly, the
overhead cost of $3.00 consists of factory floor space, indirect labor, and other costs that
will also continue even if the part is bought. By this reasoning, the decision to purchase
might cost the company as much as $8.00 þ $1.75 þ $3.00 ¼ $12.75 per unit if it results in
idle time in the factory on the machine that would have been used to make the part.
On the other hand, if the equipment can be used to produce other components for
which the internal prices are less than the corresponding external quotes, then a buy
decision makes good economic sense.
n
Make or buy decisions are rarely as clear as in Example 40.1. Some of the other
factors that enter the decision are listed in Table 40.4. Although these factors appear to
be subjective, they all have cost implications, either directly or indirectly. In recent
years, major companies have placed strong emphasis on building close relationships
with parts suppliers. This trend has been especially prevalent in the automobile
industry, where long-term agreements have been reached between each carmaker
and a limited number of vendors who are able to deliver high-quality components
reliably on schedule.
TABLE 40.4
Key factors in the make or buy decision.
Factor
Explanation and Effect on Make/Buy Decision
Process available in-
house
If a given process is not available internally, then the obvious decision is to purchase.
Vendors often develop proficiency in a limited set of processes that makes them cost
competitive in external-internal comparisons. There are exceptions to this guideline, in
which a company decides that, in its long-term strategy, it must develop a proficiency in a
manufacturing process technology that it does not currently possess.
Production quantity
Number of units required. High volume tends to favor make decisions. Low quantities tend
to favor buy decisions.
Product life
Long product life favors internal production.
Standard items
Standard catalog items, such as bolts, screws, nuts, and many other types of components are
produced economically by suppliers specializing in those products. It is almost always
better to purchase these standard items.
Supplier reliability
The reliable supplier gets the business.
Alternative source
In some cases, factories buy parts from vendors as an alternative source to their own
production plants. This is an attempt to ensure uninterrupted supply of parts, or to smooth
production in peak demand periods.
Section 40.1/Process Planning
951

40.1.3 COMPUTER-AIDED PROCESS PLANNING
During the last several decades, there has been considerable interest in computer-aided
process planning (CAPP)—automating the process planning function by means of computer
systems. Shop people knowledgeable in manufacturing processes are gradually retiring. An
alternative approach to process planning is needed, and CAPP systems provide this
alternative. Computer-aided process planning systems are designed around either of two
approaches: retrieval systems and generative systems.
Retrieval CAPP Systems
Retrieval CAPP systems, also known as variant CAPP
systems, are based on group technology and parts classification and coding (Section 39.5).
In these systems, a standard process plan is stored in computer files for each part code
number. The standard plansare based on current part routingsin use in thefactory, or on an
ideal plan that is prepared for each family. Retrieval CAPP systems operate as indicated in
Figure 40.4. The user begins by identifying the GT code of the part for which the process
plan is to be determined. A search is made of the part family file to determine if a standard
route sheet exists for the given part code. If the file contains a process plan for the part, it is
retrieved and displayed for the user. The standard process plan is examined to determine
whether modifications are necessary. Although the new part has the same code number,
minor differences in the processes might be required to make the part. The standard plan is
edited accordingly. The capacity to alter an existing process plan is why retrieval CAPP
systems are also called variant systems.
Ifthefiledoesnotcontainastandardprocessplanfor thegivencodenumber,theuser
may search the file for a similar code number for which a standard routing exists. By editing
the existing process plan, or by starting from scratch, the user develops the process plan for
the new part. This becomes the standard process plan for the new part code number.
The final step is the process plan formatter, which prints the route sheet in the proper
format.Theformattermaycallotherapplicationprograms:determiningcuttingconditionsfor
machine tool operations, calculating standard times for machining operations, or computing
cost estimates.
Generative CAPP Systems
Generative CAPP systems are an alternative to retrieval
systems. Rather than retrieving and editing existing plans from a database, a generative
system creates the process plan using systematic procedures that might be applied by a
human planner. In a fully generative CAPP system, the process sequence is planned
without human assistance and without predefined standard plans.
Designing a generative CAPP system is a problem in the field of expert systems, a
branch of artificial intelligence. Expert systems are computer programs capable of solving
complexproblemsthatnormallyrequireahumanwhohasyearsofeducationandexperience.
Standard
process plan
file
Edit existing
plan or write
new plan
Retrieve
standard
process plan
Search part
family file for
GT code
Derive GT
code number
for part
Other
application
programs
Part family
file
Process plan
formatter
Process plan
(route sheet)
FIGURE 40.4
Operation of a retrieval computer-aided process planning system. (Source: [5].)
952
Chapter 40/Manufacturing Engineering

Process planning fits that definition. Several ingredients are required in a fully generative
CAPP system:
1. Knowledge base. The technical knowledge of manufacturing and the logic used by
successful process planners must be captured and coded into a computer program. An
expert system applied to process planning requires the knowledge and logic of human
processplannerstobeincorporatedintoaknowledgebase.Generative CAPPsystemsthen
use the knowledge base to solve process planning problems; that is, to create route sheets.
2. Computer-compatible part description. Generative process planning requires a com-
puter-compatible description of the part. The description contains all the pertinent data
needed to plan the process sequence. Two possible descriptions are (1) the geometric
model of the part developed on a CAD system during product design, or (2) a group
technology code number of the part defining its features in significant detail.
3. Inference engine. AgenerativeCAPPsystemrequiresthecapabilitytoapplytheplanning
logic and process knowledge contained in the knowledge base to a given part description.
The CAPP system applies its knowledge base to solve a specific problem of planning the
processforanewpart.Thisproblem-solvingprocedureisreferredtoastheinferenceengine
intheterminologyofexpertsystems.Byusingitsknowledgebaseandinferenceengine,the
CAPP system synthesizes a new process plan for each new part presented to it.
Beneﬁts of CAPP
Benefits of computer-automated process planning include the follow-
ing: (1) process rationalization and standardization—automated process planning leads to
more logical and consistent process plans than when traditional process planning is used; (2)
increased productivity of process planners—the systematic approach and availability of
standard process plans in the data files permit a greater number of process plans to be
developed by the user; (3) reduced lead time to prepare process plans; (4) improved legibility
compared to manually prepared route sheets; and (5) ability to interface CAPP programs
with other application programs, such as cost estimating, work standards, and others.
40.2
PROBLEM SOLVING AND CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT
Problems arise in manufacturing that require technical staff support beyond what is normally
available in the line organization of the production departments. Providing this technical
support is one of the responsibilities of manufacturing engineering. The problems are usually
specific to the particular technologies of the processes performed in the operating depart-
ment. In machining, the problems may relate to selection of cutting tools, fixtures that do not
work properly, parts with out-of-tolerance conditions, or non-optimal cutting conditions. In
plastic molding, the problems may be excessive flash, parts sticking in the mold, or any of
several defects that can occur in a molded part. These problems are technical, and engineer-
ing expertise is often required to solve them.
In some cases, the solution may require a design change; for example, changing the
toleranceonapart dimensiontoeliminatea finishgrindingoperationwhilestill achieving the
functionalityofthepart.Themanufacturingengineerisresponsiblefordevelopingtheproper
solution to the problem and proposing the engineering change to the design department.
One of the areas that is ripe for improvement is setup time. The procedures involved
in changing over from one production setup to the next (i.e., in batch production) are time
consuming and costly. Manufacturing engineers are responsible for analyzing changeover
procedures and finding ways to reduce the time required to perform them. Some of the
approaches used in setup reduction are described in Section 41.4.
In addition to solving current technical problems (‘‘fire fighting,’’ as it might be called),
the manufacturing engineering department is also responsible for continuous improvement
Section 40.2/Problem Solving and Continuous Improvement
953

projects.Continuousimprovementmeansconstantlysearchingforandimplementingwaysto
reduce cost, improve quality, and increase productivity in manufacturing. It is accomplished
one project at a time. Depending on the type of problem area, it may involve a project team
whose membership includes not only manufacturing engineers, but also other personnel such
as product designers, quality engineers, and production workers.
40.3
CONCURRENT ENGINEERING AND DESIGN FOR
MANUFACTURABILITY
Much of the process planning function described in Section 40.1 is preempted by decisions
made in product design. Decisions on material, part geometry, tolerances, surface finish,
grouping of parts into subassemblies, and assembly techniques limit the available manu-
facturing processes that can be used to make a given part. If the product engineer designs an
aluminum sand casting with features that can be achieved only by machining (e.g., flat
surfaces with good finishes, close tolerances, and threaded holes), then the process planner
has no choice but to plan for sand casting followed by the required machining operations. If
the product designer specifies a collection of sheet-metal stampings to be assembled by
threadedfasteners,thentheprocessplannermustlayouttheseriesofblanking,punching,and
formingstepstofabricatethestampingsandthenassemblethem.Inbothoftheseexamples,a
plastic molded part may be a superior design, both functionally and economically. It is
important for the manufacturing engineer to act as an advisor to the design engineer in
matters of manufacturability because manufacturability matters, not only to the production
departments but to the design engineer. A product design that is functionally superior and at
the same time can be produced at minimum cost holds the greatest promise of success in the
marketplace. Successful careers in design engineering are built on successful products.
Terms often associated with this attempt to favorably influence the manufacturability
ofaproductaredesignformanufacturing(DFM)anddesignforassembly(DFA).Ofcourse,
DFM and DFA are inextricably coupled, so let us refer to them as DFM/A. The scope of
DFM/A is expanded in some companies to include not only manufacturability issues but also
marketability, testability, serviceability, maintainability, and so forth. This broader view calls
for inputs from many departments in addition to design and manufacturing engineering. The
approach is called concurrent engineering. Our discussion is organized into two sections:
DFM/A and concurrent engineering.
40.3.1 DESIGN FOR MANUFACTURING AND ASSEMBLY
Design for manufacturing and assembly is an approach to product design that systemati-
cally includes considerations of manufacturability and assemblability in the design.
DFM/A includes organizational changes and design principles and guidelines.
To implement DFM/A, a company must change its organizational structure, either
formally or informally, to provide closer interaction and better communication between
design and manufacturing personnel. This is often accomplished by forming project teams
consisting of product designers, manufacturing engineers, and other specialties (e.g., quality
engineers, material scientists) to design the product. In some companies, design engineers are
required to spend some career time in manufacturing to learn about the problems encoun-
tered in making things. Another possibility is to assign manufacturing engineers to the
product design department as full-time consultants.
DFM/A also includes principles and guidelines that indicate how to design a given
product for maximum manufacturability. Many of these are universal design guidelines,
such as those presented in Table 40.5. They are rules of thumb that can be applied to nearly
954
Chapter 40/Manufacturing Engineering

any product design situation. In addition, several of our chapters on manufacturing
processes include DFM/A principles that are specific to those processes.
The guidelines are sometimes in conflict. For example, one guideline for part design is
to make the geometry as simple as possible. Yet, in design for assembly, it is often desirableto
combinefeaturesofseveralassembledpartsintoasinglecomponenttoreducepartcountand
assembly time. In these instances, design for manufacture conflicts with design for assembly,
and a compromise must be found that achieves the best balance between opposing sides of
the conflict.
Benefits typically cited for DFM/A include (1) shorter time to bring the product to
market, (2) smoother transition into production, (3) fewer components in the final
TABLE 40.5
General principles and guidelines in design for manufacturing and assembly.
Minimize number of components. Assembly costs are reduced. The final product is more reliable because there are
fewer connections. Disassembly for maintenance and field service is easier. Reduced part count usually means
automation is easier to implement. Work-in-process is reduced, and there are fewer inventory control problems.
Fewer parts need to be purchased, which reduces ordering costs.
Use standard commercially available components. Design time and effort are reduced. Design of custom-engineered
components is avoided. There are fewer part numbers. Inventory control is facilitated. Quantity discounts may be
possible.
Use common parts across product lines. There is an opportunity to apply group technology (Section 39.5).
Implementation of manufacturing cells may be possible. Quantity discounts may be possible.
Design for ease of part fabrication. Net shape and near net shape processes may be feasible. Part geometry is
simplified, and unnecessary features are avoided. Unnecessary surface finish requirements should be avoided;
otherwise, additional processing may be needed.
Design parts with tolerances that are within process capability. Tolerances tighter than the process capability
(Section 42.2) should be avoided; otherwise, additional processing or sortation will be required. Bilateral tolerances
should be specified.
Design the product to be foolproof during assembly. Assembly should be unambiguous. Components should be
designed so they can be assembled only one way. Special geometric features must sometimes be added to
components to achieve foolproof assembly.
Minimize use of flexible components. Flexible components include parts made of rubber, belts, gaskets, cables, etc.
Flexible components are generally more difficult to handle and assemble.
Design for ease of assembly. Part features such as chamfers and tapers should be designed on mating parts. Design the
assembly using base parts to which other components are added. The assembly should be designed so that
components are added from one direction, usually vertically. Threaded fasteners (screws, bolts, nuts) should be
avoided where possible, especially when automated assembly is used; instead, fast assembly techniques such as snap
fits and adhesive bonding should be employed. The number of distinct fasteners should be minimized.
Use modular design. Each subassembly should consist of five to fifteen parts. Maintenance and repair are facilitated.
Automated and manual assembly are implemented more readily. Inventory requirements are reduced. Final
assembly time is minimized.
Shape parts and products for ease of packaging. The product should be designed so that standard packaging cartons
can be used, which are compatible with automated packaging equipment. Shipment to customer is facilitated.
Eliminate or reduce adjustment required. Adjustments are time-consuming in assembly. Designing adjustments into
the product means more opportunities for out-of-adjustment conditions to arise.
Compiled from [1], [2], [9].
Section 40.3/Concurrent Engineering and Design for Manufacturability
955

product, (4) easier assembly, (5) lower costs of production, (6) higher product quality, and
(7) greater customer satisfaction [1], [2].
40.3.2 CONCURRENT ENGINEERING
Concurrentengineeringreferstoanapproachtoproductdesigninwhichcompaniesattemptto
reduce the elapsed time required to bring a new product to market by integrating design
engineering, manufacturing engineering, and other functions in the company. The traditional
approach to launch a new product tends to separate the two functions, as illustrated in
Figure 40.5(a). Product design develops the new design, sometimes with small regard for the
manufacturing capabilities possessed by the company. There is little interaction between
designengineersandmanufacturingengineerswhomightprovideadviceonthesecapabilities
and how the product design might be altered to accommodate them. It is as if a wall exists
between the two functions; when design engineering completes the design, it tosses the
drawings and specifications over the wall so that process planning can commence.
In a company that practices concurrent engineering (also known as simultaneous
engineering), manufacturing planning begins while the product design is being developed, as
pictured in Figure 40.5(b). Manufacturing engineering becomes involved early in the product
developmentcycle.Inaddition, otherfunctionsarealsoinvolved,suchasfieldservice, quality
engineering, the manufacturing departments, vendors supplying critical components, and in
some cases customers who will use the product. All of these functions can contribute to a
product design that not only performs well functionally, but is also manufacturable,
assemblable, inspectable, testable, serviceable, maintainable, free of defects, and safe. All
viewpoints have been combined to design a product of high quality that will deliver customer
satisfaction. And through early involvement, rather than a procedure of reviewing the final
designandsuggestingchangesafterit is toolate toconvenientlymakethem, thetotalproduct
development cycle is substantially reduced.
FIGURE 40.5
Comparison of: (a) tradi-
tional product develop-
ment cycle, and
(b) product development
using concurrent
engineering.
956
Chapter 40/Manufacturing Engineering

In addition to design for manufacturing and assembly, other objectives include
design for quality, design for life cycle, and design for cost.
With the importance of quality in international competition, and the demonstrated
success of those companies that have been able to produce products of high quality, one must
concludethatdesignforqualityisveryimportant.Chapter42isdevotedtothetopicofquality
control and includes a discussion of several quality approaches related to product design.
Design for life cycle refers to the product after it has been manufactured. In
many cases, a product can involve a significant cost to the customer beyond the
purchase price. These costs include installation, maintenance and repair, spare parts,
future upgrading of the product, safety during operation, and disposition of the product
at the end of its useful life. The price paid for the product may be a small portion of its
total cost when life cycle costs are included. Some customers (e.g., federal government)
consider life cycle costs in their purchasing decisions. The manufacturer must often
include service contracts that limit customer vulnerability to excessive maintenance
and service costs. In these cases, accurate estimates of these life cycle costs must be
included in the total product cost.
A product’s cost is a major factor in determining its commercial success. Cost affects
theprice charged for the productandtheprofit made onit. Design for productcost refersto
the efforts of a company to identify the impact of design decisions on overall product costs
and to control those costs through optimal design. Many of the DFM/A guidelines are
directed at reducing product cost.
REFERENCES
[1] Bakerjian, R., and Mitchell, P. Tool and Manufac-
turing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol. VI, Design
for Manufacturability. Society of Manufacturing
Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1992.
[2] Chang, C-H., and Melkanoff, M. A. NC Machine
Programming and Software Design, 3rd ed. Prentice
Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2005.
[3] Eary, D. F., and Johnson, G. E. Process Engineering
for Manufacturing. Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood
Cliffs, New Jersey, 1962.
[4] Groover, M. P., and Zimmers, E. W., Jr. CAD/CAM:
Computer-Aided Design and Manufacturing. Pren-
tice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1984.
[5] Groover, M. P. Automation, Production Systems,
and Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 3rd ed.
Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New
Jersey, 2008.
[6] Kane, G. E.‘‘The Role of the Manufacturing Engi-
neer,’’ Technical paper MM70-222. Society of Man-
ufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1970.
[7] Koenig, D. T. Manufacturing Engineering. Hemi-
sphere Publishing Corporation (Harper & Row,
Publishers, Inc.), Washington, DC, 1987.
[8] Kusiak, A. (ed.). Concurrent Engineering: Automa-
tion, Tools, and Techniques. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., New York, 1993.
[9] Martin, J. M.‘‘The Final Piece of the Puzzle,’’ Man-
ufacturing Engineering, September 1988, pp. 46–51.
[10] Nevins, J. L., and Whitney, D. E. (eds.). Concurrent
Design of Products and Processes. McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1989.
[11] Tanner, J. P. Manufacturing Engineering, 2nd ed.
CRC Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 1990.
[12] Usher, J. M., Roy, U., and Parsaei, H. R. (eds.).
Integrated
Product
and
Process
Development.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1998.
[13] Veilleux, R. F., and Petro, L. W. Tool and Manu-
facturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol. V,
Manufacturing Management. Society of Manufac-
turing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1988.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
40.1.
Define manufacturing engineering.
40.2.
What are the principal activities in manufacturing
engineering?
40.3.
Identify some of the details and decisions that are
included within the scope of process planning.
40.4.
What is a route sheet?
Review Questions
957

40.5.
What is the difference between a basic process and
a secondary process?
40.6.
What is a precedence constraint in process planning?
40.7.
In the make or buy decision, why is it that purchas-
ing a component from a vendor may cost more than
producing the component internally, even though
the quoted price from the vendor is lower than the
internal price?
40.8.
Identify some of the important factors that should
enter into the make or buy decision.
40.9.
Name three of the general principles and guide-
lines in design for manufacturability.
40.10.
What is concurrent engineering and what are its
important components?
40.11.
What is meant by the term design for life cycle?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 19 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
40.1.
The manufacturing engineering department in an
organization is best described as which one of the
following: (a) branch of the sales department,
(b) concurrent engineers, (c) management, (d) prod-
uct designers, (e) production supervisors, or (f) tech-
nical staff function?
40.2.
Whichofthefollowingaretheusualresponsibilitiesof
themanufacturingengineeringdepartment(fourbest
answers): (a) advising on design for manufacturabil-
ity,(b)facilitiesplanning,(c)marketingtheproduct,
(d)plantmanagement,(e)processimprovement,(f)
process planning, (g) product design, (h) solving
technical problems in the production departments,
and (i) supervision of production workers?
40.3.
Which of the following are considered basic processes,
as opposed to secondary processes (four correct
answers): (a) annealing, (b) anodizing, (c) drilling,
(d) electroplating, (e) forward hot extrusion to
produce aluminum bar stock, (f) impression die
forging, (g) rolling of sheet steel, (h) sand casting,
(i) sheet-metal stamping, (j) spot welding, (k) sur-
face grinding of hardened steel, (l) tempering of
martensitic steel, and (m) turning?
40.4.
Which of the following would be considered second-
ary processes, as opposed to basic processes (four
correct answers): (a) annealing, (b) arc welding,
(c) drilling, (d) electroplating, (e) extrusion to pro-
duce steel automotive components, (f) impression
die forging, (g) painting, (h) plastic injection mold-
ing, (i) rolling ofsheetsteel,(j) sandcasting,(k)sheet-
metal stamping, (l) sintering of pressed ceramic
powders, and (m) ultrasonic machining?
40.5.
Which of the following are operations to enhance
physical properties (three correct answers): (a) an-
nealing, (b) anodizing, (c) die casting, (d) drilling,
(e) electroplating, (f) rolling of nickel alloys, (g) sheet
metal drawing, (h) sintering of pressed ceramic
powders, (i) surface grinding of hardened steel,
(j) tempering of martensitic steel, (k) turning,
and (l) ultrasonic cleaning?
40.6.
A route sheet is a document whose principal function
is which one of the following: (a) continuous improve-
ment, (b) design for manufacturability, (c) provides
authorization for material handlers to move the
part, (d) quality inspection procedure, (e) specifies
the process plan, or (f) specifies the detailed
method for a given operation?
40.7.
In a make or buy situation, the decision should
always be to purchase the component if the ven-
dor’s quoted price is less than the in-house esti-
mated cost of the component: (a) true or (b) false?
40.8.
Which one of the following types of computer-
aided process planning relies on parts classification
and coding in group technology: (a) generative
CAPP, (b) retrieval CAPP, (c) traditional process
planning, or (d) none of the preceding?
958
Chapter 40/Manufacturing Engineering

41
PRODUCTION
PLANNING AND
CONTROL
Chapter Contents
41.1
Aggregate Planning and the Master
Production Schedule
41.2
Inventory Control
41.2.1
Types of Inventory
41.2.2
Order Point Systems
41.3
Material and Capacity Requirements Planning
41.3.1
Material Requirements Planning
41.3.2
Capacity Requirements Planning
41.4
Just-in-Time and Lean Production
41.5
Shop Floor Control
Production planning and control are the manufacturing sup-
port systems concerned with logistics problems in the produc-
tionfunction.Productionplanningisconcernedwithplanning
what products are to be produced, in what quantities, and
when. It also considers the resources required to accomplish
the plan. Production control determines whether the re-
sources to execute the plan have been provided and, if not,
takes the necessary action to correct the deficiency. The scope
ofproductionplanningandcontrolincludesinventorycontrol,
which is concerned with having appropriate stock levels avail-
able of raw materials, work-in-process, and finished goods.
Problems in production planning and control differ for
differenttypesofmanufacturing.Oneoftheimportantfactors
is the relationship between product variety and production
quantity (Section 1.1.2). At one extreme is job shop produc-
tion, in which a number of different product types are each
produced in low quantities. The products are often complex,
consisting of many components, each of which must be
processed through multiple operations. Solving the logistics
problems in such a plant requires detailed planning—sched-
uling and coordinating the large numbers of different com-
ponents and processing steps for the different products.
At the other extreme is mass production, in which a
singleproduct(withperhapssomelimitedmodelvariations)is
produced in very large quantities (millions of units). The
logisticsproblemsinmassproductionaresimpleiftheproduct
and process are simple. In more complex cases, the product is
an assembly consisting of many components (e.g., automo-
bilesandhouseholdappliances)andthefacilityisorganizedas
a production line (Section 39.2). The logistics problem in
operating such a plant is to get each component to the right
workstation at the right time so that it can be assembled to the
product as it passes through that station. Failure to solve this
problem can result in stoppage of the entire production line
for lack of a critical part.
To distinguish between these two extremes in terms of
the issues in production planning and control, we can say that
the planning function is emphasized in a job shop, whereas the
959

controlfunctionisemphasizedinthemassproductionofassembledproducts.Therearemany
variations between these extremes, with accompanying differences in the way production
planning and control are implemented.
Figure 41.1 presents a block diagram depicting the activities of a modern production
planning and control system and their interrelationships. The activities can be divided into
three phases: (1) aggregate production planning, (2) detailed planning of material and
capacity requirements, and (3) purchasing and shop floor control. Our discussion of
production planning and control in this chapter is organized around this framework.
41.1
AGGREGATE PLANNING AND THE MASTER PRODUCTION
SCHEDULE
Any manufacturing firm must have a business plan, and the plan must include what products
will be produced, how many, and when. The manufacturing plan should take into account
current orders and sales forecasts, inventory levels, and plant capacity considerations. There
are several types of manufacturing plans in terms of planning horizon: (1) long-range plans
FIGURE 41.1
Activities in a production planning and control system.
960
Chapter 41/Production Planning and Control

that deal with a time horizon that is more than one year in the future; (2) medium-range
plans that are concerned with the period 6 months to 1 year in the future; and (3) short-
range plans that consider near future horizons such as days or weeks.
Long-range planning is the responsibility of the highest level executives of the
company. It is concerned with corporate goals and strategies, future product lines, financial
planning for the future, and obtaining the resources (personnel, facilities, and equipment)
necessary so that the company will have a future. As the planning horizon is reduced, the
company’s long-range plan must be translated into medium-range and short-range plans that
become increasingly specific. At the medium-range level are the aggregate production plan
and the master production schedule, examined in this section. In the short range are material
and capacity requirements planning, and detailed scheduling of the orders.
The aggregate production plan indicates production output levels for major product
linesratherthanspecificproducts.Itmustbecoordinatedwiththesalesandmarketingplanof
the company and must consider current inventory levels. Aggregate planning is therefore a
high-level corporate planning activity, although details of the planning process are delegated
to staff. The aggregate plan must reconcile the marketing plans for current products and new
productsunderdevelopmentagainstthecapacityresourcesavailabletomakethoseproducts.
The planned output levels of the major product lines listed in the aggregate
schedule must be converted into a very specific schedule of individual products. This
is called the master production schedule, and it lists the products to be manufactured,
when they should be completed, and in what quantities. A hypothetical master schedule
is presented in Table 41.1(b) for a limited product set, with the corresponding aggregate
plan for the product line in Table 41.1(a).
Products listed in the master schedule generally are divided into three categories: (1)
firm customer orders, (2) forecasted demand, and (3) spare parts. Customer orders for
specific products usually obligate the company to a delivery date that has been promised to a
customer by the sales department. The second category consists of production output levels
based on forecasted demand, in which statistical forecasting techniques are applied to
previous demand patterns, estimates by the sales staff, and other sources. The forecast often
dominates the master schedule. The third category is demand for individual component
parts—repair parts to be stocked in the firm’s service department. Some companies exclude
this third category from the master schedule because it does not represent end products.
TABLE 41.1
(a) Aggregate production plan, and (b) corresponding master production schedule for a
hypothetical product line.
(a)
Week
Product line
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
P models
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
50
150
250
Q models
400
400
400
300
300
300
300
250
250
250
R models
100
100
150
150
200
200
200
250
300
350
(b)
Week
Product
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Model P1
50
75
100
Model P2
50
50
Model P3
25
50
Model P4
50
Model Q1
200
200
200
100
100
100
100
50
50
50
Model Q2 (etc.)
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
Section 41.1/Aggregate Planning and the Master Production Schedule
961

The master production schedule is a medium-range plan because it must consider the
lead times required to order raw materials and components, fabricate parts in the factory, and
then assemble and test the final products. Depending on type of product, these lead times can
run from several months to more than a year. However, although it deals with the midterm
horizon,itisadynamicplan.Itisusuallyconsideredtobefixedinthenearterm,meaningthat
changesaredisallowedwithinabout a6-weekhorizon. However, adjustmentsintheschedule
are possible beyond six weeks to deal with shifts in demand or new product opportunities. It
should therefore be noted that the aggregate production plan is not the only input to the
master schedule. Other drivers that may cause it to deviate from the aggregate plan include
new customer orders and changes in sales forecast over the near term.
41.2
INVENTORY CONTROL
Inventorycontrolisconcernedwithachievingabalancebetweentwocompetingobjectives:
(1) minimizing the cost of maintaining inventory and (2) maximizing service to customers.
Inventory costs include investment costs, storage costs, and cost of possible obsolescence
or spoilage. Investment cost is often the dominant factor; a typical case is when the
company invests borrowed money at a certain interest rate in materials that have not yet
been delivered to the customer. All of these costs are referred to as carrying costs. The
company can minimize carrying cost by maintaining zero inventories. However, customer
service is likely to suffer, and customers may decide to take their business elsewhere. This
has a cost, referred to as stock-out cost. A reasonable company wants to minimize stock-
out cost and provide a high level of customer service. Customers are of two kinds: (1)
external customers, the kind we usually associate with the word, and (2) internal
customers, which are the operating departments, final assembly, and other units in the
company that depend on the ready availability of materials and parts.
41.2.1 TYPES OF INVENTORY
Various types of inventory are encountered in manufacturing. The categories of greatest
interest in production planning and control are raw materials, purchased components, in-
process inventory (work-in-process), and finished products.
Different inventory control procedures are appropriate, depending on which type
we are attempting to manage. An important distinction is between items subject to
independent versus dependent demand. Independent demand means that the demand or
consumption of the item is unrelated to demand for other items. End products and spare
parts experience independent demand. Customers purchase end products and spare
parts, and their decisions to do so are unrelated to the purchase of other items.
Dependent demand refers to the fact that demand for the item is directly related to
demandforsomethingelse,usuallybecausetheitemisacomponentofanendproductsubject
to independent demand. Consider an automobile—an end product, the demand for which is
independent.Eachcarhasfourtires(five,ifweincludethespare),whosedemanddependson
the demand for the automobile. Thus, the tires used on new automobiles are examples of
dependentdemand.Foreverycarmadeinthefinalassemblyplant,fourtiresmustbeordered.
The same is true of the thousands of other components used on an automobile. Once the
decision is made to produce a car, all of these components must be supplied to build it.
Tires represent an interesting example because they not only experience dependent
demand in the new car business, but also independent demand in the replacement tire market.
Differentproductionandinventorycontrolproceduresmustbeusedforindependent
and dependent demand. Forecasting procedures are commonly used to determine future
962
Chapter 41/Production Planning and Control

production levels of independent demand products. Production of the components used on
these products is then determined directly from the product quantities to be made. Two
different inventory control systems are required for the two cases: (1) order point systems
and (2) material requirements planning. Order point systems are covered in the following
section. Material requirements planning is covered in Section 41.3.1.
41.2.2 ORDER POINT SYSTEMS
Order point systems address two related problems encountered when controlling invento-
ries of independent demand items: how much to order andwhen to order. The first problem
can be solved using economic order quantity formulas. The second problem can be solved
using reorder points.
Economic Order Quantity
The problem of determining the appropriate quantity that
should be ordered or produced arises in cases of independent demand products, in which
demand for the item is relatively constant during the period under consideration and the
production rate is significantly greater than demand rate. This is the typical make-to-stock
situation. A similar problem is encountered in some dependent demand situations, when
usage of the components in the final product is fairly steady over time and it makes sense to
pay some inventory carrying costs in order to reduce the frequency of setups. In both of these
situations, the inventory level is graduallydepleted over time and then quickly replenished to
some maximum level determined by the order quantity, as depicted in Figure 41.2.
One can derive a total cost equation for the sum of carrying cost and setup cost for
the inventory model in Figure 41.2. The model has a sawtooth appearance, representing
the gradual consumption of product down to a zero, followed by immediate replenish-
ment up to a maximum level Q. Based on this behavior, the average inventory level is
one-half the maximum level Q. The total annual inventory cost equation is
TIC ¼ ChQ
2
þ CsuDa
Q
ð41:1Þ
where TIC ¼ total annual inventory cost (carrying plus ordering costs), $/yr; Q ¼ order
quantity, pc/order; Ch ¼ holding cost (cost of carrying the inventory), $/pc/yr; Csu ¼ cost of
setting up for an order, $/setup or $/order; and Da ¼ annual demand for the item, pc/yr. In
theequation, the ratio Da Q ¼ the number of orders (batches of parts produced) peryear; it
therefore gives the number of setups per year.
The carrying cost Ch is generally taken to be directly proportional to the value of
the item; that is,
Ch ¼ hCp
ð41:2Þ
where Cp ¼ cost per piece, $/unit; and h ¼ annual holding cost rate, which includes
interest and storage charges, (yr)1.
FIGURE 41.2
Model of
inventory level over time
in the typical make-to-
stock situation.
Section 41.2/Inventory Control
963

The setup cost Csu includes the cost of idle production equipment during the
changeover time between batches, as well as whatever labor costs are involved in the
setup changes. Thus,
Csu ¼ TsuCdt
ð41:3Þ
where Tsu ¼ setup or changeover time between batches, hr; and Cdt ¼ cost rate of machine
downtime, $/hr. In cases where parts are ordered from an outside vendor, the price quoted
by the vendor usually includes a setup cost, either directly or in the form of quantity
discounts. Csu should also include the internal costs of placing the order to the vendor.
It should be noted that Eq. (41.1) excludes the actual annual cost of part produc-
tion, which is DaCp. If this cost is included, then annual total cost is given by
TC ¼ DaCp þ ChQ
2
þ CsuDa
Q
ð41:4Þ
By taking the derivative of either Eq. (41.1) or Eq. (41.4) and setting it to zero, we
obtain the economic order quantity formula that minimizes the sum of carrying costs and
setup costs:
EOQ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2DaCsu
Ch
s
ð41:5Þ
where EOQ ¼ economic order quantity (number of parts that should be produced in the
batch), pc; and the other terms are previously defined.
Example 41.1
Economic Order
Quantity
A product is made to stock. Annual demand rate is 12,000 units. One unit of product costs
$10 and the holding cost rate ¼ 24%/yr. Setting up to produce a batch of products requires
changeover of equipment, which takes 4 hr. The cost of equipment downtime plus labor ¼
$100/hr. Determine the economic order quantity and the total inventory costs for this case.
Solution:
Setup cost Csu ¼ 4  $100 ¼ $400. Holding cost per unit ¼ 0.24  $10 ¼ $2.40.
Using these values and the annual demand rate in the EOQ formula, we have
EOQ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2 12; 000
ð
Þ 400
ð
Þ
2:40
r
¼ 2; 000 units
Total inventory costs are given by the TIC equation:
TIC ¼ 0:5 2:40
ð
Þ 2; 000
ð
Þ þ 400 12; 000=2; 000
ð
Þ ¼ $4800
Including the actual production costs in the annual total, by Eq. (41.4) we have
TC ¼ 12; 000 10
ð
Þ þ 4; 800 ¼ $124; 800
n
The EOQ formula has been a widely used model for deciding ‘‘optimum produc-
tion runs.’’ There are variations of Eqs. (41.1) and (41.4) that take into account additional
factors such as rate of production. While the mathematical accuracy of the formula
cannot be disputed, it is instructive to note some of the difficulties encountered in its
application. One difficulty is concerned with the values of the parameters in the equation,
namely setup or ordering cost and inventory carrying costs. These costs are often difficult
to evaluate; yet they have an important effect on the calculated EOQ value.
A second difficulty is concerned with an erroneous tenet of manufacturing philosophy
that has been promulgated by the use of the EOQ formula in the United States. It is that long
productionrunsrepresentanoptimumstrategyinbatchmanufacturing.Nomatterhowmuch
it costs to change the setup, the formula gives the optimum production batch size. The higher
964
Chapter 41/Production Planning and Control

the setup cost, the longer the production run. A preferable approach is to develop ways to
reduce the setup cost by reducing the time required to accomplish a changeover. Setup
reduction is an important component of just-in-time production, andweconsider some of the
ways to reduce setup time in Section 41.4.
When to Reorder
Determining when to reorder can be accomplished in several ways.
Herewedescribethereorderpointsystemthatiswidelyusedinindustry.RefertoFigure41.3,
whichprovidesamorerealisticviewofthelikelyvariationsindemandratethanFigure41.2.In
a reorder point system, when the inventory level for a given stock item declines to some point
definedasthereorderpoint,thisisthesignaltoplaceanordertorestocktheitem.Thereorder
point is set at a high enough level so as to minimize the probability that a stock-out will occur
during the period between when the reorder point is reached and a new batch is received.
Reorder point policies can be implemented using computerized inventory control
systems. These systems are programmed to continuously monitor the inventory level as
transactions are made, and to automatically generate an order for a new batch when the level
fallsbelowthereorderpoint. Anoncomputerizedsystem,calledthetwo-binapproach, starts
with two equally sized bins both filled with parts of a certain type, but parts are only
withdrawn from one of the bins to satisfy demand. When the supply in that bin has been
exhausted, an order is placed to replenish it, and the other bin is used to satisfy demand.
Switchingbackandforthbetweenbinsinthiswayprovidesaverysimplemethodofinventory
control. In effect, the reorder point is signaled when one of the bins becomes empty.
41.3
MATERIAL AND CAPACITY REQUIREMENTS PLANNING
We present two alternative techniques for planning and controlling production and inventory.
In this section we cover procedures used for job shop and midrange production of assembled
products. In Section 41.4, we examine procedures more appropriate for high production.
41.3.1 MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS PLANNING
Material requirements planning (MRP) is a computational procedure used to convert the
master production schedule for end products into a detailed schedule for raw materials
and components used in the end products. The detailed schedule indicates the quantities
of each item, when it must be ordered, and when it must be delivered to achieve the
FIGURE 41.3
Operation
of a reorder point
inventory system.
Demand rate
Reorder
point
Reorder lead time
Time
Q
Section 41.3/Material and Capacity Requirements Planning
965

master schedule. Capacity requirements planning (Section 41.3.2) coordinates labor and
equipment resources with material requirements.
Material requirements planning is most appropriate for job shop and batch produc-
tion of products that have multiple components, each of which must be purchased and/or
fabricated. It is the proper technique for determining quantities of dependent demand
items that constitute the inventories of manufacturing: raw materials, purchased parts,
work-in-process, and so forth.
Material requirements planning is relatively straightforward in concept. Its applica-
tion is complicated by the sheer magnitude of the data that must be processed. The master
schedule specifies the production of final products in terms of month-by-month deliveries.
Each product may contain hundreds of components. These components are produced from
raw materials, some of which are common among the components (e.g., sheet steel for
stampings). Some of the components themselves may be common to several different
products (these are called common use items in MRP). For each product, the components
areassembledintosimple subassemblies, which are added toformothersubassemblies, and
so on, until the final products are completed. Each step in the sequence consumes time. All
of these factors must be accounted for in material requirements planning. Although each
calculation is simple, the large number of calculations and massive amounts of data require
that MRP be implemented by computer.
The lead time for a job is the time that must be allowed to complete the job from start to
finish. There are two kinds of lead times in MRP: ordering lead times and manufacturing lead
times. Ordering lead time is the time required from initiation of the purchase requisition to
receipt of the item from the vendor. If the item is a raw material stocked by the vendor, the
orderingleadtimeshouldberelativelyshort,perhapsafewweeks.Iftheitemisfabricated,the
lead time may be substantial, perhaps several months. Manufacturing lead time is the time
required to produce the item in the company’s own plant, from order release to completion.
Inputs to the MRP System
For the MRP processor to function properly, it must receive
inputs from several files: (1) master production schedule, (2) product design data, in the
form of a bill of materials file, (3) inventory records, and (4) capacity requirements
planning. Figure 41.1 shows the data flow into the MRP processor and the recipients of its
output reports.
The master production schedule was discussed in Section 41.1. The bill-of-materials
file lists the component parts and subassemblies that make up each product. It is used to
compute the requirements for raw materials and components used in the end products listed
in the master schedule. Figure 41.4 shows a (simplified) structure of an assembled product.
Theproduct consists of twosubassemblies, eachconsisting of three parts. Thenumber of each
item in the next level above in the product structure is indicated in parentheses.
The inventory record file identifies each item (by part number) and provides a time-
phasedrecordofitsinventorystatus.Thismeansthatnotonlyisthecurrentquantityoftheitem
listed, but also any future changes in inventory status that will occur and when they will occur.
FIGURE 41.4
Product
structure for assembled
product P1. (Based on
data in [3].)
966
Chapter 41/Production Planning and Control

These data include gross requirements for the item (how many units will be needed to build
products in the master schedule), scheduled receipts, on-hand status, and planned order
releases. Each of these data sets indicates the changes by time period in the schedule (e.g.,
month, week).
How MRP Works
Based on inputs from the master schedule, bill-of-materials file, and
inventory record file, the MRP processor computes how many of each component and raw
material will be needed in future time periods by ‘‘exploding’’ the end product schedule into
successively lower levels in the product structure. The MRP computations must deal with
several complicating factors. First, component and subassembly quantities must be adjusted
for any inventories on hand or on order. Second, quantities of common use items must be
combined during parts explosion to obtain a total requirement for each component and raw
material in the schedule. Third, the time-phased delivery of end products must be converted
into time-phased requirements for components and materials by factoring in the appropriate
lead times. For every unit of final product listed in the MPS, the required number of
components of each type must be ordered or fabricated, taking into account its ordering or
manufacturing lead times. For each component, the raw material must be ordered, account-
ing for its ordering lead time. And assembly lead times must be considered in the scheduling
of subassemblies and final products.
Example 41.2
Material
Requirements
Planning
Consider the requirements planning procedure for one of the components in product P1: C4.
The required deliveries for P1 are indicated in the master production schedule in Table 41.1
(b). According to the product structure in Figure 41.4, two units of C4 are required to make
subassembly S2, and two S2 units are required to make the final product P1. One unit of raw
material M4 is used to make each unit of C4. Ordering, manufacturing, and assembly lead
timesfortheseitemsareknown.ForP1andS2,theleadtimeis1week;forC4,theleadtimeis
2 weeks; and for M4, the lead time is 3 weeks. The inventory status of M4 is 50 units currently
on hand, and zero units of component C4 and S2. There are no scheduled requirements,
receipts, or order releases indicated in the inventory record for these items. Neither material
M4 nor component C4 is used on any other product—they are not common use items.
Determinethe time-phasedrequirementsforM4, C4, andS2to meet themasterschedule for
product P1. Orders for P1 beyond period 10 are ignored in this problem.
Solution:
Table41.2presentsthesolutiontothisMRPproblem. Deliveryrequirements
for P1 must be offset by 1 week to obtain the planned order releases. S2 must be exploded
by 2 units per P1 unit and offset by 1 week to obtain its order release. C4 is exploded by 2
units per S2 unit and offset by 2 weeks to obtain its requirement. And M4 is offset by its 3-
week ordering time to obtain its release date, taking into account current stock of M4 on
hand.
n
Output Reports and Beneﬁts of MRP
MRP generates various output reports that can
be used in planning and managing plant operations. The reports include (1) order releases,
which authorize the placement of orders planned by the MRP system; (2) planned order
releases in future periods; (3) rescheduling notices, indicating changes in due dates for open
orders; (4) cancellation notices, which indicate that certain open orders have been canceled
due to changes in the master schedule; (5) inventory status reports; (6) performance reports;
(7) exception reports, showing deviations from schedule, overdue orders, scrap, and so forth;
and (8) inventory forecasts, which project inventory levels in future periods.
Many benefits are claimed for a well-designed MRP system, including (1) inventory
reductions,(2)fasterresponsetochangesindemand,(3)reducedsetupandchangeovercosts,
(4) better machine utilization, (5) improved ability to respond to changes in the master
schedule, and (6) helpful in developing the master schedule. Despite these claims, MRP
systems have been implemented in industry with varying degrees of success. Some of the
reasons for unsuccessful MRP implementations include (1) inappropriate application, (2)
MRP calculations based on inaccurate data, and (3) absence of capacity planning.
Section 41.3/Material and Capacity Requirements Planning
967

41.3.2 CAPACITY REQUIREMENTS PLANNING
Capacity requirements planning is concerned with determining the labor and equipment
requirements needed to meet the master production schedule. It is also concerned with
identifyingthefirm’slong-termfuturecapacityneeds.Capacityplanningalsoservestoidentify
production resource limitations so that a realistic master production schedule can be planned.
A realistic master schedule must take into account the manufacturing capabilities of
theplantthat istomaketheproducts. Thefirmmust beawareofits productioncapacityand
must plan for changes in capacity to meet changing production requirements specified in
the master schedule. The relationship between capacity planning and other functions in
production planning and control is shown in Figure 41.1. The master schedule is reduced to
material and component requirements using MRP. These requirements provide estimates
of the required labor hours and other resources needed to produce the components. The
required resources are then compared to plant capacity over the planning horizon. If the
master schedule is not compatible with plant capacity, adjustments must be made either in
the schedule or in plant capacity.
TABLE 41.2
Material requirements solution to Example 41.2
Period
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Item: Product P1
Gross requirements
50
75
100
Scheduled receipts
On hand
0
Net requirements
50
75
100
Planned order releases
50
75
100
Item: Subassembly S2
Gross requirements
100
150
200
Scheduled receipts
On hand
0
Net requirements
100
150
200
Planned order releases
100
150
200
Item: Component C4
Gross requirements
200
300
400
Scheduled receipts
On hand
0
Net requirements
200
300
400
Planned order releases
200
300
400
Item: Raw material M4
Gross requirements
200
300
400
Scheduled receipts
On hand
50
50
50
50
50
Net requirements
150
300
400
Planned order releases
150
300
400
968
Chapter 41/Production Planning and Control

Plant capacity can be adjusted in the short term and in the long term. Short-term
capacity adjustmentsinclude (1) employment levels—increasing or decreasingdirect labor in
the plant based on changes in capacity requirements; (2) shift hours—increasing or decreas-
ing the number of labor hours per shift through the use of overtime or reduced hours; (3)
number of work shifts—increasing or decreasing the number of shifts worked per production
period by authorizing evening and night shifts and/or weekend shifts; (4) inventory stock-
piling—thistactic isusedtomaintainsteadyemploymentlevelsduringslow demandperiods;
(5) order backlogs—delaying deliveries to the customer during busy periods when produc-
tion resources are insufficient to keep up with demand; and (6) subcontracting—contracting
work to outside shops during busy periods or taking in extra work during slack periods.
Long-term capacity adjustments include possible changes in production capacity that
generally require long lead times, including the following types of decisions: (1) new equip-
ment—investments in additional machines, more productive machines, or new types of
machines to match future changes in product design; (2) new plants—construction of new
plantsorpurchaseofexistingplantsfromothercompanies;and(3)plantclosings—closing
plants not needed in the future.
41.4
JUST-IN-TIME AND LEAN PRODUCTION
Just-in-time (JIT) is an approach to production that was developed by Toyota Motors in
Japan to minimize inventories. Work-in-process and other inventories are viewed as waste
that should be eliminated. Inventory ties up investment funds and takes up space. To reduce
this form of waste, the JITapproach includes a number of principles and procedures aimed at
reducing inventories, either directly or indirectly. Indeed, the scope of JITisso broad that it is
often referred to as a philosophy. JIT is an important component of ‘‘lean production,’’ a
principal goal of which is to reduce waste in production operations (Section 1.5.1). Lean
production can be defined as ‘‘an adaptation of mass production in which workers and work
cellsaremademoreflexibleandefficientbyadoptingmethodsthatreducewasteinallforms.1
Just-in-time procedures have proven most effective in high-volume repetitive manu-
facturing, such as the automobile industry [4]. The potential for in-process inventory
accumulation in this type of manufacturing is significant because both the quantities of
productsandthenumberofcomponentsperproductarelarge.Ajust-in-timesystemproduces
exactly the right number of each component required to satisfy the next operation in the
manufacturingsequencejustwhenthatcomponentisneeded—’’justintime.’’Theidealbatch
sizeisonepart.Asapracticalmatter,morethanonepartareproducedatatime,butthebatch
size is kept small. Under JIT, producing too many units is to be avoided as much as producing
toofewunits.ThisisaproductiondisciplinethatcontrastswithtraditionalU.S.practice,which
has promoted use of large in-process inventories to deal with problems such as machine
breakdowns, defective components, and other obstacles to smooth production. The U.S.
approach might be described as a ‘‘just-in-case’’ philosophy.
Although the principal theme in JIT is inventory reduction, this cannot simply be
mandated. Several requisites must be pursued to make it possible: (1) stable production
schedules; (2) small batch sizes and short setup times; (3) on-time delivery; (4) defect-free
components and materials; (5) reliable production equipment; (6) pull system of produc-
tion control; (7) a work force that is capable, committed, and cooperative; and (8) a
dependable supplier base.
Stable Schedule
For JIT to be successful, work must flow smoothly with minimal
perturbations from normal operations. Perturbations require changes in operating
1M. P. Groover, Automation, Production Systems, and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing [APSCIM],
p. 834.
Section 41.4/Just-In-Time and Lean Production
969

procedures—increases anddecreases inproduction rate, unscheduledsetups, variations from
the regular work routine, and other exceptions. Perturbations in downstream operations (i.e.,
final assembly) tend to be amplified in upstream operations (i.e., parts feeding). A master
production schedule that remains relatively constant over time is one way of achieving
smooth work flow and minimizing disturbances and changes in production.
Small Batch Sizes and Setup Reduction
Two requirements for minimizing invento-
ries are small batch sizes and short setup times. We examined the relationship between batch
size and setup time in the EOQ formula, Eq. (41.5). Instead of using the EOQ formulajust to
compute batch quantities, efforts should be focused on reducing setup time, thereby
permitting smaller batches and lower work-in-process levels. Some of the approaches
used to reduce setup time include (1) performing as much of the setup as possible while
the previous job is still running; (2) using quick-acting clamping devices instead of bolts and
nuts; (3) eliminating or minimizing adjustments in the setup; and (4) using group technology
and cellular manufacturing so that similar part styles are produced on the same equipment.
On-Time Delivery, Zero Defects, and Reliable Equipment
Success of JIT produc-
tion requires near perfection in on-time delivery, parts quality, and equipment reliability. The
smalllotsizesandpartsbuffersusedinJITrequirepartstobedeliveredbeforestock-outsoccur
atdownstreamstations.Otherwise,productionmustbesuspendedatthesestationsforlackof
parts. If the delivered parts are defective, they cannot be used in assembly. This tends to
promote zero defects in parts fabrication. Workers inspect their own output to make sure it is
right before it proceeds to the next operation. Low work-in-process also requires reliable
production equipment. Machines that break down cannot be tolerated in a JIT production
system.Thisemphasizestheneedforreliableequipmentdesignsandpreventivemaintenance.
Pull System of Production Control
Just-in-time requires a pull system of production
control, in which the order to produce parts at a given workstation comes from the
downstream station that uses those parts. As the supply of parts becomes exhausted at a
given station, it ‘‘places an order’’ at the upstream workstation to replenish the supply. This
order provides the authorization for the upstream station to produce the needed parts. This
procedure, repeated at each workstation throughout the plant, has the effect of pulling parts
through the production system. By contrast, a push system of production operates by
supplying parts to each station in the plant, in effect driving the work from upstream stations
to downstream stations. MRP is a push system. The risk in a push system is to overload the
factory by scheduling more work than it can handle. This results in large queues of parts in
front of machines that cannot keep up with arriving work. A poorly implemented MRP
system, one that does not include capacity planning, manifests this risk.
One famous pull system is the kanban system used by Toyota Motors. Kanban
(pronouncedkahn-bahn)isaJapanesewordmeaning card.Thekanbansystemofproduction
control is based on the use of cards to authorize production and work flow in the plant. There
aretwotypesofkanbans:(1) production kanbans, and (2)transport kanbans. A production
kanban authorizes production of a batch of parts. The parts are placed in containers, so the
batch must consist of just enough parts to fill the container. Production of additional parts
is not permitted. The transport kanban authorizes movement of the container of parts to
the next station in the sequence.
Refer to Figure 41.5 as we explain how two workstations, one that feeds the other,
operate in a kanban system. The figure shows four stations, but B and C are the stations we
want to focus on here. Station B is the supplier in this pair, and station C is the consumer.
Station C supplies downstream station D. B is supplied by upstream station A. When station
C starts work on a full container, a worker removes the transport kanban from that container
and takes it back to B. The worker finds a full container of parts at B that have just been
produced, removes the production kanban from that container, and places it on a rack at B.
970
Chapter 41/Production Planning and Control

The worker then places the transport kanban in the full container, which authorizes its
movement to station C. The production kanban on the rack at station B authorizes
production of a new batch of parts. Station B produces more than one part style, perhaps
for several other downstream stations in addition to C. The scheduling of work is determined
by the order in which the production kanbans are placed on the rack.
The kanban pull system between stations A and B and between stations C and D
operates the same as it does between stations B and C, described here. This system of
production control avoids unnecessary paperwork. The cards are used over and over
rather than generating new production and transport orders every cycle. An apparent
disadvantage is the considerable labor involvement in material handling (moving the
cards and containers between stations); however, it is claimed that this promotes
teamwork and cooperation among workers.
Workforce and Supplier Base
Another requirement of a JIT production system is
workers who are cooperative, committed, and capable of performing multiple tasks. The
workers must be flexible to produce a variety of part styles at their respective stations, to
inspect the quality of their work, and to deal with minor technical problems with the
production equipment so that major breakdowns do not occur.
Just-in-time extends to the material and component suppliers of the company.
Suppliers must be held to the same standards of on-time delivery, zero defects, and other
JIT requisites as the company itself. Some of the vendor policies used by companies to
implement JIT include (1) reducing the total number of suppliers, (2) selecting suppliers
with proven records for meeting quality and delivery standards, (3) establishing long-term
partnerships with suppliers, and (4) selecting suppliers that are located near the company’s
manufacturing plant.
41.5
SHOP FLOOR CONTROL
The third phase in production planning and control (Figure 41.1) is concerned with releasing
production orders, monitoring and controlling progress of the orders, and acquiring up-to-
date information on order status. The purchasing department is responsible for these
functions among suppliers. The term shop floor control is used to describe these functions
when accomplished in the company’s own factories. In basic terms, shop floor control is
concerned with managing work-in-progress in the factory. It is most relevant in job shop and
batch production, where there are a variety of different orders in the shop that must be
scheduled and tracked according to their relative priorities.
A typical shop floor control system consists of three modules: (1) order release,
(2) order scheduling, and (3) order progress. The three modules and how they relate
to other functions in the factory are depicted in Figure 41.6. They are implemented by a
combination of computer systems and human resources.
Order Release
Order release in shop floor control generates the documents needed to
process a production order through the factory. The documents are sometimes called the
FIGURE 41.5
Operation
of a kanban system
between workstations.
Section 41.5/Shop Floor Control
971

shop packet; it typically consists of (1) route sheet, (2) material requisitions to draw the
starting materials from stores, (3) job cards to report direct labor time used on the order,
(4) move tickets to authorize transport of parts to subsequent work centers in the routing,
and (5) parts list—required for assembly jobs. In a traditional factory, these documents
move with the production order and are used to track its progress through the shop. In
modern factories, automated methods such as bar code technology are used to monitor
order status, making some or all of these paper documents unnecessary.
Order release is driven by two principal inputs, as indicated in Figure 41.6: (1) material
requirements planning, which provides the authorization to produce; and (2) engineering
and manufacturing database that indicates product structure and process planning details
required to generate the documents that accompany the order through the shop.
Order Scheduling
Order scheduling assigns the production orders to work centers in the
factory. It serves as the dispatching function in production planning and control. In order
scheduling, a dispatch list is preparedindicating which orders shouldbe accomplishedat each
work center. It also provides relative priorities for the different jobs (e.g., by showing due
dates for each job). The dispatch list helps the department foreman assign work and allocate
resources to achieve the master schedule.
Order scheduling addresses two problems in production planning and control:
machine loading and job sequencing. To schedule production orders through the factory,
FIGURE 41.6
Three modules in a shop ﬂoor control system, and interconnections with other production planning
and control functions.
972
Chapter 41/Production Planning and Control

they must first be assigned to work centers. Assigning orders to work centers is called
machine loading. Loading all of the work centers in the plant is called shop loading. Since
the number of production orders is likely to exceed the number of work centers, each work
center will have a queue of orders waiting to be processed. A given production machine
may have 10 to 20 jobs waiting to be processed.
Job sequencing is the problem of deciding the order in which to process jobs through a
givenmachine.Theprocessingsequenceisdecidedbymeansofprioritiesamongthejobsinthe
queue.Therelativeprioritiesaredeterminedbyafunctioncalledprioritycontrol.Someofthe
rules used to establish priorities for production orders in a plant include (1) first-come-first-
serve—ordersareprocessedinthesequenceinwhichtheyarriveattheworkcenter;(2)earliest
due date—orders with earlier due dates are given higher priorities; (3) shortest processing
time—orders with shorter processing times are given higher priorities; (4) least slack time—
orderswiththeleastslackintheirschedulearegivenhigherpriorities(slacktimeisdefinedasthe
differencebetweenthetimeremaininguntilduedateandtheprocesstimeremaining);and(5)
criticalratio—orderswiththelowestcriticalratioaregivenhigherpriorities(thecriticalratiois
definedastheratioofthetimeremaininguntilduedatedividedbytheprocesstimeremaining).
The relative priorities of the orders may change over time. Expected demand could be
higher or lower for certain products, equipment breakdowns could occur, orders could be
cancelled, or there could be defects in raw materials, among other reasons. Priority control
reviews the relative priorities of the production orders and adjusts the dispatch list accord-
ingly. When an order is completed at one work center, it moves to the next machine in its
routing. Theorderbecomes part of themachineloading forthe next workcenter, andpriority
control is again used to determine the sequence among jobs to be processed at that machine.
Order Progress
Order progress in shop floor control monitors the status of the orders,
work-in-process, and other parameters in the plant that indicate progress and production
performance.Theobjectiveinorderprogressistoprovideinformationtomanageproduction
based on data collected from the factory.
Varioustechniquesareavailabletocollectdatafromfactoryoperations.Thetechniques
range from clerical procedures requiring workers to submit paper forms that are later
compiled, to fully automated techniques requiring no human participation. The term factory
data collection system is sometimes used to identify these techniques. More complete
coverage of this topic is presented in [3].
Information presented to management is often summarized in the form of reports. The
reports include (1) work order status reports, which indicate status of production orders,
includingtheworkcenterwhereeachorderislocated,processinghoursremainingbeforeeach
orderwillbecompleted,whetherthejobisontime,andprioritylevel;(2)progressreportsthat
report shop performance during a certain time period such as a week or month—how many
orders were completed during the period, how many orders should have been completed
duringtheperiodbutwerenotcompleted,andsoforth;and(3)exceptionreportsthatindicate
deviations from the production schedule, such as overdue jobs. These reports are helpful to
management in deciding resource allocation issues, authorizing overtime, and identifying
problem areas that adversely affect achievement of the master production schedule.
REFERENCES
[1] Bedworth, D. D., and Bailey, J. E. Integrated Pro-
duction Control Systems, 2nd ed. John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 1987.
[2] Chase, R. B., and Aquilano, N. J., et al. Production
and Operations Management, 10th ed. McGraw-
Hill-Irwin, Boston, 2001.
[3] Groover, M. P. Automation, Production Systems,
and Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 3rd ed.
Pearson Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, New
Jersey, 2008.
[4] Monden, Y. Toyota Production System, 3rd ed. Engi-
neeringandManagementPress,Norcross,Georgia,1998.
References
973

[5] Orlicky,
J.
Material
Requirements
Planning.
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1975.
[6] Silver, E. A., Pyke, D. F., and Peterson, R. Inventory
Management and Production Planning and Con-
trol, 3rd ed. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1998.
[7] Veilleux, R. F., and Petro, L. W. (eds.). Tool and
Manufacturing
Engineers
Handbook,
4th
ed.,
Vol. V, Manufacturing Management. Society of
Manufacturing
Engineers,
Dearborn,
Michigan,
1988.
[8] Vollman, T. E., Berry, W. L., Whybark, D. C., and
Jacobs, F. R. Manufacturing Planning and Control
Systems for Supply Chain Management, 5th ed.
McGraw-Hill, New York, 2005.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
41.1.
What
is
meant
by
the
term
make-to-stock
production?
41.2.
How does aggregate planning differ from the mas-
ter production scheduling?
41.3.
What are the product categories usually listed in
the master production schedule?
41.4.
What is the difference between dependent and
independent demand for products?
41.5.
Define reorder point inventory system.
41.6.
In material requirements planning, what are com-
mon use items?
41.7.
Identify the inputs to the material requirements
planning
processor
in
material
requirements
planning.
41.8.
What are some of the resource changes that can be
made to increase plant capacity in the short run?
41.9.
Identify the principal objective in just-in-time
production.
41.10.
How is a pull system distinguished from a push
system in production and inventory control?
41.11.
What are the three phases in shop floor control?
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 15 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
41.1.
Which one of the following terms best describes the
overall function of production planning and con-
trol: (a) inventory control, (b) manufacturing lo-
gistics, (c) manufacturing engineering, (d) mass
production, or (e) product design?
41.2.
Which of the following are the three categories of
items usually listed in the master production sched-
ule: (a) components used to build the final prod-
ucts, (b) firm customer orders, (c) general product
lines, (d) orders for maintenance and spare parts,
(e) sales forecasts, and (f) spare tires?
41.3.
Inventory carrying costs include which of the fol-
lowing (two best answers): (a) equipment down-
time, (b) interest, (c) production, (d) setup,
(e) spoilage, (f) stock-out, and (g) storage?
41.4.
Which of the following are the three terms in the
economic order quantity formula: (a) annual
demand rate, (b) batch size, (c) cost per piece,
(d) holding cost, (e) interest rate, and (f) setup cost?
41.5.
Order point inventory systems are intended for
which of the following (two best answers):
(a) dependent demand items, (b) independent
demand items, (c) low production quantities,
(d) mass production quantities, and (e) mid-range
production quantities?
41.6.
With which of the following manufacturing re-
sources is capacity requirements planning primarily
concerned (two best answers): (a) component
parts, (b) direct labor, (c) inventory storage
space, (d) production equipment, and (e) raw
materials?
41.7.
The word kanban is most closely associated with
which one of the following: (a) capacity planning,
(b) economic order quantity, (c) just-in-time
production, (d) master production schedule, or
(e) material requirements planning?
41.8.
Machine loading refers most closely to which one
of the following: (a) assigning jobs to a work center,
(b) floor foundation in the factory, (c) managing
work-in-process in the factory, (d) releasing orders
to the shop, or (e) sequencing jobs through a
machine?
974
Chapter 41/Production Planning and Control

PROBLEMS
Inventory Control
41.1.
A product is made to stock. Annual demand is
86,000 units. Each unit costs $9.50 and the annual
holding cost rate is 22%. Setup cost to produce this
product is $800. Determine (a) economic order
quantity and (b) total inventory costs for this
situation.
41.2.
Given that annual demand for a product is 20,000
units, cost per unit ¼ $6.00, holding cost rate ¼
2.5%/month, changeover (setup) time between
products averages 2.0 hr, and downtime cost during
changeover ¼ $200/hr, determine (a) economic
order quantity and (b) total inventory costs for
this situation.
41.3.
A product is produced in batches. Batch size ¼
2000 units. Annual demand ¼ 50,000 units, and unit
cost of the product ¼ $4.00. Setup time to run a
batch ¼ 2.5 hr, cost of downtime on the affected
equipment is figured at $250/hr, and annual holding
cost rate ¼ 30%. What would the annual savings be
if the product were produced in the economic order
quantity?
41.4.
Assembly of a product requires that a component
part be ordered and stocked. Demand for the
product is constant throughout the year at 7800
units annually. The cost to place an order is $95.
The cost of the part is $56 and the holding cost rate
is 22%. When units are ordered, they take two
weeks to arrive. Determine (a) the economic order
quantity and (b) the reorder point. (c) The parts are
prepackaged in multiples of 100. It saves the sup-
plier unpacking and repackaging time if they can
ship in multiples of 100. The supplier has offered to
reduce the price by $1 per unit if even multiples of
100 are purchased. How much would be saved (if
anything) by taking this offer?
41.5.
A certain piece of production equipment is used to
produce various components for an assembled
product. To keep in-process inventories low, it is
desired to produce the components in batch sizes of
150 units. Demand for each product is 2500 units
per year. Production downtime costs an estimated
$200/hr. All of the components made on the equip-
ment are of approximately equal unit cost, which is
$9.00. Holding cost rate ¼ 30%/yr. In how many
minutes must the changeover between batches be
completed in order for 150 units to be the economic
order quantity?
41.6.
Current setup time on a certain machine is 3.0 hr.
Cost of downtime on this machine is estimated at
$200/hr. Annual holding cost per part made on the
equipment, Ch ¼ $1.00. Annual demand for the
part is 15,000 units. Determine (a) EOQ and (b)
total inventory costs for this data. Also, determine
(c) EOQ and (d) total inventory costs, if the
changeover time could be reduced to 6 minutes.
41.7.
The two-bin approach is used to control inventory
for a particular low-cost component. Each bin
holds 1200 units. The annual usage of the compo-
nent is 45,000 units. Cost to order the component is
around $70. (a) What is the imputed holding cost
per unit for this data? (b) If the actual annual
holding cost per unit is only 7 cents, what lot
size should be ordered? (c) How much more is
the current two-bin approach costing the company
annually,
compared
to
the
economic
order
quantity?
Material Requirements Planning
41.8.
Quantity requirements are to be planned for com-
ponent C2 in product P1. Required deliveries for
P1 are given in Table 41.1. Ordering, manufactur-
ing, and assembly lead times are as follows: for P1
and C2, the lead time is one week; and for S1 and
M2, the lead time is two weeks. Given the product
structure in Figure 41.4, determine the time-phased
requirements for M2, C2, and S1 to meet the
master schedule for P1. Assume no common use
items and all on-hand inventories and scheduled
receipts are zero. Use a format similar to Table 41.2
and develop a spreadsheet calculator to solve.
Ignore demand for P1 beyond period 10.
41.9.
Requirements are to be planned for component C5 in
product P1. Required deliveries for P1 are given in
Table 41.1. Ordering, manufacturing, and assembly
leadtimesareasfollows:forP1andS2,theleadtimeis
one week;for C5,the leadtimeis three weeks;andfor
M5, the lead time is 2 weeks. Given the product
structure in Figure 41.4, determine the time-phased
requirements for M5, C5, and S2 to meet the master
schedule for P1. Assume no common use items. On-
handinventoriesare200unitsforM5and100unitsfor
C5, zero for S2. Usea format similar to Table 41.2 and
develop a spreadsheet calculator to solve. Ignore
demand for P1 beyond period 10.
Problems
975

41.10.
Solve Problem 41.9 except that the following is
known in addition to the information given:
scheduled receipts of M5 are 250 units in period
(week) 3 and 50 units in period (week) 4.
Order Scheduling
41.11.
Four products are to be manufactured in Depart-
ment A, and it is desired to determine how to
allocate resources in that department to meet
the required demand for these products for a
certain week. For product 1, demand ¼ 750/wk,
setup time ¼ 6 hr, and operation time ¼ 4.0 min.
For product 2, demand ¼ 900/wk, setup time ¼ 5 hr,
and operation time ¼ 3.0 min. For product 3,
demand ¼ 400/wk, setup time ¼ 7 hr, and operation
time ¼ 2.0 min. For product 4, demand ¼ 400/wk,
setup time ¼ 6 hr, and operation time ¼ 3.0 min.
The plant normally operates one shift (7.0 hours
per shift), 5 days per week and there are currently
three work centers in the department. Propose a
way of scheduling the machines to meet the weekly
demand.
41.12.
In the previous problem, propose a way of sched-
uling to meet the weekly demand if there were four
machines instead of three.
41.13.
The current date in the production calendar is day
14. There are three orders (A, B, and C) to be
processed at a particular work center. The orders
arrived in the sequence A-B-C at the work center.
For order A, the remaining process time ¼ 8 days,
and the due date is day 24. For order B, the
remaining process time ¼ 14 days, and the due
date is day 33. For order C, the remaining process
time ¼ 6 days, and the due date is day 26. Deter-
mine the sequence of the orders that would be
scheduled using (a) first-come-first-serve, (b) ear-
liest due date, (c) shortest processing time, (d) least
slack time, and (e) critical ratio.
41.14.
Five jobs are waiting to be scheduled on a machine.
For order A, the remaining process time ¼ 5 days,
and the due date is day 8. For order B, the remain-
ing process time ¼ 7 days, and the due date is day
16. For order C, the remaining process time ¼ 11
days, and the due date is day 22. For order D, the
remaining process time ¼ 9 days, and the due date is
day 31. For order E, the remaining process time ¼ 10
days, and the due date is day 26. Determine a
production schedule based on (a) shortest process-
ing time, (b) earliest due date, (c) critical ratio, and
(d) least slack time. All times are listed in days.
976
Chapter 41/Production Planning and Control

42
QUALITY CONTROL
AND INSPECTION
Chapter Contents
42.1
Product Quality
42.2
Process Capability and Tolerances
42.3
Statistical Process Control
42.3.1
Control Charts for Variables
42.3.2
Control Charts for Attributes
42.3.3
Interpreting the Charts
42.4
Quality Programs in Manufacturing
42.4.1
Total Quality Management
42.4.2
Six Sigma
42.4.3
Taguchi Methods
42.4.4
ISO 9000
42.5
Inspection Principles
42.5.1
Manual and Automated Inspection
42.5.2
Contact versus Noncontact Inspection
42.6
Modern Inspection Technologies
42.6.1
Coordinate Measuring Machines
42.6.2
Measurements with Lasers
42.6.3
Machine Vision
42.6.4
Other Noncontact Inspection
Techniques
Traditionally, quality control (QC) has been concerned with
detecting poor quality in manufactured products and taking
corrective action to eliminate it. QC has often been limited
to inspecting the product and its components, and deciding
whether the dimensions and other features conformed to
design specifications. If they did, the product was shipped.
The modern view of quality control encompasses a broader
scope of activities, including various quality programs such
as statistical process control and Six Sigma as well as modern
inspection technologies such as coordinate measuring ma-
chines and machine vision. In this chapter, we discuss these
and other quality and inspection topics that are relevant
today in modern manufacturing operations. Let us begin our
coverage by defining product quality.
42.1
PRODUCT QUALITY
The dictionary defines quality as ‘‘the degree of excellence
which a thing possesses,’’ or ‘‘the features that make some-
thing what it is’’—its characteristic elements and attributes.
The American Society for Quality (ASQ) defines quality as
‘‘the totality of features and characteristics of a product or
service that bear on its ability to satisfy given needs’’ [2].
In a manufactured product, quality has two aspects [4]:
(1) product features and (2) freedom from deficiencies.
Product features are the characteristics of the product
thatresultfromdesign.Theyarethefunctionalandaesthetic
features of the item intended to appeal to and provide
satisfactiontothecustomer.Inanautomobile,thesefeatures
includethesizeofthecar,itsstyling,thefinishofthebody,gas
mileage, reliability, reputation of the manufacturer, and
similar aspects. They also include the available options for
the customer to choose. The sum of a product’s features
usually defines its grade, which relates to the level in the
market at which the product is aimed. Cars (and most other
products) come in different grades. Some cars provide basic
977

transportation because that is what some customers want, while others are upscale for
consumers willing to spend more to own a ‘‘better product.’’ The features of a product are
decided in design, and they generally determine the inherent cost of the product. Superior
features and more of them mean higher cost.
Freedomfromdeficienciesmeansthattheproductdoeswhatitissupposedtodo(within
the limitations of its design features), that it is absent of defects and out-of-tolerance
conditions, and that no parts are missing. This aspect of quality includes components and
subassemblies of the product as well as the product itself. Freedom from deficiencies means
conforming to design specifications, which is accomplished in manufacturing. Although the
inherentcosttomakeaproductisafunctionofitsdesign, minimizing theproduct’scosttothe
lowest possible level within the limits set by its design is largely a matter of avoiding defects,
tolerance deviations, and other errors during production. Costs of these deficiencies make a
long list indeed: scrapped parts, larger lot sizes for scrap allowances, rework, reinspection,
sortation,customercomplaintsandreturns,warrantycostsandcustomerallowances,lostsales,
and lost good will in the marketplace.
Thus, product features are the aspect of quality for which the design department is
responsible. Product features determine to a large degree the price that a company can
charge for its products. Freedom from deficiencies is the quality aspect for which the
manufacturing departments are responsible. The ability to minimize these deficiencies has
an important influence on the cost of the product. These generalities oversimplify the way
things work, because the responsibility for high quality extends well beyond the design and
manufacturing functions in an organization.
42.2
PROCESS CAPABILITY AND TOLERANCES
In any manufacturing operation, variability exists in the process output. In a machining
operation, which is one of the most accurate processes, the machined parts may appear to
be identical, but close inspection reveals dimensional differences from one part to the
next. Manufacturing variations can be divided into two types: random and assignable.
Random variations are caused by many factors: human variability within each
operation cycle, variations in raw materials, machine vibration, and so on. Individually,
thesefactors maynot amounttomuch,butcollectivelytheerrorscanbesignificantenoughto
cause trouble unless they are within the tolerances for the part. Random variations typically
form a normal statistical distribution. The output of the process tends to cluster about the
mean value, in terms of the product’s quality characteristic of interest (e.g., length, diameter).
A large proportion of the population of parts is centered around the mean, with fewer parts
away from the mean. When the only variations in the process are of this type, the process is
said to be in statistical control. This kind of variability will continue so long as the process is
operating normally. It is when the process deviates from this normal operating condition that
variations of the second type appear.
Assignable variations indicate an exception from normal operating conditions.
Something has occurred in the process that is not accounted for by random variations.
Reasons for assignable variations include operator mistakes, defective raw materials, tool
failures, machine malfunctions, and so on. Assignable variations in manufacturing usually
betray themselves by causing the output to deviate from the normal distribution. The
process is no longer in statistical control.
Process capability relates to the normal variations inherent in the output when the
process is in statistical control. By definition, process capability equals 3 standard
deviations about the mean output value (a total of 6 standard deviations),
PC ¼ m  3 s
ð42:1Þ
978
Chapter 42/Quality Control and Inspection

where PC ¼ process capability; m ¼ process mean, which is set at the nominal value of the
product characteristic when bilateral tolerancing is used (Section 5.1.1); and s ¼ standard
deviation of the process. Assumptions underlying this definition are (1) steady state
operation has been achieved and the process is in statistical control, and (2) the output is
normally distributed. Under these assumptions, 99.73% of the parts produced will have
output values that fall within 3.0s of the mean.
The process capability of a given manufacturing operation is not always known, and
experiments must be conducted to assess it. Methods are available to estimate the natural
tolerance limits based on a sampling of the process.
The issue of tolerances is critical to product quality. Design engineers tend to assign
dimensional tolerances to components and assemblies based on their judgment of how size
variations will affect function and performance. Conventional wisdom is that closer toler-
ances beget better performance. Small regard is given to the cost resulting from tolerances
that are unduly tight relative to process capability. As tolerance is reduced, the cost of
achieving the tolerance tends to increase because additional processing steps may be needed
and/or more accurate and expensive production machines may be required. The design
engineer should be aware of this relationship. Although primary consideration must be given
to function in assigning tolerances, cost is also a factor, and any relief that can be given to the
manufacturing departments in the form of wider tolerances without sacrificing product
function is worthwhile.
Design tolerances must be compatible with process capability. It serves no useful
purpose to specify a tolerance of 0.025 mm (0.001 in) on a dimension if the process
capability is significantly widerthan 0.025mm (0.001 in). Eitherthetolerance should be
opened further (if design functionality permits), or a different manufacturing process
should be selected. Ideally, the specified tolerance should be greater than the process
capability. If function and available processes prevent this, then sorting must be included in
the manufacturing sequence to inspect every unit and separate those that meet specifica-
tion from those that do not.
Design tolerances can be specified as being equal to process capability as defined in
Eq.(42.1).Theupperandlowerboundariesofthisrangeareknownasthe naturaltolerance
limits. When design tolerances are set equal to the natural tolerance limits, then 99.73% of
the parts will be within tolerance and 0.27% will be outside the limits. Any increase in the
tolerance range will reduce the percentage of defective parts.
Tolerances are not usually set at their natural limits by product design engineers;
tolerances are specified based on the allowable variability that will achieve required
function and performance. Itisusefulto know the ratioof thespecifiedtolerancerelative to
the process capability. This is indicated by the process capability index
PCI ¼ T
6s
ð42:2Þ
where PCI ¼ process capability index; T ¼ tolerance range—the difference between upper
and lower limits of the specified tolerance; and 6s ¼ natural tolerance limits. The under-
lying assumption inthisdefinitionisthatthe processmean issetequaltothenominaldesign
specification, so that the numerator and denominator in Eq. (42.2) are centered about the
same value.
Table 42.1 shows the effect of various multiples of standard deviation on defect rate
(i.e., proportion of out-of-tolerance parts). The desire to achieve very-low-fraction defect
rates has led to the popular notion of ‘‘six sigma’’ limits in quality control. Achieving Six
Sigma limits virtually eliminates defects in a manufactured product, assuming the process is
maintained within statistical control. As we shall see later in the chapter, Six Sigma quality
programs do not quite live up to their names. Before addressing that issue, let us discuss a
widely used quality control technique: statistical process control.
Section 42.2/Process Capability and Tolerances
979

42.3
STATISTICAL PROCESS CONTROL
Statistical process control (SPC) involves the use of various statistical methods to assess
and analyze variations in a process. SPC methods include simply keeping records of the
production data, histograms, process capability analysis, and control charts. Control
charts are the most widely used SPC method, and this section will focus on them.
The underlying principle in control charts is that the variations in any process
divide into two types (Section 42.2): (1) random variations, which are the only variations
present if the process is in statistical control, and (2) assignable variations that indicate a
departure from statistical control. It is the objective of a control chart to identify when
the process has gone out of statistical control, thus signaling that some corrective action
should be taken.
A control chart is a graphical technique in which statistics computed from measured
values of a certain process characteristic are plotted over time to determine if the process
remainsinstatisticalcontrol.ThegeneralformofthecontrolchartisillustratedinFigure42.1.
The chart consists of three horizontal lines that remain constant over time: a center, a lower
control limit (LCL), and an upper control limit (UCL). The center is usually set at the
nominal design value. The upper and lower control limits are generally set at 3 standard
deviations of the sample means.
It is highly unlikely that a random sample drawn from the process will lie outside
the upper or lower control limits while the process is in statistical control. Thus, if it
happens that a sample value does fall outside these limits, it is interpreted to mean that
the process is out of control. Therefore, an investigation is undertaken to determine the
TABLE 42.1
Defect rate when tolerance is deﬁned in terms of number of standard
deviations of the process, given that the process is operating in statistical control.
No. of Standard
Deviations
Process Capability
Index
Defect
Rate, %
Defective Parts
per Million
1.0
0.333
31.74%
317,400
2.0
0.667
4.56%
45,600
3.0
1.00
0.27%
2,700
4.0
1.333
0.0063%
63
5.0
1.667
0.000057%
0.57
6.0
2.00
0.0000002%
0.002
FIGURE 42.1
Control
chart.
980
Chapter 42/Quality Control and Inspection

reason for the out-of-control condition, with appropriate corrective action to eliminate
the condition. By similar reasoning, if the process is found to be in statistical control, and
there is no evidence of undesirable trends in the data, then no adjustments should be
made since they would introduce an assignable variation to the process. The philosophy,
‘‘If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it,’’ is applicable to control charts.
There are two basic types of control charts: (1) control charts for variables and
(2) control charts for attributes. Control charts for variables require a measurement of
the quality characteristic of interest. Control charts for attributes simply require a
determination of whether a part is defective or how many defects there are in the sample.
42.3.1 CONTROL CHARTS FOR VARIABLES
A process that is out of statistical control manifests this condition in the form of significant
changes in process mean and/or process variability. Corresponding to these possibilities,
there are two principal types of control charts for variables: x chart and R chart. The x chart
(call it ‘‘x bar chart’’) is used to plot the average measured value of a certain quality
characteristic for each of a series of samples taken from the production process. It indicates
how the process mean changes over time. The R chart plots the range of each sample, thus
monitoring the variability of the process and indicating whether it changes over time.
A suitable quality characteristic of the process must be selected as the variable to
be monitored on the x and R charts. In a mechanical process, this might be a shaft
diameter or other critical dimension. Measurements of the process itself must be used to
construct the two control charts.
With the process operating smoothly and absent of assignable variations, a series of
samples(e.g.,m¼ 20ormoreisgenerallyrecommended) ofsmallsize(e.g., n¼ 4, 5,or6 parts
per sample) are collected and the characteristic of interest is measured for each part. The
following procedure is used to construct the center, LCL, and UCL for each chart:
1. Compute the mean x and range R for each of the m samples.
2. Compute the grand mean x, which is the mean of the x values for the m samples; this
will be the center for the x chart.
3. Compute R, which is the mean of the R values for the m samples; this will be the center
for the R chart.
4. Determine the upper and lower control limits, UCL and LCL, for the x and R charts. The
approach is based on statistical factors tabulated in Table 42.2 that have been derived
specificallyforthesecontrolcharts.Valuesofthefactorsdependonsamplesizen.Forthex
TABLE 42.2
Constants for the x and R charts.
R Chart
Sample
Size n
x Chart
A2
D3
D4
3
1.023
0
2.574
4
0.729
0
2.282
5
0.577
0
2.114
6
0.483
0
2.004
7
0.419
0.076
1.924
8
0.373
0.136
1.864
9
0.337
0.184
1.816
10
0.308
0.223
1.777
Section 42.3/Statistical Process Control
981

chart:
LCL ¼ x  A2R
and
UCL ¼ x  A2R
ð42:3Þ
and for the R chart:
LCL ¼ D3R
and
UCL ¼ D4R
ð42:4Þ
Example 42.1 x
and R Charts
Eight samples (m ¼ 8) of size 4 (n ¼ 4) have been collected from a manufacturing process
that is in statistical control, and the dimension of interest has been measured for each
part. It is desired to determine the values of the center, LCL, and UCL for x and R charts.
The calculated x values (units are cm) for the eight samples are 2.008, 1.998, 1.993, 2.002,
2.001, 1.995, 2.004, and 1.999. The calculated R values (cm) are, respectively, 0.027, 0.011,
0.017, 0.009, 0.014, 0.020, 0.024, and 0.018.
Solution:
The calculation of x and R values above comprise step 1 in our procedure. In
step 2, we compute the grand mean of the sample averages.
x ¼ 2:008 þ 1:998 þ    þ 1:999
ð
Þ=8 ¼ 2:000
In step 3, the mean value of R is computed.
R ¼ 0:027 þ 0:011 þ    þ 0:018
ð
Þ=8 ¼ 0:0175
In step 4, the values of LCL and UCL are determined based on factors in Table 42.2. First,
using Eq. (42.3) for the x chart,
LCL ¼ 2:000  0:729 0:0175
ð
Þ ¼ 1:9872
UCL ¼ 2:000 þ 0:729 0:0175
ð
Þ ¼ 2:0128
and for the R chart using Eq. (42.4),
LCL ¼ 0 0:0175
ð
Þ ¼ 0
UCL ¼ 2:282 0:0175
ð
Þ ¼ 0:0399
n
The two control charts are constructed in Figure 42.2 with the sample data plotted in the
charts.
42.3.2 CONTROL CHARTS FOR ATTRIBUTES
Control charts for attributes do not use a measured quality variable; instead, they monitor
the number of defects present in the sample or the fraction defect rate as the plotted
statistic. Examples of these kinds of attributes include number of defects per automobile,
fraction of bad parts in a sample, existence or absence of flash in plastic moldings, and
number of flaws in a roll of sheet steel. The two principal types of control charts for
attributes are the p chart, which plots the fraction defect rate in successive samples; and the
c chart, which plots the number of defects, flaws, or other nonconformities per sample.
p Chart
In the p chart, the quality characteristic of interest is the proportion (p for
proportion) of nonconforming or defective units. For each sample, this proportion pi is the
ratio of the number of nonconforming or defective items di over the number of units in the
982
Chapter 42/Quality Control and Inspection

sample n (we assume samples of equal size in constructing and using the control chart)
pi ¼ di
n
ð42:5Þ
where i is used to identify the sample. If the pi values for a sufficient number of samples are
averaged, the mean value p is a reasonable estimate of the true value of p for the process.
The p chart is based on the binomial distribution, where p is the probability of a
nonconforming unit. The center in the p chart is the computed value of p for m samples
of equal size n collected while the process is operating in statistical control.
p ¼
P
m
i¼1
pi
m
ð42:6Þ
The control limits are computed as three standard deviations on either side of the center.
Thus,
LCL ¼ p  3
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p 1  p
ð
Þ
n
r
and
UCL ¼ p þ 3
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p 1  p
ð
Þ
n
r
ð42:7Þ
where the standard deviation of p in the binomial distribution is given by
sp ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p 1  p
ð
Þ
n
r
FIGURE 42.2
Control
charts for Example 42.2.
Section 42.3/Statistical Process Control
983

If the value of p is relatively low and the sample size n is small, then the lower control limit
computed by the first of these equations is likely to be a negative value. In this case, let LCL
¼ 0 (the fraction defect rate cannot be less than zero).
c Chart
In the c chart (c for count), the number of defects in the sample are plotted over
time. The sample may be a single product such as an automobile, and c ¼ number of quality
defects found during final inspection. Or the sample may be a length of carpeting at the
factory prior to cutting, and c ¼ number of imperfections discovered in that strip. The c
chart is based on the Poisson distribution, where c ¼ parameter representing the number of
eventsoccurring within a defined sample space(defects per car, imperfections per specified
length of carpet). Our best estimate of the true value of c is the mean value over a large
number of samples drawn while the process is in statistical control:
c ¼
P
m
i¼1
ci
m
ð42:8Þ
This value of c is used as the center for the control chart. In the Poisson distribution, the
standard deviation is the square root of parameter c. Thus, the control limits are:
LCL ¼ c  3
ﬃﬃﬃ
c
p
and
UCL ¼ c þ 3
ﬃﬃﬃ
c
p
ð42:9Þ
42.3.3 INTERPRETING THE CHARTS
When control charts are used tomonitor production quality, random samples are drawn from
the process of the same size n used to construct the charts. For x and R charts, the x and R
values of the measured characteristic are plotted on the control chart. By convention, the
points are usually connected, as in our figures. To interpret the data, one looks for signs that
indicate the process is not in statistical control. The most obvious sign iswhen x or R (or both)
lie outside the LCL or UCL limits. This indicates an assignable cause such as bad starting
materials, new operator, broken tooling, or similar factors. An out-of-limit x indicates a shift
in the process mean. An out-of-limit R shows that the variability of the process has changed.
The usual effect is that R increases, indicating variability has risen. Less obvious conditions
may reveal process problems, even though the sample points lie within the 3s limits. These
conditions include (1) trends or cyclical patterns in the data, which may mean wear or other
factors that occur as a function of time; (2) sudden changes in average level of the data; and
(3) points consistently near the upper or lower limits.
The same kinds of interpretations that apply to the x chart and R chart are also
applicable to the p chart and c chart.
42.4
QUALITY PROGRAMS IN MANUFACTURING
Statistical process control is widely used for monitoring the quality of manufactured parts
and products. Several additional quality programs are also used in industry, and in this
section we briefly describe four of them: (1) total quality management, (2) Six Sigma,
(3) Taguchi methods, and (4) ISO 9000. These programs are not alternatives to statistical
process control; in fact, the tools used in SPC are included within the methodologies of
total quality management and Six Sigma.
42.4.1 TOTAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT
Total quality management (TQM) is a management approach to quality that pursues
three main goals: (1) achieving customer satisfaction, (2) encouraging the involvement of
the entire workforce, and (3) continuous improvement.
984
Chapter 42/Quality Control and Inspection

The customer and customer satisfaction are a central focus of TQM, and products are
designed and manufactured with this focus in mind. The product must be designed with the
features that customers want, and it must be manufactured free of deficiencies. Within the
scope of customer satisfaction is the recognition that there are two categories of customers:
(1) external customers and (2) internal customers. External customers are those who
purchase the company’s products and services. Internal customers are inside the company,
such as the company’s final assembly department which is the customer of the parts
production departments. For the total organization to be effective and efficient, satisfac-
tion must be achieved in both categories of customers.
InTQM,workerinvolvementinthequalityeffortsoftheorganizationextendsfromthe
topexecutivesthroughall levels beneath. There is recognition of the important influence that
productdesignhasonproductqualityandhowdecisionsmadeduringdesignaffectthequality
thatcanbeachievedinmanufacturing.Inaddition, productionworkers aremaderesponsible
for the quality of their own output, rather than rely on inspectors to uncover defects after the
parts are already produced. TQM training, including use of the tools of statistical process
control,isprovidedtoallworkers.Thepursuitofhighqualityisembracedbyeverymemberof
the organization.
The third goal of TQM is continuous improvement; that is, adopting the attitude that
it is always possible to make something better, whether it is a product or a process.
Continuous improvement in an organization is generally implemented using worker teams
that have been organized to solve specific problems that are identified in production. The
problemsarenotlimitedtoqualityissues.Theymayincludeproductivity,cost,safety,orany
other area of interest to the organization. Team members are selected on the basis of their
knowledge and expertise in the problem area. They are drawn from various departments
and serve part-time on the team, meeting several times per month until they are able to
make recommendations and/or solve the problem. Then the team is disbanded.
42.4.2 SIX SIGMA
The Six Sigma quality program originated and was first used at Motorola Corporation in the
1980s. It has been adopted by many other companies in the United States and was briefly
discussed in Section 1.5 as one of the trends in manufacturing. Six Sigma is quite similar to
total quality management in its emphasis on management involvement, worker teams to
solve specific problems, and the use of SPC tools such as control charts. The major difference
between Six Sigma and TQM is that Six Sigma establishes measurable targets for quality
based on the number of standard deviations (sigma s) away from the mean in the Normal
distribution. Six sigma implies near perfection in the process in the normal distribution. A
process operating at the 6s level in a Six Sigma program produces no more than 3.4 defects
per million, where a defect is anything that might result in lack of customer satisfaction.
As in TQM, worker teams participate in problem-solving projects. A project requires
the Six Sigma team to (1) define the problem, (2) measure the process and assess current
performance, (3) analyze the process, (4) recommend improvements, and (5) develop a
control plan to implement and sustain the improvements. The responsibility of management
in Six Sigma is to identify important problems in their operations and sponsor the teams to
address those problems.
Statistical Basis of Six Sigma
An underlying assumption in Six Sigma is that the defects
in any process can be measured and quantified. Once quantified, the causes of the defects
can be identified, and improvements can be made to eliminate or reduce the defects. The
effects of anyimprovements can be assessedusing the same measurements in a before-and-
after comparison. The comparison is often summarized as a sigma level; for example, the
process is now operating at the 4.8-sigma level whereas before it was only operating at the
Section 42.4/Quality Programs in Manufacturing
985

2.6-sigma level. The relationship between sigma level and defects per million (DPM) is
listed in Table 42.3 for a Six Sigma program. We see that the DPM was previously
at 135,666 defects per 1,000,000 in our example, whereas it has now been reduced to
108 DPM.
A traditional measure for good process quality is 3s (three sigma level). It
implies that the process is stable and in statistical control, and the variable representing
the output of the process is normally distributed. Under these conditions, 99.73% of
the output will be within the 3s range, and 0.27% or 2700 parts per million will lie
outside these limits (0.135% or 1350 parts per million beyond the upper limit and the
same number beyond the lower limit). But wait a minute, if we look up 3.0 sigma in
Table 42.3, we find that there are 66,807 defects per million. Why is there a difference
between the standard normal distribution value (2700 DPM and the value given in
Table 42.3 (66,807 DPM)? There are two reasons for this discrepancy. First, the values
in Table 42.3 refer to only one tail of the distribution, so that an appropriate
comparison with the standard normal tables would only use one tail of the distribution
(1350 DPM). Second, and much more significant, is that when Motorola devised the
Six Sigma program, they considered the operation of processes over long periods of
time, and processes over long periods tend to experience shifts from their original
process means. To compensate for these shifts, Motorola decided to adjust the standard
normal values by 1.5s. To summarize, Table 42.3 includes only one tail of the normal
distribution, and it shifts the distribution by 1.5 sigma relative to the standard normal
distribution. These effects can be seen in Figure 42.3.
Measuring the Sigma Level
In a Six Sigma project, theperformancelevel of theprocess
of interest is reduced to a sigma level. This is done at two points during the project: (1) after
measurements have been taken of the process as it is currently operating and (2) after
process improvements have been made to assess the effect of the improvements. This
provides a before-and-after comparison. High sigma values represent good performance;
low sigma values mean poor performance.
To find the sigma level, the number of defects per million must first be determined.
There are three measures of defects per million used in Six Sigma. The first and most
important is thedefects permillion opportunities (DPMO),whichconsiders that there may
be more than one type of defect that can occur in each unit (product or service). More
complex products are likely to have more opportunities for defects, while simple products
have fewer opportunities. Thus, DPMO accounts for the complexity of the product and
allows entirely different kinds of products or services to be compared. Defects per million
opportunities is calculated using the following equation:
DPMO ¼ 1; 000; 000
Nd
NuNo
ð42:10Þ
TABLE 42.3
Sigma Levels and Corresponding Defects Per Million in a Six Sigma Program.
Sigma
level
Defects per
million
Sigma
level
Defects per
million
Sigma
level
Defects per
million
Sigma
level
Defects per
million
6.0s
3.4
5.8s
8.5
4.8s
483
3.8s
10,724
2.8s
96,801
5.6s
21
4.6s
968
3.6s
17,864
2.6s
135,666
5.4s
48
4.4s
1,866
3.4s
28,716
2.4s
184,060
5.2s
108
4.2s
3,467
3.2s
44,565
2.2s
241,964
5.0s
233
4.0s
6,210
3.0s
66,807
2.0s
308,538
986
Chapter 42/Quality Control and Inspection

where Nd ¼ total number of defects found, Nu ¼ number of units in the population of
interest, and No ¼ number of opportunities for a defect per unit. The constant 1,000,000
converts the ratio into defects per million.
Other measures besides DPMO are defects per million (DPM), which measures all
of the defects found in the population, and defective units per million (DUPM), which
counts the number of defective units in the population and recognizes that there may be
more than one type of defect in any defective unit. The following two equations can be
used to compute DPM and DUPM:
DPM ¼ 1; 000; 000 Nd
Nu
ð42:11Þ
DUPM ¼ 1; 000; 000 Ndu
Nu
ð42:12Þ
where Ndu ¼ number of defective units in the population, and the other terms are the same
as for Eq. (42.10). Once the values of DPMO, DPM, and DUPM have been determined,
Table 42.3 can be used to convert these values to their corresponding sigma levels.
Example 42.2
Determining the
Sigma Level of a
Process
A final assembly plant that makes dishwashers inspects for 23 features that are considered
importantforoverallquality. Duringthepreviousmonth, 9056 dishwasherswereproduced.
During inspection, 479 defects among the 23 features were found, and 226 dishwashers had
one or more defect. Determine DPMO, DPM, and DUPM for these data and convert each
to its corresponding sigma level.
Solution:
Summarizing the data, Nu ¼ 9056, No ¼ 23, Nd ¼ 479, and Ndu ¼ 226. Thus,
DPMO ¼ 1; 000; 000
479
9056 23
ð
Þ ¼ 2300
The corresponding sigma level is about 4.3 from Table 42.3.
DPM ¼ 1; 000; 000 479
9056 ¼ 52; 893
1.50
M1
M2
M1 + 60
+4.50
FIGURE 42.3
Normal distribution shift by 1.5s from original mean and consideration of only one tail of
the distribution (at right). Key: m1 ¼ mean of original distribution, m2 ¼ mean of shifted distribution, s ¼
standard distribution.
Section 42.4/Quality Programs in Manufacturing
987

The corresponding sigma level is about 3.1.
DUPM ¼ 1; 000; 000 226
9056 ¼ 24; 956
The corresponding sigma level is about 3.4.
n
42.4.3 TAGUCHI METHODS
Genichi Taguchi has had an important influence on the development of quality engineer-
ing, especially in the design area—both product design and process design. In this section
we review two of the Taguchi methods: (1) the loss function and (2) robust design. More
complete coverage can be found among our references [5], [10].
The Loss Function
Taguchi defines quality as ‘‘the loss a product costs society from the
time the product is released for shipment’’ [10]. Loss includes costs to operate, failure to
function, maintenance and repair costs, customer dissatisfaction, injuries caused by poor
design, and similar costs. Some of these losses are difficult to quantify in monetary terms, but
they are nevertheless real. Defective products (or their components) that are exposed before
shipment are not considered part of this loss. Instead, any expense to the company resulting
from scrap or rework of defective product is a manufacturing cost rather than a quality loss.
Lossoccurswhenaproduct’sfunctionalcharacteristicdiffersfromitsnominalortarget
value. Although functional characteristics do not translate directly into dimensional features,
the loss relationship is most readily understood in terms of dimensions. When the dimension
of a component deviates from its nominal value, the component’s function is adversely
affected. No matter how small the deviation, there is some loss in function. The loss increases
at an accelerating rate as the deviation grows, according to Taguchi. If we let x ¼ the quality
characteristic of interest and N ¼ its nominal value, then the loss function will be a U-shaped
curve as in Figure 42.4(a). A quadratic equation can be used to describe this curve:
L x
ð Þ ¼ k x  N
ð
Þ2
ð42:13Þ
where L(x) ¼ loss function; k ¼ constant of proportionality; and x and N are defined above.
At some level of deviation (x2  N) ¼ (x1  N), the loss will be prohibitive, and it is
necessarytoscraporreworktheproduct.Thislevelidentifiesonepossiblewayofspecifying
the tolerance limit for the dimension.
In the traditional approach to quality control, tolerance limits are defined and any
product within those limits is acceptable. Whether the quality characteristic (e.g., the
dimension)isclosetothenominalvalueorclosetooneofthetolerance limits,it isacceptable.
Trying to visualize this approach in terms analogous to the preceding relation, we obtain the
discontinuouslossfunctioninFigure42.4(b).Therealityisthatproductsclosertothenominal
FIGURE 42.4
(a) The
quadratic quality loss
function. (b) Loss function
implicit in traditional
tolerance speciﬁcation.
Tolerance
limits
Tolerance
limits
(a)
(b)
N
N
x1
x2
x
Scrap or
rework cost
Loss
Loss
988
Chapter 42/Quality Control and Inspection

specification are better quality and will provide greater customer satisfaction. In order to
improve quality and customer satisfaction, one must attempt to reduce the loss by designing
the product and process to be as close as possible to the target value.
Example 42.3
Taguchi Loss
Function
A certain product has a critical dimension that is specified as 20.00  0.04 cm. Repair
records indicate that if the tolerance is exceeded, there is a 75% probability that the
product will be returned to the manufacturer at a cost of $80 for replacement and
shipping. (a) Estimate the constant k in the Taguchi loss function, Eq. (42.13). (b) Using
the loss function constant determined in (a), what would be the value of the loss function
if the company could maintain a tolerance of 0.01 cm instead of 0.04 cm?
Solution:
In Eq. (42.13), the value of (x  N) is the tolerance 0.04 cm. The loss is the
expected cost of replacement and shipping, which is calculated as follows:
E L x
ð Þ
f
g ¼ 0:75 $80
ð
Þ þ 0:25 0
ð Þ ¼ $60
Using this expected cost in the loss function, the value of k can be determined as
follows:
60 ¼ k 0:04
ð
Þ2 ¼ 0:0016k
k ¼ 60=0:0016 ¼ $37; 500
Accordingly, the Taguchi loss function is L(x) ¼ 37,500(x  N).
(b) For a tolerance of 0.01 cm, the loss function is determined as follows:
L x
ð Þ ¼ 37; 500 0:01
ð
Þ2 ¼ 37; 500 0:0001
ð
Þ ¼ $3:75
This is a significant reduction from the $60.00 using a tolerance of 0.04 cm.
n
Robust Design
A basic purpose of quality control is to minimize variations. Taguchi
calls the variations noise factors. A noise factor is a source of variation that is impossible
or difficult to control and that affects the functional characteristics of the product. Three
types of noise factors can be distinguished: (1) unit-to-unit, (2) internal, and (3) external.
Unit-to-unit noise factors consist of inherent random variations in the process or
product caused by variability in raw materials, machinery, and human participation.
These are noise factors we have previously called random variations in the process. They
are associated with a production process that is in statistical control.
Internal noise factors are sources of variation that are internal to the product or
process. They include time-dependent factors such as wear of mechanical components,
spoilage of raw materials, and fatigue of metal parts; and operational errors, such as
improper settings on the product or machine tool. An external noise factor is a source of
variation that is external to the product or process, such as outside temperature, humidity,
raw material supply, and input voltage. Internal and external noise factors constitute what
we have previously called assignable variations.
A robust design is one in which the product’s function and performance are relatively
insensitive to variations in design and manufacturing parameters. It involves the design of
both the productandprocess sothatthemanufactured productwill berelatively unaffected
by all noise factors. An example of a robust product design is an automobile whose ignition
starter works as well in Minneapolis, Minnesota in winter as in Meridian, Mississippi in
summer. An example of robust process design is a metal extrusion operation that produces
good product despite temperature variations in the starting billet.
42.4.4 ISO 9000
ISO 9000 is a set of international standards that relate to the quality of the products (and
services, if applicable) delivered by a given facility. The standards were developed by the
Section 42.4/Quality Programs in Manufacturing
989

International Organization for Standardization (ISO), which is based in Geneva, Switzer-
land. ISO 9000 establishes standards for the systems and procedures used by the facility that
determine the quality of its products. ISO 9000 is not a standard for the products themselves.
Its focus is on systems and procedures, which include the facility’s organizational structure,
responsibilities, methods, and resources needed to manage quality. ISO 9000 is concerned
withtheactivitiesusedbythefacilitytoensurethatitsproductsachievecustomersatisfaction.
ISO 9000 can be implemented in two ways, formally and informally. Formal imple-
mentation means that the facility becomes registered, which certifies that the facility meets
the requirements of the standard. Registration is obtained through a third-party agency that
conducts on-site inspections and reviews the facility’s quality systems and procedures. A
benefitofregistrationisthatitqualifiesthefacilitytodobusinesswithcompaniesthatrequire
ISO 9000 registration, which is common in the European Economic Community where
certain products are regulated and ISO 9000 registration is required for companies making
these products.
Informal implementation of ISO 9000 means that the facility practices the standards
or portions thereof simply to improve its quality systems. Such improvements are worth-
while, even without formal certification, for companies desiring to deliver high quality
products.
42.5
INSPECTION PRINCIPLES
Inspection involves the use of measurement and gaging techniques to determine whether a
product, its components, subassemblies, or starting materials conform to design specifica-
tions. The design specifications are established by the product designer, and for mechanical
products they refer to dimensions, tolerances, surface finish, and similar features. Dimen-
sions, tolerances, and surface finish were defined in Chapter 5, and many of the measuring
instruments and gages for assessing these specifications were described in that chapter.
Inspection is performed before, during, and after manufacturing. The incoming
materials and starting parts are inspected upon receipt from suppliers; work units are
inspected at various stages during their production; and the final product should be
inspected prior to shipment to the customer.
We should clarify the distinction between inspection and testing, which is a closely
related topic. Whereas inspection determines the quality of the product relative to design
specifications, testing generally refers to the functional aspects of the product. Does the
productoperatethewayitissupposedtooperate?Willitcontinuetooperateforareasonable
period of time? Will it operate in environments of extreme temperature and humidity? In
quality control, testing is a procedure in which the product, subassembly, part, or material is
observed under conditions that might be encountered during service. For example, a product
might be tested by operating it for a certain period of time to determine whether it functions
properly. If it passes the test, it is approved for shipment to the customer.
Testing of a component or material is sometimes damaging or destructive. In these
cases, the items must be tested on a sampling basis. The expense of destructive testing is
significant, and great efforts are made to develop methods that do not destroy the item.
These methods are referred to as nondestructive testing or nondestructive evaluation.
Inspections divide into two types: (1) inspection by variables, in which the product
or part dimensions of interest are measured by the appropriate measuring instruments;
and (2) inspection by attributes, in which the parts are gauged to determine whether they
are within tolerance limits. The advantage of measuring a part dimension is that data
are obtained about its actual value. The data might be recorded over time and used to
analyze trends in the manufacturing process. Adjustments in the process can be made
based on the data so that future parts are produced closer to the nominal design value.
990
Chapter 42/Quality Control and Inspection

When a part dimension is simply gaged, all that is known is whether it is within tolerance or
too big or too small. On the positive side, gaging can be done quickly and at low cost.
42.5.1 MANUAL AND AUTOMATED INSPECTION
Inspection procedures are often performed manually. The work is usually boring and
monotonous, yettheneed for precision and accuracy is high. Hours aresometimes required
to measure the important dimensions of only one part. Because of the time and cost of
manual inspection, statistical sampling procedures are generally used to reduce the need to
inspect every part.
Sampling versus 100% Inspection
When sampling inspection is used, the number of
parts in the sample is generally small compared to the quantity of parts produced. The sample
size may be only 1% of the production run. Because not all of the items in the population are
measured,thereisariskinanysamplingprocedurethatdefectivepartswillslipthrough.Oneof
the goals in statistical sampling is to define the expected risk; that is, to determine the average
defectratethatwillpassthroughthesamplingprocedure.Theriskcanbereducedbyincreasing
the sample size and the frequency with which samples are collected. But the fact remains that
100% good quality cannot be guaranteed in a sampling inspection procedure.
Theoretically, the only way to achieve 100% good quality is by 100% inspection; thus,
alldefectsare screenedandonly goodparts pass through theinspection procedure. However,
when 100% inspection is done manually, two problems are encountered. The first is the
expense involved. Instead of dividing the cost of inspecting the sample over the number of
parts in the production run, the unit inspection cost is applied to every part in the batch.
Inspection cost sometimes exceeds the cost of making the part. Second, in 100% manual
inspection, there are almost always errors associated with the procedure. The error rate
depends on the complexity and difficulty of the inspection task and how much judgment is
required by the human inspector. These factors are compounded by operator fatigue. Errors
mean that a certain number of poor quality parts will be accepted and a certain number of
good quality parts will be rejected. Therefore, 100% inspection using manual methods is no
guarantee of 100% good quality product.
Automated 100% Inspection
Automation of the inspection process offers a possible way
toovercome the problemsassociated with100% manual inspection. Automatedinspectionis
defined as automation of one or more steps in the inspection procedure, such as (1) auto-
mated presentation of parts by an automated handling system, with a human operator
still performing the actual inspection process (e.g., visually examining parts for flaws); (2)
manual loading of parts into an automatic inspection machine; and (3) fully automated
inspection cell in which parts are both presented and inspected automatically. Inspection
automation can also include (4) computerized data collection from electronic measuring
instruments.
Automated 100% inspection can be integrated with the manufacturing process to
accomplish some action relative to the process. The actions can be one or both of the
following: (1) parts sortation, and/or (2) feedback of data to the process. Parts sortation
means separating parts into two or more quality levels. The basic sortation includes two
levels: acceptable and unacceptable. Some situations require more than two levels, such as
acceptable, reworkable, and scrap. Sortation and inspection may be combined in the same
station. An alternative approach is to locate one or more inspections along the processing
line, and instructions are sent to a sortation station at the end of the line indicating what
action is required for each part.
Feedback of inspection data to the upstream manufacturing operation allows
compensating adjustments to be made in the process to reduce variability and improve
Section 42.5/Inspection Principles
991

quality. If inspection measurements indicate that the output is drifting toward one of the
tolerance limits (e.g., due to tool wear), corrections can be made to process parameters to
move the output toward the nominal value. The output is thereby maintained within a
smaller variability range than possible with sampling inspection methods.
42.5.2 CONTACT VERSUS NONCONTACT INSPECTION
There are a variety of measurement and gaging technologies available for inspection. The
possibilities can be divided into contact and noncontact inspection methods. Contact
inspection involves the use of a mechanical probe or other device that makes contact with
the object being inspected. By its nature, contact inspection is usually concerned with
measuring or gaging some physical dimension of the part. It is accomplished manually or
automatically. Most of the traditional measuring and gaging devices described in Chapter
5 relate to contact inspection. An example of an automated contact measuring system is
the coordinate measuring machine (Section 42.6.1).
Noncontact inspection methods utilize a sensor located a certain distance from the
object to measure or gage the desired feature(s). Typical advantages of noncontact
inspection are (1) faster inspection cycles, and (2) avoidance of damage to the part that
might result from contact. Noncontact methods can often be accomplished on the
production line without any special handling. By contrast, contact inspection usually
requires special positioning of the part, necessitating its removal from the production
line. Also, noncontact inspection methods are inherently faster because they employ a
stationary probe that does not require positioning for every part. By contrast, contact
inspection requires positioning of the contact probe against the part, which takes time.
Noncontact inspection technologies can be classified as optical or nonoptical.
Prominent among the optical methods are lasers (Section 42.6.2) and machine vision
(Section 42.6.3). Nonoptical inspection sensors include electrical field techniques, radia-
tion techniques, and ultrasonics (Section 42.6.4).
42.6
MODERN INSPECTION TECHNOLOGIES
Advanced technologies are substituting for manual measuring and gaging techniques in
modern manufacturing plants. They include contact and noncontact sensing methods. We
beginour coveragewith animportant contact inspectiontechnology:coordinate measuring
machines.
42.6.1 COORDINATE MEASURING MACHINES
A coordinate measuring machine (CMM) consists of a contact probe and a mechanism to
position the probe in three dimensions relative to surfaces and features of a workpart. See
Figure 42.5. The location coordinates of the probe can be accurately recorded as it contacts
the part surface to obtain part geometry data.
In a CMM, the probe is fastened to a structure that allows movement of the probe
relative to the part, which is fixtured on a worktable connected to the structure. The
structure must be rigid to minimize deflections that contribute to measurement errors. The
machine in Figure 42.5 has a bridge structure, one of the most common designs. Special
features are used in CMM structures to build high accuracy and precision into the
measuring machine, including use of low-friction air-bearings and mechanical isolation
of the CMM to reduce vibrations. An important aspect in a CMM is the contact probe and
992
Chapter 42/Quality Control and Inspection

its operation. Modern ‘‘touch-trigger’’ probes have a sensitive electrical contact that emits
a signal when the probe is deflected from its neutral position in the slightest amount. On
contact, the coordinate positions are recorded by the CMM controller, adjusting for
overtravel and probe size.
Positioning of the probe relative to the part can be accomplished either manually or
under computer control. Methods of operating a CMM can be classified as (1) manual
control, (2) manual computer-assisted, (3) motorized computer-assisted, and (4) direct
computer control.
In manual control, a human operator physically moves the probe along the axes to
contact the part and record the measurements. The probe is free-floating for easy
movement. Measurements are indicated by digital read-out, and the operator can record
the measurement manually or automatically (paper print-out). Any trigonometric
calculations must be made by the operator. The manual computer-assisted CMM is
capable of computer data processing to perform these calculations. Types of computa-
tions include simple conversions from U.S customary units to SI, determining the angle
between two planes, and determining hole-center locations. The probe is still free-
floating to permit the operator to bring it into contact with part surfaces.
FIGURE 42.5
Coordinate measuring
machine. (Courtesy of
Brown & Sharpe
Manufacturing Company,
North Kingstown, Rhode
Island.)
Section 42.6/Modern Inspection Technologies
993

Motorized computer-assisted CMMs power drive the probe along the machine axes
under operator guidance. A joystick or similar device is used to control the motion. Low-
power stepping motors and friction clutches are used to reduce the effects of collisions
between probe and part. The direct computer-control CMM operates like a CNC machine
tool. It is a computerized inspection machine that operates under program control. The
basic capability of a CMM is to determine coordinate values where its probe contacts the
surface of a part. Computer control permits the CMM to accomplish more sophisticated
measurementsandinspections,suchas(1)determining centerlocationofaholeorcylinder,
(2) definition of a plane, (3) measurement of flatness of a surface or parallelism between
two surfaces, and (4) measurement of an angle between two planes.
Advantages of using coordinate measuring machines over manual inspection meth-
ods include (1) higher productivity—a CMM can perform complex inspection procedures
in much less time than traditional manual methods; (2) greater inherent accuracy and
precision than conventional methods; and (3) reduced human error through automation of
the inspection procedure and associated computations [8]. A CMM is a general-purpose
machine that can be used to inspect a variety of part configurations.
42.6.2 MEASUREMENTS WITH LASERS
Recall that laser stands for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.
Applications of lasers include cutting (Section 26.3.3) and welding (Section 30.4). These
applicationsinvolvethe use of solid-state laserscapable of focusing sufficient power tomelt
or sublimate the work material. Lasers for measurement applications are low-power gas
lasers such as helium-neon, which emits light in the visible range. The light beam from a
laser is (1) highly monochromatic, which means the light has a single wave length, and (2)
highly collimated, which means the light rays are parallel. These properties have motivated
a growing list of laser applications in measurement and inspection. We describe two here.
Scanning Laser Systems
The scanning laser uses a laser beam deflected by a rotating
mirror to produce a beam of light that sweeps past an object, as in Figure 42.6. A
photodetector on the far side of the object senses the light beam during its sweep except
for the short time when it is interrupted by the object. This time period can be measured
FIGURE 42.6
Scanning
laser system for
measuring diameter of
cylindrical workpart; time
of interruption of light
beam is proportional to
diameter D.
994
Chapter 42/Quality Control and Inspection

quickly with great accuracy. A microprocessor system measures the time interruption that
is related to the size of the object in the path of the laser beam, and converts the time to a
linear dimension. Scanning laser beams can be applied in high production on-line inspec-
tion and gaging. Signals can be sent to production equipment to make adjustments in the
process and/or activate a sortation device on the production line. Applications of scanning
laser systems include rolling-mill operations, wire extrusion, machining, and grinding.
Laser Triangulation
Triangulation is used to determine the distance of an object from two
known locations by means of trigonometric relationships of a right triangle. The principle can
be applied in dimensional measurements using a laser system, as in Figure 42.7. The laser
beam is focused on an object to form a light spot on the surface. A position-sensitive optical
detector is used to determine the location of the spot. The angle A of the beam directed at the
objectandthedistanceHarefixedandknown.Giventhatthephotodetectorislocatedafixed
distance above the worktable, the part depth D in the setup of Figure 42.7 is determined from
D ¼ H  R ¼ H  L cot A
ð42:14Þ
where L is determined by the position of the light spot on the workpart.
42.6.3 MACHINE VISION
Machine vision involves the acquisition, processing, and interpretation of image data by
computer for some useful application. Vision systems can be classified as two dimensional or
three dimensional. Two-dimensional systems view the scene as a 2-D image, which is quite
adequate for applications involving a planar object. Examples include dimensional measur-
ing and gaging, verifying the presence of components, and checking for features on a flat (or
almostflat)surface. Three-dimensionalvisionsystemsare requiredforapplicationsrequiring
a 3-D analysis of the scene, where contours or shapes are involved. The majority of current
applications are 2-D, and our discussion will focus (excuse the pun) on this technology.
Operation of Machine Vision Systems
Operation of a machine vision system consists
of three steps, depicted in Figure 42.8: (1) image acquisition and digitization, (2) image
processing and analysis, and (3) interpretation.
Image acquisition and digitizing is accomplished by a video camera connected to a
digitizing system to store the image data for subsequent processing. With the camera focused
on the subject, an image is obtained by dividing the viewing area into a matrix of discrete
picture elements (called pixels), in which each element assumes a value proportional to the
FIGURE 42.7
Laser
triangulation to measure
part dimension D.
Section 42.6/Modern Inspection Technologies
995

light intensity of that portion of the scene. The intensity value for each pixel is converted to its
equivalent digital value by analog-to-digital conversion. Image acquisition and digitizing is
depicted in Figure 42.9 for a binary vision system, in which the light intensity is reduced to
either of two values (black or white ¼ 0 or 1), as in Table 42.4. The pixel matrix in our
illustration is only 12  12; a real vision system would have many more pixels for better
resolution.Eachsetofpixelvaluesisaframe,whichconsistsofthesetofdigitizedpixelvalues.
Theframeisstoredincomputermemory.Theprocessofreadingallthepixelvaluesinaframe
is performed 30 times per second in United States, 25 cycle/s in European systems.
The resolution of a vision system is its ability to sense fine details and features in the
image. This depends on the number of pixels used. Common pixel arrays include 640
(horizontal)  480 (vertical), 1024  768, or 1040  1392 picture elements. The more pixelsin
the vision system, the higher its resolution. However, system cost increases as pixel count
increases.Also,timerequiredtoreadthepictureelementsandprocessthedataincreaseswith
number of pixels. In addition to binary vision systems, more sophisticated vision systems
distinguish various gray levels in the image that permit them to determine surface character-
istics such as texture. Called gray-scale vision, these systems typically use 4, 6, or 8 bits of
memory. Other vision systems can recognize colors.
FIGURE 42.8
Operation
of a machine vision
system.
FIGURE 42.9
Image
acquisition and digitizing:
(a) the scene consists of a
dark-colored part against
alightbackground;(b)a12
 12 matrix of pixels im-
posed on the scene.
(b)
(a)
996
Chapter 42/Quality Control and Inspection

The second function in machine vision is image processing and analysis. The data for
each frame must be analyzed within the time required to complete one scan (1/30 s or 1/25 s).
Several techniques have been developed to analyze image data, including edge detection and
feature extraction. Edge detection involves determining the locations of boundaries between
an object and its surroundings. This is accomplished by identifying contrast in light intensity
between adjacent pixels at the borders of the object. Feature extraction is concerned with
determining feature values of an image. Many machine vision systems identify an object in
the image by means of its features. Features of an object include area, length, width, or
diameter of the object, perimeter, center of gravity, and aspect ratio. Feature extraction
algorithms are designed to determine these features based on the object’s area and
boundaries. Area of an object can be determined by counting the number of pixels that
make up the object. Length can be found by measuring the distance (in pixels) between two
opposite edges of the part.
Interpretationoftheimageisthethirdfunction.Itisaccomplishedbyextractedfeatures.
Interpretation is usually concerned with recognizing the object—identifying the object in the
image by comparing it to predefined models or standard values. One common interpretation
techniqueistemplatematching,whichreferstomethodsthatcompareoneormorefeaturesof
an image with corresponding features of a model (template) stored in computer memory.
Machine Vision Applications
The interpretation function in machine vision is gener-
ally related to applications, which divide into four categories: (1) inspection, (2) part
identification, (3) visual guidance and control, and (4) safety monitoring.
Inspection is the most important category, accounting for about 90% of all industrial
applications. The applications are in mass production, where the time to program and install
the system can be divided by many thousands of units. Typical inspection tasks include: (1)
dimensional measurement or gaging, which involves measuring or gaging certain dimen-
sions of parts or products moving along a conveyor; (2) verification functions, which
include verifying presence of components in an assembled product, presence of a hole in a
workpart, and similar tasks; and (3) identification of flaws and defects, such as identifying
flaws in a printed label in the form of mislocation, poorly printed text, numbering, or
graphics on the label.
Part identification applications include counting different parts flowing past on a
conveyor, part sorting, and character recognition. Visual guidance and control involves a
vision system interfaced with a robot or similar machine to control the movement of the
machine. Examples include seam tracking in continuous arc welding, part positioning, part
reorientation, and picking parts from a bin. In safety monitoring applications, the vision
system monitors the production operation to detect irregularities that might indicate a
hazardous condition to equipment or humans.
TABLE 42.4
Pixel values in a binary vision system for the image in Figure 42.8.
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Section 42.6/Modern Inspection Technologies
997

42.6.4 OTHER NONCONTACT INSPECTION TECHNIQUES
In addition to optical inspection methods, there are various nonoptical techniques used in
inspection. These include sensor techniques based on electrical fields, radiation, and
ultrasonics.
Under certain conditions, electrical fields created by an electrical probe can be used
for inspection. The fields include reluctance, capacitance, and inductance; they are affected
by an object in the vicinity of the probe. In a typical application, the workpart is positioned
in a fixed relationship to the probe. By measuring the effect of the object on the electrical
field, an indirect measurement of certain part characteristics can be made, such as
dimensional features, thickness of sheet material, and flaws (cracks and voids below
the surface) in the material.
Radiation techniques use X-ray radiation to inspect metals and weldments. The
amount of radiation absorbed by the metal object indicates thickness and presence of
flaws in the part or welded section. For example, X-ray inspection is used to measure
thickness of sheet metal in rolling (Section 19.1). Data from the inspection is used to
adjust the gap between rolls in the rolling mill.
Ultrasonic techniques use high-frequency sound (>20,000 Hz) to perform various
inspection tasks. One of the techniques analyses the ultrasonic waves emitted by a probe
and reflected off the object. During the setup for the inspection procedure, an ideal test
part is positioned in front of the probe to obtain a reflected sound pattern. This sound
pattern is used as the standard against which production parts are subsequently com-
pared. If the reflected pattern from a given part matches the standard, the part is
accepted. If a match is not obtained, the part is rejected.
REFERENCES
[1] DeFeo, J. A., Gryna, F. M., and Chua, R. C. H. Juran’s
Quality Planning and Analysis for Enterprise Qual-
ity, 5th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2006.
[2] Evans, J. R., and Lindsay, W. M. The Management
and Control of Quality, 6th ed. Thomson/South-
Western
College
Publishing
Company,
Mason,
Ohio, 2005.
[3] Groover, M. P. Automation, Production Systems, and
Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 3rd ed. Pren-
tice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2008.
[4] Juran, J. M., and Gryna, F. M. Quality Planning and
Analysis, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1993.
[5] Lochner, R. H., and Matar, J. E. Designing for Quality.
ASQC Quality Press, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 1990.
[6] Montgomery, D. C. Introduction to Statistical
Quality Control, 6th ed. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
[7] Pyzdek, T., and Keller, P. Quality Engineering
Handbook. 2nd ed. CRC Taylor & Francis, Boca
Raton, Florida, 2003.
[8] Schaffer, G. H.‘‘Taking the Measure of CMMs.’’
Special Report 749, American Machinist, October
1982, pp. 145–160.
[9] Schaffer, G. H.‘‘Machine Vision: A Sense for CIM.’’
Special Report 767, American Machinist, June 1984,
pp. 101–120.
[10] Taguchi, G., Elsayed, E. A., and Hsiang, T. C. Qual-
ity Engineering in Production Systems. McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1989.
[11] Wick, C., and Veilleux, R. F. Tool and Manufactur-
ing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed. Vol. IV, Quality
Control and Assembly. Society of Manufacturing
Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1987.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
42.1.
What are the two principal aspects of product
quality?
42.2.
How is a process operating in statistical control
distinguished from one that is not?
42.3.
Define process capability.
42.4.
What are the natural tolerance limits?
42.5.
What is the difference between control charts for
variables and control charts for attributes?
998
Chapter 42/Quality Control and Inspection

42.6.
Identify the two types of control charts for
variables.
42.7.
What are the two basic types of control charts for
attributes?
42.8.
When interpreting a control chart, what does one
look for to identify problems?
42.9.
What are the three main goals in total quality
management (TQM)?
42.10.
What is the difference between external customers
and internal customers in TQM?
42.11.
At what company was the Six Sigma quality pro-
gram first used?
42.12.
Why is the normal statistical table used in a Six
Sigma program different from the standard normal
tables found in textbooks on probability and
statistics?
42.13.
A Six Sigma program uses three measures of de-
fects per million (DPM) to assess the performance
of a given process. Name the three measures of
DPM.
42.14.
What is meant by robust design, as defined by
Taguchi?
42.15.
Automated inspection can be integrated with the
manufacturing
process
to
accomplish
certain
actions. What are these possible actions?
42.16.
Give an example of a noncontact inspection
technique.
42.17.
What is a coordinate measuring machine?
42.18.
Describe a scanning laser system.
42.19.
What is a binary vision system?
42.20.
Name some of the nonoptical noncontact sensor
technologies available for inspection.
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUIZ
There are 23 correct answers in the following multiple choice questions (some questions have multiple answers that are
correct). To attain a perfect score on the quiz, all correct answers must be given. Each correct answer is worth 1 point. Each
omitted answer or wrong answer reduces the score by 1 point, and each additional answer beyond the correct number of
answers reduces the score by 1 point. Percentage score on the quiz is based on the total number of correct answers.
42.1.
Which of the following quality aspects would be
classified as examples of freedom from deficiencies
rather than product features (two correct answers):
(a) components within tolerance, (b) location of on/
off switch, (c) no missing parts, (d) product weight,
(e) reliability, and (f) reputation of the company?
42.2.
If the product tolerance is set so that the process
capability index ¼ 1.0, then the percentage of parts
that are within tolerance will be closest to which
one of the following when the process is operating
in statistical control: (a) 35%, (b) 65%, (c) 95%,
(d) 99%, or (e) 100%?
42.3.
In a control chart, the upper control limit is set
equal to which one of the following: (a) process
mean, (b) process mean plus three standard devia-
tions, (c) upper design tolerance limit, or (d) upper
value of the maximum range R?
42.4.
The R chart is used for which one of the following
product or part characteristics: (a) number of re-
jects in the sample, (b) number of reworked parts in
a sample, (c) radius of a cylindrical part, or
(d) range of sample values?
42.5.
Which one of the following best describes the situa-
tions for which the c chart is most suited: (a) control
of defective parts, (b) mean value of part character-
istic of interest, (c) number of defects in a sample, or
(d) proportion of defects in a sample?
42.6.
Which of the following identify a likely out-of-
control condition in a control chart (three correct
answers): (a) consistently increasing value of x,
(b) points near the central line, (c) points oscillat-
ing back and forth across the central line, (d) R
outside the control limits of the R chart, (e) sample
points consistently slightly above the central line,
and (f) x outside the control limits of the x chart?
42.7.
Which of the following are the three main goals in a
total quality management program: (a) achieving
customer satisfaction, (b) computing defects per
million, (c) continuous improvement, (d) develop-
ing robust product and process designs, (e) encour-
aging the involvement of the entire workforce, (f)
forming worker teams, (g) statistical process con-
trol, and (h) zero defects?
42.8.
Which one of the following measures in a Six Sigma
program allows products of different complexity to
be directly compared: (a) defects per million units,
(b) defects per million opportunities, or (c) defec-
tive units per million units?
42.9.
Which
of
the
following
principles
and/or
approaches are generally credited to G. Taguchi
(two correct answers): (a) acceptance sampling, (b)
control charts, (c) loss function, (d) Pareto priority
index, and (e) robust design?
42.10.
Which of the following phrases relating to ISO 9000
are correct (three correct answers): (a) certified by
the International Standards Office located in Ge-
neva, Switzerland, (b) developed by the Interna-
tional Organization for Standardization located
somewhere in Europe, (c) establishes standards
for the quality systems and procedures used by a
Multiple Choice Quiz
999

facility, (d) establishes standards for the products
and services delivered by a facility, and (e) registra-
tion in ISO 9000 obtained through a third-party
agency that certifies the facility’s quality systems?
42.11.
The two basic types of inspection are inspection by
variables and inspection by attributes. The second
of these inspections uses which one of the follow-
ing: (a) destructive testing, (b) gaging, (c) measur-
ing, or (d) nondestructive testing?
42.12.
Automated 100% inspection can be integrated
with the manufacturing process to accomplish
which of the following (two best answers): (a)
better design of products, (b) feedback of data to
adjust the process, (c) 100% perfect quality, and (d)
sortation of good parts from defects?
42.13.
Which one of the following is an example of contact
inspection: (a) coordinate measuring systems, (b)
machine vision, (c) radiation techniques, (d) scan-
ning laser systems, and (e) ultrasonic techniques?
42.14.
Which one of the following is the most important
application of vision systems: (a) inspection,
(b) object identification, (c) safety monitoring, or
(d) visual guidance and control of a robotic
manipulator?
PROBLEMS
Note: Problems identified with an asterisk () in this set require the use of statistical tables not included in this text.
Process Capability and Tolerances
42.1.
An automatic turning process is set up to produce
parts with a mean diameter ¼ 6.255 cm. The
process is in statistical control and the output is
normally distributed with a standard deviation ¼
0.004 cm. Determine the process capability.
42.2.
In Problem 42.1, the design specification on the
part is: diameter ¼ 6.250  0.013 cm. (a) What
proportion of parts fall outside the tolerance lim-
its? (b) If the process were adjusted so that its mean
diameter ¼ 6.250 cm and the standard deviation
remained the same, what proportion of parts would
fall outside the tolerance limits?
42.3.
A sheet-metal bending operation produces bent
parts with an included angle ¼ 92.1. The process is
in statistical control and the values of included
angle are normally distributed with a standard
deviation ¼ 0.23. The design specification on
the angle ¼ 90  2. (a) Determine the process
capability. (b) If the process could be adjusted so
that its mean ¼ 90.0, determine the value of the
process capability index.
42.4.
A plastic extrusion process produces round extru-
date with a mean diameter ¼ 28.6 mm. The process
is in statistical control and the output is normally
distributed with standard deviation ¼ 0.53 mm.
Determine the process capability.
42.5.
InProblem42.4,thedesignspecificationonthediam-
eteris28.02.0mm.(a)Whatproportionofpartsfall
outside the tolerance limits? (b) If the process were
adjusted so that its mean diameter ¼ 28.0 mm and
the standard deviation remained the same, what
proportion of parts would fall outside the tolerance
limits? (c) With the adjusted mean at 28.0 mm,
determine the value of the process capability index.
Control Charts
42.6.
In 12 samples of size n ¼ 7, the average value of the
sample means is x ¼ 6.860 cm for the dimension of
interest, and the mean of the ranges of the samples
is R ¼ 0.027 cm. Determine (a) lower and upper
control limits for the x chart and (b) lower and
upper control limits for the R chart. (c) What is
your best estimate of the standard deviation of the
process?
42.7.
In nine samples of size n ¼ 10, the grand mean of the
samples is x ¼ 100 for the characteristic of interest,
and the mean of the ranges of the samples is R ¼ 8.5.
Determine (a) lower and upper control limits for the
x chart and (b) lower and upper control limits for the
R chart. (c) Based on the data given, estimate the
standard deviation of the process?
42.8.
Ten samples of size n ¼ 8 have been collected from
a process in statistical control, and the dimension of
interest has been measured for each part. The
calculated values of x for each sample are (mm)
9.22, 9.15, 9.20, 9.28, 9.19, 9.12, 9.20, 9.24, 9.17, and
9.23. The values of R are (mm) 0.24, 0.17, 0.30, 0.26,
0.26, 0.19, 0.21, 0.32, 0.21, and 0.23, respectively. (a)
Determine the values of the center, LCL, and UCL
for the x and R charts. (b) Construct the control
charts and plot the sample data on the charts.
42.9.
Seven samples of 5 parts each have been collected
from an extrusion process that is in statistical control,
and the diameter of the extrudate has been measured
for each part. The calculated values of x for each
sample are (in) 1.002, 0.999, 0.995, 1.004, 0.996,
1000
Chapter 42/Quality Control and Inspection

0.998, and 1.006. The values of R are (in) 0.010, 0.011,
0.014, 0.020, 0.008, 0.013, and 0.017, respectively.
(a) Determine the values of the center, LCL, and
UCL for x and R charts. (b) Construct the control
charts and plot the sample data on the charts.
42.10.
A p chart is to be constructed. Six samples of
25 parts each have been collected, and the average
number of defects per sample was 2.75. Determine
the center, LCL and UCL for the p chart.
42.11.
Ten samples of equal size are taken to prepare a p
chart. The total number of parts in these ten
samples was 900 and the total number of defects
counted was 117. Determine the center, LCL and
UCL for the p chart.
42.12.
The yield of good chips during a certain step in
silicon processing of integrated circuits averages
91%. The number of chips per wafer is 200. Deter-
mine the center, LCL, and UCL for the p chart that
might be used for this process.
42.13.
The upper and lower control limits for a p chart are:
LCL ¼ 0.19 and UCL ¼ 0.24. Determine the
sample size n that is used with this control chart.
42.14.
The upper and lower control limits for a p chart are:
LCL ¼ 0 and UCL ¼ 0.20. Determine the mini-
mum possible sample size n that is compatible with
this control chart.
42.15.
Twelve cars were inspected after final assembly.
The number of defects found ranged between 87
and 139 defect per car with an average of 116.
Determine the center and upper and lower control
limits for the c chart that might be used in this
situation.
Quality Programs
42.16.
A foundry that casts turbine blades inspects for
eight features that are considered critical-to-qual-
ity. During the previous month, 1236 castings were
produced. During inspection, 47 defects among the
eight features were found, and 29 castings had one
or more defects. Determine DPMO, DPM, and
DUPM in a Six Sigma program for these data
and convert each to its corresponding sigma level.
42.17.
In the previous problem, if the foundry desired to
improve its quality performance to the 5.0 sigma level
in all three measures of DPM, how many defects and
defective units would they produce in an annual
production quantity of 15,000 castings? Assume the
same eight features are used to assess quality.
42.18.
The inspection department in an automobile final
assembly plant inspects cars coming off the pro-
duction line against 55 quality features considered
important to customer satisfaction. The depart-
ment counts the number of defects found per
100 cars, which is the same type of metric used
by a national consumer advocate agency. During a
1-month period, a total of 16,582 cars rolled off the
assembly line. These cars included a total of 6045
defects of the 55 features, which translates to 36.5
defects per 100 cars. In addition, a total of 1955 cars
had one or more of the defects during this month.
Determine DPMO, DPM, and DUPM in a Six
Sigma program for these data and convert each
to its corresponding sigma level.
42.19.
A company produces a certain part whose most
important dimension is 37.50  0.025 in. If the
tolerance is exceeded, the customer will return
the part to the manufacturer at a cost of $200 in
rework and replacement expenses. (a) Determine
the constant k in the Taguchi loss function,
Eq. (42.13). (b) The company can add a finish
grinding operation that will allow the tolerance
to be reduced to 0.010 in. Using the loss function
from part (a) what is the value of the loss associated
with this new tolerance?
42.20.
The additional operation in the preceding problem
will add $2.00 to the current cost of the part, which
is $13.50. If the rate of returns from the customer at
the tolerance of 0.025 in is 2.1%, and it is
expected to drop to zero returns using the new
tolerance, should the company add the finish grind-
ing operation to the manufacturing sequence for
the part? Answer this question using the basic cost
and return rate data without consideration of the
Taguchi loss function.
Laser Measurement Technologies
42.21.
A laser triangulation system has the laser mounted
at a 35 angle from the vertical. The distance be-
tween the worktable and the photodetector is
24.0000 in. Determine (a) the distance between
the laser and the photodetector when no part is
present and (b) the height of a part when the
distance between the laser and photo-detector is
12.0250 in.
42.22.
A laser triangulation system is used to determine
the height of a steel block. The system has a
photosensitive detector that is located 750.000
mm above the working surface and the laser is
mounted at a 30.00 angle from the vertical. With
no part on the worktable, the position of the laser
reflection on the photo sensor is recorded. After a
part is placed on the worktable, the laser reflection
shifts 70.000 mm toward the laser. Determine the
height of the object.
Problems
1001

INDEX
Abrasive belt grinding, 621
Abrasive flow machining, 632
Abrasive jet machining, 631–632
Abrasive processes, 483, 604–624,
631–632
Abrasive water jet cutting, 631
Abrasives, 141–142, 606–609
Absolute positioning, 897
Accuracy, 79–80, 904
Acetal, 166–167
Acetylene, 644, 726–728
Acid cleaning and pickling, 670
Acrylics, 167
Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene, 167
Actuators, 891
Adhesive bonding, 758–763, 844–845
Advanced composites, 200
Age hardening, 662
Air carbon arc cutting, 643–644
Alkyd resins, 174
Alloy cast irons, 119
Alloys, 99–103, 133
Allowance:
bending, 451–452
drilling, 520–521
machining (casting), 254
shearing, 446
Alumina, 9, 136, 140, 141, 142
Aluminizing, 673, 678
Aluminum, 120–122, 252
Aluminum oxide, 566–567
Amino resins, 172
Amorphous structures, 35–37
Analog-to-digital converter, 892
Angularity, 80
Annealing:
glass, 265
metals, 657
Anodizing, 679–680
Antioch process, 236
APT, 905–906
Aramides, 168
Arc cutting, 642–644
Arc welding, 695, 709–719
Area reduction, 44
Assembly:
automated, 782, 928–929
defined, 10, 15, 693, 766–767
electronics, 840–847
mechanical, 766–782
robotic, 912
Assembly lines, 923–927
Atomic bonding, 28
Atomic force microscope, 877
Atomic structure, 26–28
Atomization, 350–351
Austenite, 104, 660
Austenitic stainless steel, 115
Austenitizing, 659–660
Autoclave, 335
Autogenous weld, 695
Automated assembly, 782, 928–929
Automated inspection, 991–992
Automated production lines, 927–931
Automated welding, 697
Automation, 887–894
Average flow stress, 387
Backward extrusion, 421
Bakelite, 154, 173
Ball mill, 370
Bambooing, 281
Banbury mixer, 317
Bar drawing, 385, 430–435
Bar machine, 516
Barrel finishing, 671
Barreling, 49
Basic oxygen furnace, 104, 108–109
Batch production, 17
Batting, 373
Bauxite, 120, 140
Bayer process, 121
Beading, 454, 779
Belt sanding, 621
Bend allowance, 451–452
Bending:
sheet metal, 385, 450–454
tube stock, 476–477
Bending test, 50–51
Bernoulli’s theorem,
Bi-injection molding, 294
Bilateral tolerance, 79
Billet, 396
Binary phase diagram, 100
Binders,
Biodegradable polymers, 183–184
Biomimetics, 881–882
Blanking, 445
Blast finishing, 671
Blast furnace, 104, 106–107
Bloom,
Blow molding, 298–301
Blowing, glass, 260–261
Blown-film extrusion, 282–283, 308
Body-centered cubic (BCC), 31
Bolt(s), 767
Bonding:
adhesive, 758–763
atomic, 28–30
die (IC), 823
eutectic, 823
metallic, 28, 29
molecular, 29–30
primary bonds, 28–29
secondary bonds, 29–30
Boring, 513, 517–518
Boron, 150
Boronizing, 663, 673
Boron nitride, 144
Bose-Einstein statistics, 825
Brass, 125, 129
Braze welding, 753–754
Brazing, 748–754
Brinell hardness, 53
Broaching, 535–536, 576
Bronze, 125, 129
Buckyballs, 871–872
Buffing, 624
Built-up edge, 492
Bulk deformation, 384–385, 395–436
Bulk micromachining, 861
Burr, 445
Butadiene-acrylonitrile rubber, 180
Butadiene rubber, 179
Butyl rubber, 179
C-frame press, 466–468
CAD/CAM, 906, 940
Calendering, 283, 318
Calipers, 81–82
Calorizing, 673
Capacity requirements planning, 966,
968–969
Carbide ceramics, 9, 143
Carbon, 148–149
diamond, 28–29, 149
graphite, 148–149
iron-carbon alloy system, 104–105
Carbon arc cutting, 718
Carbon arc technique, 879
Carbon arc welding, 718
Carbon black, 178, 317
Carbon buckyballs, 871–872
Carbon nanotubes, 872–873
Carbonitriding, 663, 673
Carburizing, 663, 673
Case hardening, 663
Cast cobalt, 563
Cast iron, 9, 105, 118–119, 251
1003

Casting:
advantages and disadvantages, 207
continuous, 110–111
defined, 205–207
glass, 262
heating and pouring, 210–213
history, 206–207
overview, 13
plastics, 306–307
processes, 225–245
product design considerations,
253–254
quality, 249–251
rubber, 319
solidification and cooling, 213–220
Cellophane, 168
Cellular manufacturing, 18, 931–935
Cellulose, 167
Cellulose acetate, 168
Cellulose acetate-butyrate, 168
Cellulose nitrate, 154
Cemented carbide, 143, 197–198, 379,
563–566
Cementite, 105
Centering, 522
Centerless grinding, 618–619
Centrifugal casting, 242–245, 341
Centrifuge casting, 245
Ceramic matrix composites, 198–199, 380
Ceramic-mold casting, 236
Ceramic(s), 136–148
classification of, 137
cutting tools, 566–567
defined, 9, 136
hardness, 56
history, 140, 143
IC packaging, 824
processing of, 150,
products, 141–142
properties, 37, 56
Cermet, 143, 196–198, 378–380, 566
Chalcopyrite, 124
Chamfering, 513
Chemical blanking, 647–648
Chemical cleaning, 670–671
Chemical engraving, 648
Chemical machining, 644–650
Chemical milling, 647
Chemical vapor deposition, 682–685,
813–815, 816, 879
China (ceramic), 141
China (country), 21
Chip:
integrated circuit, 800, 823
metal cutting, 489–492
Chip breaker, 569
Chloroprene rubber, 179
Chromate coating, 679
Chromium, 113, 115
Chromium carbide, 143, 198
Chromizing, 663, 673
Chucking machine, 516
Chvorinov’s rule, 216
Circularity, 80
Clay, 139–140
Cleaning processes, 249, 668–672
Clean room, 804
Clearance, 50, 446
CMM, see Coordinate measuring
machine
CNC, see Numerical control
Closed-die forging, 409
Coated carbides, 566
Coating:
carbides, 566
plastic, 285–286
processes, 678–690
rubber, 318–319
wire, 280
Cobalt, 132
Cogging, 409
Coining, 412, 462
Cold extrusion, 422
Cold forming, 388
Cold rolling, 396
Cold welding, 733
Cold working, 133, 387–388
Comminution, 309
Compact discs, 856–857
Compaction, 354–355, 379
Composites
classification of, 189
defined, 9–10, 187–188
guide to processing, 201–202
properties and structures, 188–196
Compression bending, 477
Compression molding, 296–297, 335–336
Compression properties, 48–50
Computer-aided process planning,
952–953
Computer integrated manufacturing,
918, 939–941
Computer numerical control, see
Numerical control
Concentricity, 80
Concurrent engineering, 954–957
Conductivity (electrical), 74
Conductors, 74
Connectors, electrical, 847–850
Contact lamination, 331
Contact molding, 331
Continuous casting, 110–111
Continuous improvement, 953–954
Continuous laminating, 342
Continuous path, 897
Contour turning, 513
Contouring, 526, 537, 897
Control chart(s), 980–984
Control resolution, 903
Control systems, 887–889, 898–902
Conversion coating, 678–680
Coolants (machining), 577–578
Coordinate measuring machine, 907,
992–994
Copolymers, 161
Copper, 124–125, 252
Copper-nickel alloy system, 100
Core, 209, 228, 253
Corundum, 140
Cotter pin, 778
Counterboring, 522
Countersinking, 522
Covalent bond, 28
Creep feed grinding, 619–620
Crimping, 779, 848
Cross-linking, 160–161, 165, 171–172, 269
Cross-wire welding, 724
Crystalline structures:
ceramics, 137–138
general, 30–35
polymers, 161–163
Cubic boron nitride, 144, 567
Cup drawing, 386
Cupola, 107, 245–246
Curing:
adhesives, 758
polymer composites, 334–335
polymers, 172
tires, 322–323
Curling, 454
Cutoff, 449, 513
Cutoff length, 90
Cutting:
arc, 642–644
metal, see Machining
oxyfuel, 644
polymer composites, 342
sheet metal, 444–450
Cutting conditions,
defined, 487–488
drilling, 520–521
grinding, 609–610
milling, 526–528
selecting, 591–597
turning, 511–512
Cutting fluids, 488, 577–580
Cutting force, see Forces
Cutting speed, 487
Cutting temperature, 500–501
Cutting tool(s):
basic types, 486–487
costs, 594–595
geometry, 486, 567–577
grinding wheels, 606–609
history, 560
materials, 559–567, 569–570
tool life, 552–559
Cylindrical grinding, 617–618
Cylindricity, 80
Czochralski process, 806
Danner process, 263
Deep drawing, 386
1004
Index

Deep grinding, 620
Defects:
casting, 249–251
crystal, 32–33
drawing sheet metal, 461
extrusion (plastic), 280–281
extrusion (metal), 429–430
injection molding, 293
welding, 739–741
Deformation
bulk, 395–436
elastic, 33
plastic, 33–35
processes, 12, 13, 383
Densification, 357
Density, 67–68
Deposition processes, 680–695
Depth of cut, 487
Design considerations, see Product
design considerations
Design for assembly, 779–782, 954–956
Design for environment, 22
Design for manufacturability, 954–956
Dial indexing machine, 928
Dial indicator, 84
Diamond, 28–29, 149, 567
Die(s):
drawing, 434–435
extrusion (metal), 426–428
extrusion (plastic), 278–280
forging, 415–416
integrated circuits, 800
stamping, 464–466
threading, 538
Die bonding, 823
Die casting, 128, 239–242
Die sinking, 526, 635, 639
Die swell, 271, 278–279
Dielectric, 74
Diffusion, 72–73, 673–674
Diffusion welding, 696, 734
Digital-to-analog converter, 892
Dimensions, 78–79
Dimpling, 779
Dip casting, 319
Dip coating, 687
Dipole forces, 28
Dip-pen nanolithography, 881
Direct extrusion, 420–422, 423–426
Disc grinder, 620
Divider, 82
Doctor blade, 377–378
Doping, 674, 815
Draft:
bar drawing, 431
casting, 253
forging, 415
plastic molding, 310
rolling, 397
rubber, 324
Drain casting, 372
Draw bench, 433
Draw bending, 477
Drawing:
bar, 385, 430–435
deep, 454–461
glass, 264
plastic filaments, 284
sheet metal, 386, 454–461
wire, 385, 430–435
Dressing (grinding), 614
Drill bit, 519, 571–574
Drill jig, 523
Drill press, 519, 522
Drilling, 12, 14, 485–486, 513, 519–523,
835
Droplet deposition manufacturing, 792
Dry machining, 579–580
Dry plasma etching, 817–818
Dry pressing, 374
Dry spinning, 285
Drying:
ceramics, 374–375
organic coatings, 687
Dual in-line package, 802, 822
Ductile iron, 119
Ductility, 43–44
Durometer, 55
EBM, see Electron beam machining
ECM, see Electrochemical machining
Economic order quantity, 963–965
Edge bending, 450–451
Edging, 409
EDM, see Electric discharge machining
Elastic modulus, see Modulus of
elasticity
Elastic reservoir molding, 336
Elastomers, 9, 38, 154,
defined, 9, 154
polymer technology, 175–182
processing technology, 317–324
properties, 38, 175–176
types, 175–182
Electric discharge forming, 475
Electric discharge machining, 637–639,
866
Electric discharge wire cutting, 639–640,
866
Electric furnaces:
casting, 247,
glassworking, 259
heat treatment, 664
silicon processing, 805
steelmaking, 104, 109,
Electrical connectors, 847–850
Electrical properties, 73–75
Electrochemical deburring, 635–636
Electrochemical fabrication, 866
Electrochemical grinding, 636
Electrochemical machining, 76, 633–635
Elecrochemical plating„ 675–677
Electrochemical processes, 27, 75–76,
632–636, 675–677
Electroforming, 677, 865
Electrogas welding, 716
Electrohydraulic forming, 475
Electroless plating, 677–678, 865
Electrolysis:
aluminum production, 121
general, 75
powder metals, 352
Electromagnetic forming, 476
Electron-beam heating, 666
Electron-beam lithography, 812, 878
Electron-beam machining, 641, 866
Electron-beam welding, 729–730
Electronics packaging, see Packaging
Electroplating, 76, 675–677, 865
Electroslag welding, 731
Elements, 26–28
Elongation, 44
Embossing, 462, 779
End effector, 910
Engine lathe, 513–514
Engineering materials, 7–10
Engineering stress-strain, 42–44
Enterprise resource planning, 941
Environmentally conscious
manufacturing, 21–22
Epitaxial deposition, 814–815
Epoxies, 172–173
Etchant, 646, 816
Etching, 645, 816–818, 836
Ethylene-propylene rubber, 179
Eutectic, 102, 216
Eutectic die bonding, 823
Eutectoid, 105
Evaporative-foam process, 232
Expanded polystyrene process, 232–233
Expansion fit, 776
Expendable mold casting, 208
Explosion welding, 734–735
Explosive forming, 475
Extreme UV lithography, 812
Extrusion:
ceramics, 373
metals, 14, 385, 420–430
plastics, 271–282, 308
powdered metals, 360
rubber, 318
Extrusion blow molding, 298–300
Eyelet(s), 774
Face-centered cubic (FCC), 31
Facilities, production, 16–19
Facing, 513
Faraday’s laws, 76
Fastener(s), 767–774
Faying surfaces, 695
Feed (cutting), 487
Feldspar, 140
Ferrite, 104
Index
1005

Ferritic stainless steel, 115
Ferrous metals, 8–9, 99, 104–119
Fiberglass, 191
Fiber-reinforced composites, 194–195,
198
Fiber-reinforced polymers:
applications, 201
defined, 200, 327
properties, 200–201
shaping processes, 327–328, 331–334,
337–341
Fibers:
glass, 263–264
in composites, 189–191, 329–330
materials, 191
plastics, 284–285
production of, 329
Fick’s first law, 72
Filament, 189, 284–285
Filament winding, 328, 337–339
Film, plastic, 281–283
Finishing:
gears, 544
glass, 265
machining, 488
powdered metals, 358
Firing (sintering), 140, 368, 375–376
Fitter, 696
Fixture, 523, 696
Flakes, 191–192, 330
Flame cutting, 644
Flame hardening, 665
Flanging, 454
Flash:
die casting, 241
forging, 406, 415–416
injection molding, 293
Flash welding, 724–725
Flashless forging, 406, 412–413
Flatness, 80
Flexible manufacturing system(s), 934,
935–939
Flexible overlay process, 689
Flexure test, 50
Float process (glass), 263
Flow curve, 386–387
Flow line production, 18–19
Flow stress, 386–387
Fluid properties, 58–60
Fluidity, 58
Fluidized bed, 664, 688
Fluoropolymers, 168
Flux, 711, 751, 756
Flux-cored arc welding, 715–716
Fly cutter, 523
Foam:
composite structure, 196
polymers, 293, 307–308
Foam injection molding, 293–294
Force(s):
bar drawing, 432
bending sheet metal, 452–453
cutting sheet metal, 447–448
drawing sheet metal, 458–459
extrusion, 424–425
forging, 407–408, 411
grinding, 611–612
machining, 492–495
powder metals, 355
rolling, 399
stretch forming, 471
wire drawing, 432
Ford, Henry, 3
Forge welding, 733
Forge hammer, 15, 405, 413–414
Forging:
metals, 14, 385, 405–416
powered metals, 360
Forging press, 405, 415
Form milling, 525
Form turning, 513
Forming, 508
Forward extrusion, 420
Foundry, 207, 245
Free machining steel, 117, 587
Freezing point, 69
Friction:
metal cutting, 493
metal extrusion, 424
metal forming, 391–392
rolling, 398–399
sheet metal drawing, 457
Friction stir welding, 736–737
Friction welding, 696, 735–736
Fullerene, 871
Fullering, 409
Furnaces:
basic oxygen, 104, 108–109
blast furnace, 104, 106–107
brazing, 753
casting, 245–248
cupola, 107, 245–246
electric, see Electric furnaces
heat treatment, 664
Fused-deposition modeling, 794
Fusion welding, 695–696, 709–732
Gage blocks, 80–81
Gages and gaging, 80, 84–86
Galvanized steel, 128
Galvanizing, 678, 690
Gas atomization, 350
Gas metal arc welding, 713–715
Gas tungsten arc welding, 717–718
Gear cutting, 540–544
Gear rolling, 404
Gear shaper, 535, 542–544
Generating, 507
Geometry:
machined parts, 507–510
nontraditional processes, 650
tool, 486, 567–577
Gilbreth, Frank, 3
Glass, 144–148
chemistry, 144–146
defined, 137, 144
fibers, 146, 263–264
history, 145
product design, 266
products, 137, 146–147
properties, 137–139, 144–146
shaping processes, 258–264
Glass-ceramics, 147–148
Glass transition temperature, 37, 61, 163
Glassworking, 258–265
Glazing, 141
Globalization, 20–21
Gold, 130–131
Graphite, 148–149
Grains and grain boundaries, 35
Gray cast iron, 118
Green manufacturing, 22
Grinding, 604–621
Grinding wheels, 606–609
Gross domestic product, 1
Group technology, 18, 931–935
Guerin process, 463–464
Gun drill, 573
Hacksaw, 536
Hand lay–up, 332–333
Hand modeling, 372–373
Hard facing, 689
Hardenability, 660–661
Hardness, 52–56
Heading, 416
Heat-affected zone, 704
Heat of fusion, 36, 69, 213
Heat treatment,
glass, 264–265
metals, 133, 656–666
powdered metals, 355–356, 358
Hematite, 103, 106
Hemimorphate, 128
Hemming, 454
Hexagonal closed-packed (HCP), 31
High-energy-rate forming, 474–476
High speed machining, 545–546
High speed steel, 117, 561–563
High strength low-alloy steel, 114
Historical notes:
abrasive processes, 605
adhesive bonding, 758
aluminum, 121
casting, 206–207
cast iron products, 252
ceramics, 140
copper, 124
cutting tool materials, 560
die casting, 240
extrusion (metal), 420
forging, 405
glass, 145, 262
1006
Index

integrated circuits, 801
investment casting, 234
iron and steel, 104
machine tools, 508
manufacturing processes, 11–12
manufacturing systems, 2–3
natural rubber, 177
numerical control, 895
plastic shaping processes, 269
polymers, 154
powder metallurgy, 346
printed circuit boards, 832–833
rolling, 397
surface mount technology, 844
tungsten carbide, 143
synthetic rubber, 178
welding, 12, 694–695
Honeycomb composite structure, 196
Honing, 621–623
Hooke’s Law, 42
Hot-die forging, 419
Hot dipping, 678
Hot extrusion, 422
Hot forming, 388
Hot hardness, 56–57
Hot pressing, 360–361, 377
Hot pressure welding, 734
Hot rolling, 396
Hot-runner mold, 290
Hot working, 58, 388–389
Hubbing, 419
Hybrid composites, 200
Hydroforming, 464
Hydrogen bonding, 30
Hydrostatic extrusion, 429
Ilmenite, 127, 143
Impact extrusion, 422, 428–429
Impact grinding, 370
Impregnation, 357–358
Impression-die forging, 405, 409–412
Incremental positioning, 897
Indirect extrusion, 420–422, 423–426
Induction heating, 247–248, 665
Industrial Revolution, 2–3
Industrial robotics, 697, 907–912
Industries, 4–5
Infiltration, 358
Injection blow molding, 300
Injection molding, 286–295, 337
Ink-jet printing heads, 855
Inserts (cutting), 570–571
Inspection:
casting, 251
defined, 990
electronic assemblies, 847
instruments and gages, 79–87
machine vision, 997
principles, 990–992
printed circuit boards, 840
robotic, 912
technologies, 992–998
welding, 741–742
Insulators, 74
Integral fasteners, 779
Integrated circuit(s), 800
Integrated manufacturing systems,
918–941
Interchangeable parts, 3
Interface, 192–193
Interference fit(s), 774–777
Intermediate phase, 100
Interphase, 193
Interpolation, 897
Interstitial free steel, 117
Inventory control, 962–965
Inverse lever rule, 102
Investment casting, 233–235
Ion implantation, 674
Ion lithography, 812
Ionic bond, 28
Iridium, 131
Iron, 103, 131
Iron-carbon alloy system, 104–105
Ironing, 462
ISO 9000, 989–990
Isoprene rubber, 180
Isostatic pressing, 358–359, 377
Isothermal extrusion, 422
Isothermal forging, 419
Isothermal forming, 389
Jig grinder, 620
Jiggering, 373
Job shop, 17, 959
Joining, 693, 748
Joint(s):
adhesive bonded, 759–760
bolted, 771–772
brazed, 749–751
soldered, 754–755
weld, 697–698
Jolleying, 373
Jominy end-quench test, 661
Just-in-time, 969–971
Kanban, 970
Kaolinite, 136, 140
Kevlar, 168
Kiln, 375
Knoop hardness, 54
Knurling, 513
Kroll process, 127
Ladles, 248
Laminated-object manufacturing,
793–794
Lancing, 463, 779
Lapping, 623
Laser-beam heating, 666
Laser-beam machining, 641–642, 866
Laser-beam welding, 730–731
Laser evaporation method, 879
Laser measurement, 994–995
Lathe, 513–514
Layer processes, 812–818, 859–863
Lead, 129
Leadthrough programming, 911
Lean production, 20, 969–971
Lehr, 265
Lift-off technique, 862
LIGA process, 863–864
Limestone, 106
Limit dimensions, 79
Limonite, 106
Line balancing, 924–926, 950
Liquid-metal forging, 242
Liquid phase sintering, 361
Liquidus, 69, 100, 215
Lithography, 809–812, 864–865, 878, 881
London forces, 29–30
Lost-foam process, 232
Lost pattern process, 232
Lost-wax process, 233
Lubricants and lubrication:
ceramics, 377
drawing sheet metal, 457
metal cutting, 577–580
metal forming, 391–392
plastics, 164
powdered metals, 353
Machinability, 585–587
Machine cell(s), 933–934
Machine tools:
defined, 15–16, 488
history of, 508
machining centers, 530–531
turning and boring, 513–519
Machine vision, 995–997
Machine welding, 697
Machining,
advantages and disadvantages,
484–485
defined, 483–484
economic considerations, 585–597
operations, 485–486,
product design considerations, 597–
599
theory, 488–501
Machining center, 530–531
Machining economics, 592–597
Magnesium, 122–123, 252
Magnetic pulse forming, 476
Magnetite, 106
Make or buy decision, 950–951
Make-to-stock, 963
Malleable iron, 119
Manganese, 113
Mannesmann process, 405
Manual assembly line(s), 923–927
Manual data input, 906
Manufacturing (general), 1–7
Index
1007

Manufacturing engineering, 19, 945–954
Manufacturing history, see Historical
notes
Manufacturing processes, classification
of, 10–15
Manufacturing support systems, 19–20,
945
Manufacturing systems, 17, 886–887,
918–941
Maraging steel, 117
Martensite, 657–660
Martensitic stainless steel, 115
Masks and masking, 645, 809–812
Mass diffusion, 72–73
Mass finishing, 671
Mass production, 18, 959
Master production schedule, 960–962
Material handling, 912, 918–920
Material removal, 12, 483, 787
Material requirements planning,
965–968
Materials, 25–38
Materials in manufacturing, 7–10
Measurement:
conventional, 79–87
lasers, 994–995
surfaces, 92–94
Mechanical assembly, 766–782
Mechanical cleaning, 671–672
Mechanical plating, 690
Mechanical properties, 40–62
Mechanical thermoforming, 305
Melamine formaldehyde, 172
Melt fracture, 280
Melt spinning, 284
Melting point, 69
MEMS, 853
Merchant equation, 495–497
Metal forming, 383–392
Metal injection molding, 359
Metal matrix composites, 196–198
Metallic bonding, 29
Metallization, 815–816
Metalloids, 26
Metals, 98–133
Micro-contact printing, 865, 879
Microelectromechanical systems, 853
Microfabrication, 22, 853–867
Micro-imprint lithography, 865, 878
Micromachining, 861, 866
Micrometer, 82–83
Microscopes, 859
Microsensors, 854
Microstereolithography, 867
Microsystems, 853–859
MIG welding, 715
Milling, 12, 14, 486, 523–530
Milling cutters, 574–575
Milling machine(s), 528–530
Mill-turn center, 533
Modulus of elasticity, 42–43, 52
Mold(s):
casting, 208, 209, 228–229
plastic injection, 288–290
polymer matrix composites, 331
thermoforming, 303–305
Molding:
compression molding, 296–297
injection, 286–295
polymer matrix composites, 331–337
rubber, 319
tires, 322–323
transfer molding, 297–298
Molding compounds, 164, 330–331
Molding inserts, 778–779
Molecular beam epitaxy, 815
Molybdenite, 130
Molybdenum, 113, 129–130, 562
Multi-injection molding, 294
Multiprobe, 823, 825
Mushy zone, 215
Nanofabrication processes, 877–883
Nanoscience, 869, 873–877
Nanotechnology, 22, 853, 869
National Nanotechnology Initiative, 873
Natural rubber, 177–178, 316
Natural tolerance limits, 979
NC, see Numerical control
Near net shape, 14, 207, 345, 395
Necking, 43
Neoprene, 179
Net shape, 14, 207, 345, 395
Newtonian fluid, 59
Nickel, 113, 125–126, 131–132, 253
Nitride ceramics, 144
Nitriding, 663
Nitrile rubber, 180
Noble metals, 130
Noncrystalline structures, 35–37
Nonferrous metals, 9, 99, 120–131
Nontraditional processes, 14, 483,
628–652, 865–866
Normalizing, 657
Notching, 449
Numerical control:
applications, 907
definition, 894–895
drilling, 522, 907
filament winding, 338, 907
history, 895
machining center, 530–531, 907
milling, 530, 907
part programming, 905–906
punch press, 468, 907
tape-laying, 334, 907
technology, 895–905
turning, 517, 907
Nut(s), 767
Nylon, 168
Open-back inclinable, 468
Open-die forging, 405, 406–409
Open hearth furnace, 104
Open mold, 208, 331–334
Optical encoder, 901–902
Orbital forging, 418
Order point systems, 963–965
Organic coating, 685–688
Orthogonal cutting, 488–491, 495,
496–497
Osmium, 131
Outsourcing, 20–21
Oxide ceramics, 142
Oxyacetylene welding, 695, 726–728
Oxyfuel cutting, 644
Oxyfuel welding, 695, 726–729
Packaging, electronics:
defined, 830–831
electrical connectors, 847–850
integrated circuit, 802, 803, 820–824
printed circuit board assembly,
840–847
Palladium, 131
Parallelism, 80
Part family, 931
Part geometry (machining), 507–510
Part programming, 905–906
Particles, 191–192, 330
Particulate processing, 12, 13,
Parting, 449, 513
Parts classification and coding, 931–932
Pattern, 227–228
Pearlite, 658
Pentlandite, 125
Percussion welding, 725
Perforating, 449
Permanent mold casting, 237–245
Permanent mold, 209, 237
Perpendicularity, 80
Phase
defined, 100
diagrams, 99, 100–103
in composites, 188–193
Phenol formaldehyde, 173
Phenolics, 173
Phosphate coating, 679
Photochemical machining, 648–650, 865
Photofabrication, 867
Photolithography, 809–812, 836
Photoresist, 809
Physical properties, 67–76
Physical vapor deposition, 680–682
Pig iron, 104, 107
Pin grid array, 822
Pin-in-hole technology, 821, 830,
840–843, 846
Planing, 533–535
Plant capacity, 7
Plant layout, 17–19
Plasma arc cutting, 643
Plasma arc welding, 718
Plasma etching, 817–818
1008
Index

Plaster-mold casting, 235–236
Plastic deformation, 33
Plasticizers, 164, 171
Plastic pressing, 373
Plastics, see Polymers
Platinum, 130–131
Pointing (drawing), 435
Point-to-point, 897
Polishing, 624
Polyamides, 168
Polybutadiene, 179
Polycarbonate, 169
Polydimethylsiloxane, 181
Polyesters, 169, 173–174
Polyethylene, 169–170
Polyethylene terephthalate, 169, 301
Polyimides, 174
Polyisoprene, 177–178, 180
Polymerization, 156–158
Polymer matrix composites:
defined, 199, 327
materials, 199–201, 329–331
processing, 327–342
Polymer melts, 269–271
Polymers, 153–184
additives, 164–165
categories, 153–154
composites, 199–201
defined, 9, 153
hardness, 56
history, 154
polymerization, 156–158, 159
properties, 37–38, 56
rubbers, see Elastomers
shape processing, 184, 268–308
structures, 159–161
thermal behavior, 163
thermoplastics, see Thermoplastics
thermosets, see Thermosetting
polymers
Polymethylmethacrylate, 167, 863
Polyoxymethylene, 166
Polypropylene, 170, 301
Polystyrene, 170
Polytetrafluoroethylene, 168
Polyurethanes, 174, 180–181
Polyvinylchloride, 171, 301
Porcelain, 141
Porcelain enameling, 688
Positioning systems, 897, 898–902
Potter’s wheel, 373
Powder injection molding, 359–360, 378
Powder metallurgy, 99, 344–364
Powders, 347–352
Power:
arc welding, 711–712
automation, 887
extrusion, 425
machining, 497–500
resistance welding, 720–721
rolling, 400–401
Power density (welding), 700–701
Precious metals, 130–131
Precipitation hardening:
general, 661–662
stainless steel, 115
Precision, 80–81, 902–905
Precision forging, 411
Preform molding, 330, 336
Prepreg, 331, 332
Press:
drill, 522–523
extrusion (metal), 426–428
forging, 405, 415
stamping, 15, 443, 466–470
Press-and-blow, 260
Press brake, 468
Press fit technology, 848
Press fitting, 774–776
Pressing:
ceramics, 373, 377
glass, 260
powder metallurgy, 344, 354–355,
358–359
Pressure gas welding, 729
Pressure thermoforming, 303–304
Primary bonds, 28–29
Printed circuit board, 832–840
Printed circuit board assembly, 840–847
Process capability, 978–980
Process controller, 893–894
Process planning, 946–953
Processing operations, 10
Processes, manufacturing,
classification of,
history of, 11–12
shaping processes,
Product design considerations:
assembly, 779–782
casting, 253–254
ceramics, 380–381
glass, 266
machining, 597–599
plastics, 308–310
powder metallurgy, 362–364
rubber, 324–325
welding, 742–743
Products, manufactured, 5
Production capacity, 7
Production flow analysis, 931
Production line(s), 19, 920–931
Production planning and control,
959–973
Production quantity, 5–6, 17–19
Production system, 16–17
Programmable logic controller, 894
Properties:
fluid, see Fluid properties
mechanical, see Mechanical properties
physical, see Physical properties
Property-enhancing processes, 14
Protractor, 86
Pseudoplastic, 60
Pulforming, 340–341
Pultrusion, 328, 339–340
Punch-and–die, 443
Punching, 445
Quality:
casting, 249–251
defined, 977–978
programs, 984–990
weld, 738–742
Quality control, 977
Quantity, production, 18
Quantum mechanics, 875–876
Quartz, 140
Quenching, 660
Rack plating, 676
Radial drill, 522
Radial forging, 417
Rake angle, 486
Rapid prototyping, 786–797, 866–867
Rapid tool making, 796
Reaction injection molding, 295, 308, 337
Reaming, 513, 521
Recrystallization, 57, 389, 657
Recrystallization temperature, 57–58
Recycling:
polymers, 182–183
glass, 259
Redrawing, 459
Reduction:
bar drawing, 431
deep drawing, 458
extrusion, 423
rolling, 398
Reflow soldering, 757, 845–846
Refractory ceramics, 141
Refractory metals, 129–130
Reinforcing agents:
in composites, 189–192, 199
in plastics, 164
Relief angle, 486
Rent’s rule, 821
Reorder point, 965
Repeatability, 904
Resin transfer molding, 336
Resistance projection welding, 724
Resistance welding, 695, 719–726
Resistivity, 74
Retaining ring, 777
Reverse drawing, 460
Reverse extrusion, 421
Rheocasting, 242
Rheology, 242
Rhodium, 131
Ring rolling, 403–404
Riser (casting), 209, 219–220, 248
Rivet(s), 773–774
Robotics, 697, 907–912
Rockwell hardness, 54
Index
1009

Roll bending, 472, 477
Roll coating, 762
Roll forging, 417–418
Roll forming, 472
Roll piercing, 404–405
Roll welding, 733–734
Roller mill, 370, 402–403
Rolling:
gear, 404
glass, 262
metals, 385, 396–403
powdered metals, 360
ring, 403–404
thread, 403
Rolling mills, 15
Rotary tube piercing, 405
Rotational molding, 301–302
Roughing, 488
Roughness, surface, see Surface
roughness
Roundness, 80
Route sheet, 948–950
Rubber, see Elastomers
Rule, steel, 81
Rule of mixtures, 193–194
Ruthenium, 131
Rutile, 127, 143
Sand blasting, 671
Sand casting, 225–230
Sandwich molding, 294
Sandwich structure, 196
Saw blade, 576
Sawing, 536–537
Scanning probe microscopes, 859,
876–877, 880–881
Scanning laser systems, 994–995
Scanning tunneling microscope, 876–877
Scheelite, 130
Scleroscope, 54–55
Screen printing, 836
Screen resist, 645
Screw(s), 767–769
Screw threads, 538–540
Screw thread inserts, 770
Seam welding, 723
Seaming, 779
Secondary bonds, 29–30
Segregation (in alloys), 101
Selective laser sintering, 794–795
Self-assembly, 881–883
Semicentrifugal casting, 244
Semiconductor, 75
Semi-dry pressing, 373–374
Semimetals, 26
Seminotching, 449
Semipermanent-mold casting, 237
Semi-metal casting, 242
Sensors, 890–891
Setup reduction, 970
Sewing, 778
Shape factor:
extrusion (metal), 426–427
extrusion (plastic), 277
forging, 408
Shaping, 533–535
Shaping processes, 12
Sharkskin, 281
Shaving, 450
Shear modulus, 52
Shear plane, 488–490
Shear properties, 51–52
Shear spinning, 473–474
Shear strength, 52
Shearing, 386, 445
Sheet:
metal, 443
metalworking, 385–386, 443–476
plastic, 281–283
Shell casting, 307
Shell molding, 230–231
Shielded metal arc welding, 712–713
Shop floor control, 971–973
Shot peening, 671
Shrink fit, 776
Shrinkage
casting, 217–218
ceramics, 375
plastic molding, 292–293
Sialon, 144, 567
Siderite, 106
Silica, 136, 140, 145
Silicon, 150, 800
Silicon carbide, 9, 140, 141
Silicon nitride, 144
Silicon processing, 803, 805–809
Silicones, 174–175, 181
Siliconizing, 673
Silver, 130–131
Simultaneous engineering, 956
Sine bar, 86
Single-point tools, 486, 568–571
Sintering, 344, 355–356, 378, 379, 688
Sintered polycrystalline diamond, 567
Six sigma, 20, 985–988
Size effect, 499
Slide caliper, 82
Slip, 33–34
Slip casting, 371–372
Slit-die extrusion, 281
Slotting, 449
Slush casting, 237–238, 306–307
Smithsonite, 128
Snag grinder, 621
Snap fit, 776–777
Snap ring, 777
Soaking, 396, 657
Soft lithography, 864–865, 878
Solder paste, 845–846
Soldering, 754–758
Solid ground curing, 791–792
Solid solution,
Solid-state electronics, 800
Solid-state welding, 696, 709, 732–738
Solidification time (casting), 216
Solidification processes, 12
Solidus, 69, 100, 215
Spade drill, 573–574
Spark sintering, 361
Specific energy (machining), 498
Specific gravity, 68
Specific heat, 70–71
Sphalerite, 128
Spinning:
glass, 260
plastics, 284–285
sheet metal, 472–474
Spot facing, 522
Spot welding, 721–723
Spraying (coating), 687, 688
Spray–up, 333
Springback, 452
Sputtering, 681–682, 816
Squareness, 80
Squeeze casting, 242
Stainless steel, 114–116
Stamping, 443
Stapling, 778
Statistical process control, 980–984
Steel(s),
defined, 105, 111
for casting, 251–252
high speed, see High speed steel
low alloy, 113–114
plain carbon, 111–113
production of, 108–111
specialty, 117–118
stainless, 114–116
tool, 115–117
Stereolithography, 789–791, 867
Stick welding, 712
Sticking (friction), 392, 399
Stitching, 777–778
Straightness, 80
Strain:
defined, 42, 44
metal machining, 489–490
Strain hardening, 46
Strain hardening exponent, 46–47, 386
Strain-rate, 389–391
Strain-rate sensitivity, 389–391
Strand casting, 111
Straightness, 80
Strength coefficient, 46–47, 386
Strength-to-weight ratio, 68
Stress-strain relationship:
compression, 48–50
shear, 52
tensile, 40–48
Stretch bending, 477
Stretch blow molding, 300
Stretch forming, 471–472
Structural foam molding, 293
1010
Index

Stud(s), 769
Stud welding, 719
Styrene-butadiene rubber, 181
Styrene-butadiene-styrene, 181
Submerged arc welding, 716–717
Super alloys, 131–132
Superconductor, 74–75
Supercooled liquid, 37, 69
Superfinishing, 623–624
Superheat, 211
Surface finish, see Surface roughness
Surface grinding, 616–617
Surface hardening, 663–664
Surface integrity, 88, 91–92, 94
Surface micromachining, 861
Surface-mount technology, 821, 830,
843–847
Surface processing, 12, 15, 668–690,
761–762
Surface roughness
casting, 253–254
defined, 89–90
grinding, 610–611
machining, 588–591
measurement of, 92–93
manufacturing processes, 94–95
Surface technology, 87
Surface texture, 88–89, 94
Surfaces, 87–94
Surfacing weld, 700
Sustainable manufacturing, 22
Swaging, 417
Synthetic rubber, 178–182, 316
Systems, production, 16–17
Taguchi methods, 988–989
Tantalum carbide, 143
Tape-laying machines, 334
Tapping, 521, 540
Taylor, Frederick, 3, 556, 560
Taylor tool life equation, 555–559
Technological processing capability, 7
Technology (defined), 1
Teflon, 168
Temperature
effect on properties, 56–58
grinding, 612–613
machining, 500–501
metal forming, 387–389
Tempering:
glass, 265
metal, 660
Tensile strength, 43, 771–772
Tensile test, 41
Terneplate, 678
Testing:
electronic assemblies, 843, 847
hardness, 53–55
inspection, 991
integrated circuits, 823, 824
tensile properties, 41–47
torsion properties, 51–52
printed circuit boards, 839–840
welds,
Thermal energy processes, 636–644
Thermal oxidation, 813
Thermal properties:
conductivity, 70–72
diffusivity, 71
expansion, 36, 68–69
in manufacturing, 71–72
in metal cutting, 500
specific heat, 70
Thermal spraying, 689
Thermit welding, 731–732
Thermocompression bonding, 823
Thermoforming, 302–306, 308
Thermoplastic elastomers, 176, 181–182,
324
Thermoplastic polymers:
composites, 329,
defined, 9, 153
important thermoplastics, 166–171
properties, 38, 165–166
shaping processes, 268–308
Thermosetting polymers:
composites, 329,
defined, 9, 153
important thermosets, 172–175
properties, 38, 171–172
shaping processes, 268–308
Thermosonic bonding, 823
Thin-film magnetic heads, 856
Thixocasting, 242
Thixomolding, 242
Thixotropy, 242
Threaded fasteners, 767–773
Threading, 513, 538
Thread rolling, 403
Three-dimensional printing, 795
Three-plate mold, 289
Through-hole technology, 821
TIG welding, 717
Time-temperature-transformation curve,
658–659
Time, machining:
drilling, 520–521
electrochemical machining, 634–635
milling, 527–528
minimizing, 592–594
turning, 87, 511
Tin, 129, 252
Tin-lead alloy system, 102–103, 129
Tinning, 678, 754
Tires, 321–323
Titanium, 126–127, 253
Titanium carbide, 143, 197
Titanium nitride, 144
Tolerance(s):
casting, 254
defined, 78, 79
machining, 588
manufacturing processes, 94
plastic molding, 310
Tool-chip thermocouple, 500
Tool grinders, 620
Tools, see Cutting tools or Dies
Torque-turn tightening, 773
Torque wrench, 773
Torsion test, 51
Total quality management, 984–985
Total solidification time, 216–217
Transfer line, 927–928
Transfer molding, 297–298, 336
Transverse rupture strength, 50–51
Trimming, 248, 419, 450
True-stress-strain, 44–48
Truing, 614
TTT curve, 658–659
Tube drawing, 435–436
Tube rolling, 341
Tube sinking, 435
Tube spinning, 474
Tumbling, 671
Tungsten, 130, 562
Tungsten carbide:
cutting tools, 563–566
general, 143, 197
history, 143
processing of, 143
Tunneling, 877
Turning, 12, 14, 485, 496–497, 510–519,
533
Turning center, 533
Turret drill, 522
Turret lathe, 516, 519
Turret press, 468
Twinning, 34–35
Twist drill, 571–572
Twisting, 463
Two-plate mold, 288–289
Two-roll mill, 317
Ultimate tensile strength, 43
Ultra-high precision machining, 866
Ultrasonic bonding, 823
Ultrasonic inspection, 998
Ultrasonic machining, 629–630, 866
Ultrasonic welding, 696, 737–738
Ultraviolet, 811, 812
Undercut, 646
Unilateral tolerance, 79
Unit cell, 30
Unit operation, 10
Upset forging, 406, 416
Upset welding, 725
Upsetting, 406, 416
Urea formaldehyde, 172
V-bending, 450–451
V-process, 231
Vacuum evaporation, 681, 816
Vacuum molding, 231–232
Index
1011

Vacuum permanent-mold casting,
238–239
Vacuum thermoforming, 302–303
Valence electrons, 27
Van der Waals forces, 29
Vanadium, 114
Vapor degreasing, 670
Vernier caliper, 82
Vibratory finishing, 672
Vickers hardness, 54
Viscoelasticity, 60–62
Viscosity, 58–60
Vision, machine, 995–997
Volumetric specific heat, 71
Vulcanization, 12, 176, 177, 320
Wafer, silicon, 807–809, 823
Warm working, 388
Washer, 770–771
Water atomization, 351
Water jet cutting, 630–631
Wave soldering, 757, 844–845
Waviness (in surface texture),
Wear:
cutting tool, 552–556
grinding wheel, 613–614
Weldability, 742
Weldbonding, 759
Weld joints, 697–698
Welding,
defects, 739–741
definition and overview, 693–697
design considerations, 742–743
history, 694–695
joints, 697–700, 704–705
physics, 700–704
processes, 695–696, 709–738
quality, 738–742
Wet chemical etching, 817
Wet lay-up, 332
Wet spinning, 285
Whiskers, 190
White cast iron, 119
Whitney, Eli, 3
Wire and cable coating, 280
Wire bonding, 823
Wire drawing, 385, 430–435
Wire EDM, 639
Wolframite, 143
Work content time, 924
Work hardening, 46
Work holding,
drilling, 522–523
turning, 514–516
Wrought metal, 99
X-ray inspection, 998
X-ray lithography, 812, 878
Yield point, 43
Yields, 824–825
Yield strength, 43
Zinc, 128–129, 252
1012
Index

STANDARD UNITS USED IN THIS BOOK
Units for both the System International (SI, metric) and United States Customary System (USCS) are listed in
equations and tables throughout this textbook. Metric units are listed as the primary units and USCS units are given in
parentheses.
Preﬁxes for SI units:
Prefix
Symbol
Multiplier
Example units (and symbols)
nano-
n
109
nanometer (nm)
micro-
m
106
micrometer, micron (mm)
milli-
m
103
millimeter (mm)
centi-
c
102
centimeter (cm)
kilo-
k
103
kilometer (km)
mega-
M
106
megaPascal (MPa)
giga-
G
109
gigaPascal (GPa)
Table of Equivalencies between USCS and SI units:
Variable
SI units
USCS units
Equivalencies
Length
meter (m)
inch (in)
1.0 in ¼ 25.4 mm ¼ 0.0254 m
foot (ft)
1.0 ft ¼ 12.0 in ¼ 0.3048 m ¼ 304.8 mm
yard
1.0 yard ¼ 3.0 ft ¼ 0.9144 m ¼ 914.4 mm
mile
1.0 mile ¼ 5280 ft ¼ 1609.34 m ¼ 1.60934 km
micro-inch (m-in)
1.0 m-in ¼ 1.0  106 in ¼ 25.4  103mm
Area
m2, mm2
in2, ft2
1.0 in2 ¼ 645.16 mm2
1.0 ft2 ¼ 144 in2 ¼ 92.90  103 m2
Volume
m3, mm3
in3, ft3
1.0 in3 ¼ 16,387 mm3
1.0 ft2 ¼ 1728 in3 ¼ 2.8317  102 m3
Mass
kilogram (kg)
pound (lb)
1.0 lb ¼ 0.4536 kg
ton
1.0 ton (short) ¼ 2,000 lb ¼ 907.2 kg
Density
kg/m3
lb/in3
1.0 lb/in3 ¼ 27.68  103 kg/m3
lb/ft3
1.0 lb/ft3 ¼ 16.0184 kg/m3
Velocity
m/min
ft/min
1.0 ft/min ¼ 0.3048 m/min ¼ 5.08  103 m/s
m/s
in/min
1.0 in/min ¼ 25.4 mm/min ¼ 0.42333 mm/s
Acceleration
m/s2
ft/sec2
1.0 ft/sec ¼ 0.3048 m/s2
Force
Newton (N)
pound (lb)
1.0 lb ¼ 4.4482 N
Torque
N-m
ft-lb, in-lb
1.0 ft-lb ¼ 12.0 in-lb ¼ 1.356 N-m
1.0 in-lb ¼ 0.113 N-m
Pressure
Pascal (Pa)
lb/in2
1.0 lb/in2 ¼ 6895 N/m2 ¼ 6895 Pa
Stress
Pascal (Pa)
lb/in2
1.0 lb/in2 ¼ 6.895  103 N/mm2 ¼ 6.895  103 MPa
Energy, work
Joule (J)
ft-lb, in-lb
1.0 ft-lb ¼ 1.356 N-m ¼ 1.356 J
1.0 in-lb ¼ 0.113 N-m ¼ 0.113 J
Heat energy
Joule (J)
British thermal unit (Btu)
1.0 Btu ¼ 1055 J
Power
Watt (W)
Horsepower (hp)
1.0 hp ¼ 33,000 ft-lb/min ¼ 745.7 J/s ¼ 745.7 W
1.0 ft-lb/min ¼ 2.2597  102 J/s ¼ 2.2597  102 W
Specific heat
J/kg-C
Btu/lb-F
1.0 Btu/lb-F ¼ 1.0 Calorie/g-C ¼ 4,187 J/kg-C
Thermal
conductivity
J/s-mm-C
Btu/hr-in -F
1.0 Btu/hr-in -F ¼ 2.077  102 J/s-mm-C
Thermal
expansion
(mm/mm)/C
(in/in)/F
1.0 (in/in)/F ¼ 1.8 (mm/mm)/C
Viscosity
Pa-s
lb-sec/in2
1.0 lb-sec/in2 ¼ 6895 Pa-s ¼ 6895 N-s/m2

CONVERSION BETWEEN USCS AND SI
To convert from USCS to SI: To convert the value of a variable from USCS units to equivalent SI units, multiply the
value to be converted by the right-hand side of the corresponding equivalency statement in the Table of
Equivalencies.
Example: Convert a length L ¼ 3.25 in to its equivalent value in millimeters.
Solution:
The corresponding equivalency statement is: 1.0 in ¼ 25.4 mm
L ¼ 3:25 in  (25:4 mm/in) ¼ 82:55 mm
ToconvertfromSItoUSCS:ToconvertthevalueofavariablefromSIunitstoequivalentUSCSunits,dividethevalueto
be converted by the right-hand side of the corresponding equivalency statement in the Table of Equivalencies.
n
Example: Convert an area A ¼ 1000 mm2 to its equivalent in square inches.
Solution:
The corresponding equivalency statement is: 1.0 in2 ¼ 645.16 mm2
A ¼ 1000 mm2/(645:16 mm2/in2) ¼ 1:55 in2
n

