
Science Networks . Historical Studies 
Volume 20 
Edited by Erwin Hiebert and Hans Wussing 
Editorial Board: 
K. Anderson, Aarhus 
D. Barkan, Pasadena 
H.J.M. Bos, Utrecht 
U. Bottazzini, Roma 
J.Z. Buchwald, Cambridge, Mass. 
K. Chemla, Paris 
S.S. Demidov, Moskva 
E.A. Fellmann, Basel 
M. Folkerts, Munchen 
P. Galison, Cambridge, Mass. 
1. Grattan-Guinness, London 
J. Gray, Milton Keynes 
R. Halleux, Liege 
S. Hildebrandt, Bonn 
E. Knobloch, Berlin 
D. Laugwitz, Muhltal 
Ch. Meinel, Regensburg 
J. Peiffer, Paris 
W. Purkert, Leipzig 
D. Rowe, Mainz 
A.1. Sabra, Cambridge, Mass. 
E. Scholz, Wupperthal 
R.H. Stuewer, Minneapolis 
V.P. Vizgin, Moskva 
Springer Basel AG 

George Boole 
Selected Manuscripts on Logic 
and its Phi losophy 
Editors: 
Ivor Grattan-Guinness 
Gerard Bornet 
Springer Sasel AG 

Editors: 
Ivor Grattan-Guinness 
Professor of the History of 
Mathematics and Logic 
Middlesex University 
Queensway 
Enfield 
Middlesex EN3 4SF 
Great Britain 
Dr. phil.-hist. Gerard Bornet 
Philosophisches Seminar 
Universite Misericorde 
1700 Fribourg 
Switzerland 
Published with support of the Swiss National Science Foundation. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Boole, George. 1815-1864 
George Boole: selected manuscripts on logic and its philosophy I 
[edited by]lvor Grattan-Guinness, Gerard Bornet. 
-- (Science networks historical studies ; v. 20) 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-3-0348-9805-8 
ISBN 978-3-0348-8859-2 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-0348-8859-2 
the 
1. Logic, Symbolic and mathematical. 2. Mathematics--philosophy. 3. Boole, 
George, 1815-1864. 
1. Grattan-Guinness, 1. 
II. Bornet, Gerard. 
III. Title. IV. Series. 
QA9.2.B68 
1997 
511.3--dc21 
Deutsche Bibliothek Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
George Boole - selected manuscripts on logic and its 
philosophy Ilvor Grattan-Guinness/Gerard Bornet. - Basel ; 
Boston; Berlin: Birkhauser, 1997 
(Science networks ; VoI. 20) 
ISBN 978-3-0348-9805-8 
NE: Grattan-Guinness, Ivor; Bornet, Gerard; GT 
This work is subject to copyright. AII rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the 
material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, re-use of illustrations, 
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in other ways, and storage in data 
banks. For any kind of use, permission of the copyright owner must be obtained. 
© 1997 Springer Basel AG 
Originally published by Birkhiiuser Verlag in 1997 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1 st edition 1997 
Cover Design: Micha Lotrovsky, Therwil, Switzerland 
Printed on acid-free paper produced from chlorine-free pulp. TCF 00 
ISBN 978-3-0348-9805-8 
987654321 

Contents
Editors' Introduction
Part 1: Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
xiii
Ivor Grattan-Guinness
§lOur purpose
§2
Life and career
§3
The fate of Boole's Nachlass
§4
Organisation and explanation of the
selected manuscripts
§5
The renaissance of logic in Britain
§6
Boole, English algebraist par excellence
§7
Logic in Boole's Mathematical analysis of logic
§8
Between books, 1848-1854
§9
Logic in The laws of thought
§10
Logic after The laws of thought
§11
Plans and texts for "The philosophy of logic"
§12
Where was Boole's philosophy of mathematics?
§ 13
Outside Boole's universe: Leibniz, Peacock,
Babbage and De Morgan
§ 14
Boole's immediate legacy
xiii
xiv
xviii
xxv
XXVI
XXVll
XXVllI
XXXll
XXXV
xxxvii
xxxix
xl
xliii
xlv
Part 2: Boole's Psychologism as a Reception Problem
xlvii
Gerard Bornet
§15
Introduction
§16 Frege's psychologism criticism
§17
Boole's anti-inductivism and the problem of introspection
§18
Art versus Science
§ 19 Psychology as science
§20
Boole's structuralism
§21
Uninterpretable symbols
xlvii
xlviii
I
Ii
Iiii
Iv
lvii

vi
Contents
Part 3: Remarks on dating and editing the manuscripts .....
lviii
§22
Remarks on dating
lix
§23
Remarks on editing
lix
Acknowledgements
Notes
Part
A
The Nature
of logic and the
Philosophy
of Mathematics
Ix
lxii
Chapter I
The Nature of Logic
1
Logic is the science of reasoning
1
Of what does reasoning consist?
1
General Considerations
2
Of our Conception of Things
2
On the relations of individuals and classes
2
Of the mode in which the mind combines
and modifies its own conceptions
3
Of the nature of Propositions
4
Of the limitation of the subject of discourse
4
Laws of the Mental Operation
5
Comparison of the laws of elective symbols
with the laws of arithmetical symbols
7
Consequences of the above analogies
8
Examples for Practice
9
Of the interpretation of 0 and 1 as elective symbols
10
Expression of the class not-men etc.
10
Chapter II
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
including philosophy of mathematical reasoning
Of Signs
Of Propositions
Of the Quantity of Terms
Of the Quality of Terms
Division
Of Some of the Varieties of Propositions
13
14
14
15
16
17
18

Contents
vii
Of the Limitation of Propositions
20
Of the Conversion of Propositions
21
Of Syllogism
23
Conditions and Rules of Syllogistic Inference
25
General Remarks on Primary Propositions
29
Of Secondary Propositions
29
Of the Demonstrations of Geometry
32
Of the Foundations of Algebra
36
Of the Differential Calculus
38
The real nature of mathematical analysis
41
Chapter III
[Extracts from a notebook]
42
Miscellaneous Observations on Logic
42
Of Inverse Operations
45
Introduction
46
Of signs
47
Part
B
The Philosophical
Interpretation
of a Theory of Logic
Chapter IV
Prolegomena
51
Results of the Analysis of Conception
54
Chapter V
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory
of Logic and on the Philosophical Interpretation
of Its Methods and Processes
63
Analysis of the Operations of Conception as Exercised
within the Sphere of Formal Logic
74
Operations founded on Extension
74
Operations founded on Intension
75
Laws of Conception
76
Addition
76
Subtraction
77
Composition
78
Abstraction
79
Law of mixed operations of Addition and Composition
80

viii
Contents
Analysis of Judgment as Exercised within the Sphere
of Formal Logic
81
Analysis of Reasoning as Exercised within the Sphere
of Formal Logic
83
On Systems of Notation
86
Symbolical expression of the formal laws of Logic
88
Analysis of Reasoning resumed
95
Chapter VI
[Preparatory Notes]
105
Of the nature and scope of Logic as considered a Science
105
Definitions of Conception, Judgment and Reasoning
106
[Conception]
106
Judgment
108
Reasoning
108
[Further Considerations]
110
Chapter VII
General Summary
112
Theory of Formal Logic
112
Part
C
liThe Philosophy
of Logic" - A Sequel
to liThe Laws of Thought"
Chapter VIII
[Preface]
119
Chapter IX
Table of Contents
121
Chapter I: Of the ordinary Logic
121
Chapter II: Of the operations of thought in
relation to the science of number
122
Chapter III: Of the Laws of Thought in Logic
122
Chapter IV: Interpretation of Methods
122
Chapter X
The Philosophy of Reasoning
123

Contents
IX
Chapter XI
Logic
126
Nature and Office of Signs
129
Methods in Logic
132
The Aristotelian Logic
133
Sir W. Hamilton's Theory of Syllogism
136
The Theory of Professor De Morgan
138
Of the Ultimate Laws of Thought
141
Of the Method of This Work
143
The Method of Algebra
144
Method of This Work
148
Results of This Method
150
Part
0
Miscellaneous Matters,
Letters and Fragments
Chapter XII
On Belief in Its Relation to the Understanding.........
157
Chapter XIII
The Philosophical Idea of Freedom
Infinite evolution
162
162
Chapter XIV
Note [to Aristotle]
164
Chapter XV
Philosophy of Mathematics
Chapter II: On Geometry
167
171
Chapter XVI
[Various fragments, apparently late]
179
[Fragment 1]
179
[Fragment 2]
180
Digression on the Nature of Algebra
180
[Fragment 3]
183
Principles of Expression
183
Laws of the Symbols
184
[Fragment 4]
185

x
[Fragment 5]
[Fragment 6]
[Fragment 7]
Contents
187
188
189
Chapter XVII
Letters to Cayley, Lubbock and Penrose
Arthur Cayley
Cayley to Boole, 2 December 1847
Boole to Cayley, 6 December 1847
Cayley to Boole, 7 December 1847
Boole to Cayley, 8 December 1847
Boole to Cayley, 10 December 1847
Cayley to Boole, 11 December 1847
Boole to Cayley, 14 December 1847
John William Lubbock
Boole to Lubbock, 16 February 1849
Boole to Lubbock, 22 February 1849
John Penrose
Boole to Penrose, 13 March 1855
Textual Notes
Explanation of the description of the material
The two Signature systems "MM" and "RS"
The Boole/Falk List of 1896
Details on individual documents
Notes on the individual chapters
Chapter I: The Nature of Logic
Chapter II: Elementary Treatise on Logic
Chapter III: [Extracts from a notebook]
Chapter IV: Prolegomena
Chapter V: On the Foundations of Logic
Chapter VI: [Preparatory Notes]
Chapter VII: General Summary
Chapter VIII: [Preface]
Chapter IX: Table of Contents
Chapter X: The Philosophy of Reasoning
Chapter XI: Logic
Chapter XII: On Belief in Its Relation to the Understanding
Chapter XIII: The Philosophical Idea of Freedom
Chapter XIV: Note [to Aristotle]
Chapter XV: Philosophy of Mathematics
Chapter XVI: [Various fragments, apparently late]
Chapter XVII: Letters to Cayley, Lubbock and Penrose
191
191
191
191
192
193
194
195
196
197
197
198
200
200
203
203
203
204
206
208
208
208
209
209
210
211
212
212
213
213
213
215
215
216
216
217
220

Contents
xi
Bibliography
222
Index of Names
229
Index of Subjects
231

Editors' Introduction
Part
1: BooIe's quest for the
foundations of his logic
Ivor Grattan-Guinness
§1
Ourpurpose
The adjective "boolean", sometimes even "Boolean", is known to mathe-
maticians for a powerful algebra, to electrical engineers and computing
specialists who apply it widely in parts of their work, to philosophers as a
component of logic, and to historically-minded people as one George Boole
(1815-1864), who formed an algebra of logic from which we enjoy these mod-
ern fruits. This book publishes some of the manuscripts in which he tried but
failed to find a satisfying philosophy to underpin that logic, and conform with
the elements of philosophy and psychology which he felt himself to have
addressed; almost all appear for the first time.
Mter a short recollection of Boole's life and work (§2), this introduction
continues with the story of the manuscripts, in particular of the collection
from which our edition is drawn (§3); the organisation of our selection is
described in §4. Then, following brief surveys of the revival of interest in
logic in Britain from the 1820s (§5) and of Boole's mathematical background
(§6), we describe the main phases of his logical career. He wrote his first
book, A mathematical analysis oflogic (hereafter "MAL") of 1847 (§6-7). Then
a period of rethinking over seven years (§8) culminated in his second and
more substantial book, An investigation ofthe laws of thought ("LT') of 1854,
which included applications of his logic to probability theory (§9). Mter that
he wrote many manuscripts, especially to write a third book on "The
Philosophy of Logic" ("PL") (§10-12). We end with some remarks on four
figures who did not influence Boole as one might expect (§13), and a short

xiv
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
review of the impact of his publications up to the end of the century (§14).
Throughout we give more space to his mathematical details and procedures,
because he tended to assume them as known in the manuscripts, where he
covered the philosophical and psychological aspects much more amply.
§2 Life and career
George Boole was born on 2 November 1815 in Lincoln, the eldest of four
children of a local tradesman John Boole (1777-1848) and his wife Mary Ann
(1780-1854).1 He adopted a love of learning from his father to such an extent
that already in his teens he taught at schools in Lincoln and nearby; in his
20th year he even opened his own school. He also learnt classical and modern
languages and wrote poetry, and taught himself mathematics (and also
French and German) to a level which permitted him to engage in research in
mathematics. He began publishing in 1841, first and frequently in The Cam-
bridge Mathematical Journal, which had been founded two years earlier by
D. F. Gregory (1813-1844), his initial mathematical mentor and inspiration
(§7).
Although this early work gained considerable attention, Boole had to
continue in school-teaching until the Queen's University was proposed in
1845, as a secular institution for higher education in Ireland. Mter delays
caused by the potato famine, and Catholic opposition, Queen Victoria
formally opened the constituent colleges, including Queen's College, Cork, in
1849, and Boole took up then his post as the founder Professor of
Mathematics. While remembered as a conscientious and at times inspiring
teacher, he was not able to find any distinguished followers among his
student clientele. Never really happy with life in Ireland, he was recognised
only locally; in particular, he had very little contact with W. R. Hamilton
(1805-1865) up north in Dublin, the only other mathematician in the island
of comparable calibre, even though they were both pioneering new algebras.
Further, the Royal Irish Academy did not elect him to their throng. However,
he received honorary doctorates from Trinity College Dublin in 1851 and
Oxford University eight years later, and was made Fellow of the Royal
Society in 1857. For likenesses there survive a very few sketches, and one
photograph taken in London probably in 1860 and often reproduced; when
printed the correct way round he is looking to the viewer's left (Figure 1).
Throughout his career Boole published steadily, in two areas which were
tightly linked, as we shall see in §6 and §7. He started with the differential
and integral calculus, where he became a major figure in certain algebraic
theories popular in England and Ireland. He also wrote two well-received
textbooks: A Treatise on Differential Equations (1859a in the bibliography),

§2
Life and career
Figure 1: The well-known photograph of Boole, taken in
London 1864 (Reproduction D. MacHaIe)
xv

xvi
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
and A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences in the following year
(l860a).
Boole's other area was logic, which he publicised principally in MAL
(1847a) and LT (l854a), and in some papers. Today the latter book is
recognised as more authoritative, but at the time it gained less attention
than MAL. To accentuate the historical irony, in his lifetime and for years
afterwards his work in logic was much less well recognised than were his
contributions to the calculus, where his methods and especially textbooks
were used. Doubtless aware of the apathy over the logic, he attempted at
various times, especially soon after the publication of LT, to write the
non-technical PL.
In 1855 Boole married Mary Everest (1832-1916), daughter of the
Reverend Thomas Everest and niece of Sir George Everest, after whom the
famous mountain is named. They produced five daughters, four of whom had
varied and distinguished careers of their own: two mathematicians, a
chemist and a novelist. One of them will appear in §3 as an archivist. Mary
assisted her husband with his two textbooks on differential equations, as the
first reader for intelligibility and also as checker of some of the exercises.
After his death she proselytised Boole's philosophy, especially its application
to educational questions, both in teaching and in print. Although she was
regarded as a crank, her understanding of his ideas on logic and education
were basically sound (Laita 1980a): scattered around her rather verbose
collected works are some valuable hints and data. In particular, the title of
the short piece "Mount Carmel in London", and its initial publication in the
journal The Crank in 1904 (Boole, M. 1931a, 75-79), should not deter readers
from its merit.
Like his wife, Boole was deeply religious. According to her, when a youth
he came to the idea that a universe was central to knowledge and revelation
as in "the Great All stressed as a unity in the Scriptures", and monism in the
Jewish faith (Boole, M. 1931a, 473, 951-952), and thereafter he affirmed
ecumenism. He implicitly exhibited his position in LT by devoting ch. 13 to
sophisticated logical analyses of propositions due to Samuel Clarke and
Benedict Spinoza concerning the necessary existence of "Some one
unchangeable and independent Being" (p. 192). However, he was a Dissenter,
and at a time when such movements were gaining considerable ground in
Britain against strong resistance from the established Trinitarian Church of
England. He alluded to his stand in print very discreetly a few lines from the
end of LT, where he mentioned "the Father of Lights" and finished off with
some enigmatic lines about the bearing of religious belief upon his logic.
Ecumenism was very important to the philosophy of Boole's logic; for its
Universe 1 symbolised the Godhead standing over and lighting the factions
into which the Christian Church was split. He was especially admiring of
Frederick Denison Maurice (1805-1872), who advocated ecumenism with
great force in mid century and so was dismissed from his chair at King's

§2
Life and career
xvii
Figure 2: Boole's house at Ballintemple, where he died
(Photograph I. Grattan-Guinness)
College London. Boole spent parts of several summer vacations in England
in his last years, studying in London libraries and also attending Maurice's
Sunday services.
In similar reticence, Boole kept his political views to himself: he offered
no utterances on the condition of the Ireland in which he lived after the fam-
ine. But in a manuscript discussion of words, written in the revolutionary
year 1848, he embodied his liberal aspirations (page 5 below).
Boole died as a result of foolishly walking the three miles from home to
university without proper protection from a rain storm, so probable an event
in Cork. The ensuing pleuro-pneumonia took him away in his 50th year on 8
December 1864; he was buried at Blackrock, near Cork and the family
residence in Ballintemple (Figures 2 and 3).
The popular Illustrated London News published a short obituary by the
Vice-President of the College (Ryall 1865a) together with a fine sketch (Fig-
ure 4). Boole's former friend the teacher and mathematician Robert Harley
(1828-1910) published a fine long eulogy 1866a, and condensed from it a rou-
tine obituary 1867a for the Royal Society. The Scottish educationalist and
Shakespeare scholar Samuel Neil (1825-1901) also wrote an excellent piece
1865a in his own journa~, The British Controversialist.2 In Canada there

xviii
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
Figure 3:
Grave of Boole at Blackrock,
with his biographer D. MacHale
(Photograph I. Grattan-Guinness)
appeared a lengthy appreciation of LT (Young 1865a), together with a short
notice (Anonymous 1865a). But no obituaries were written by leading math-
ematicians.
In addition, and exceptionally for a mathematician, two stain-glass
windows were erected in Boole's memory. One was inserted around 1867 in
the Great Hall of Queen's College Cork; he is shown in one of the ten panels
(Figure 5) portraying various world luminaries. The other was inserted into
Lincoln Cathedral two years later, thanks to a subscription raised by fellow
townspeople.
§3 The fate of Boole's Nachlass
Mter Boole's death and burial, his widow moved the family to London,
where Maurice found her a post at his Queen's College for women's education
in Harley Street. Although the government awarded her a Civil List pension
of £100 per year, lack of money presumably forced her to sell his library. No

§3
The fate of Boole's Nachlass
xix
Figure 4:
Engraving of Boole,
published with Ryall's
obituary 18650
list of it survives, but it was probably not large; it seems likely that most of
his wide reading was done in libraries, or at least thanks to their holdings.
As well as teaching and applying George's ideas to education, Mary
began sorting his manuscripts with the help of her third daughter Alicia
(1860-1940). Mathematical colleagues saw them: William Spottiswoode
(1825-1883) fulfilled her request to send some of the mathematical ones to
the Royal Society, and Isaac Todhunter (1820-1884) quickly formed those
which Boole had prepared for a second edition of the book on differential
equations into a "supplementary volume" of the (Boole 1865a), the edition
itself was basically just a corrected reprint.
In addition, Augustus De Morgan (1806-1871), Boole's most eminent
contemporary in the algebra of logic (§13) and a regular correspondent,
looked through the logical manuscripts. He felt in his report 1867a that only
one was fit for printing: Boole 1868a on numerically definite syllogisms (a
topic initiated by De Morgan himself in his 1847a, ch. 8), seemingly written
around 1850.
Mrs Boole and Alicia sorted out the mathematical from the logical
manuscripts, organised each part into lettered series, and transcribed by
hand many non-symbolic logical texts and also letters; they also gathered

xx
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
together a group of notebooks. Eventually she arranged to give them
(hereafter "the collection") to the Royal Society in 1873. However, family
interest in them had not ceased. In particular, in the 1880s Alicia, then
living in or near Liverpool, teamed up with fellow townsman H. J. Falk,
mathematician by inclination and barrister by profession. They formed a
small group to study Boole's work; it included an actuary called Walter Stott,
whom Alicia married in 1890. In order to prepare a new edition of LT, which
had became very rare, they asked to borrow back the collection from the
Royal Society in 1889. The Council minutes of 20 June duly record that
"Leave was granted to Miss Boole to borrow the MSS. of the late Prof. Boole,
and to make extracts from the same" (Royal Society 1893a, 262).
Alicia and her helpers looked in detail at the logical part; they tried to
determine which manuscripts were written before and which after LT, and
to pick out those of the latter destined for the succeeding PL. They organised
the collection further into various lettered and numbered sections, and
prepared typescripts of several logical manuscripts and some letters. They
returned it to the Royal Society in 1896; Council minutes of 29 October
(Royal Society 1899a, 293-294) record that
The Boole MSS. presented to the Society by the widow of the late
Prof. George Boole and lent to Miss Boole in 1889, for the purpose of
making extract therefrom, have now been returned, the whole of the
MSS having been collated and arranged in order, and type-written
copies of several of them furnished for the Society's Library by Mr. H.
J. Falk, on behalf of the Boole family. It is proposed to proceed now
with the binding of the collection.
The Society also resolved to thank Falk "for the trouble he has taken in
arranging and copying the Boole manuscripts". Mercifully, the binding was
never effected; in addition, no publications came from all this effort, although
Mrs Boole still published on (her version 00 his theories from time to time. 3
Then, in 1905, enter Bertrand Russell (1872-1970), surprisingly and
probably also surprised. In his early thirties, he was deeply engaged in a vast
logical enterprise with A. N. Whitehead (1862-1947) of a quite different kind
from
Boole's (§14) which was to yield their three-volume Principia
mathematica (1910-1913). Perhaps not appreciating the great differences
between this and her husband's enterprises, Mrs. Boole seems to have
thought of Russell as a suitable editor. Once again nothing eventuated; but
parts of the related correspondence survives in Russell's Nachlass. Falk's son
Oswald Toynbee 4 told Russell on 18 February 1905, not quite accurately,
that
Mrs. Boole after George Boole's death gave a large collection of his
unpublished papers to the Royal Society absolutely. The more
strictly mathematical portion of the papers was looked into by
Todhunter and I believe De Morgan, the result of their work being

§3
The fate of Boole's Nachlass
xxi
Figure 5:
Panel showing Boole in the
Memorial Window in the Great
Hall of University College, Cork
(Photograph I. Grattan-Guinness)
the supplementary volume of the Differential Equations. My father
thinks that they extracted nearly all that was valuable of this
nature.
There were however in addition many papers which appeared to be
connected with "The Laws of Thought", and with the permission of
the Royal Society my father had all the papers out for some years,
and in conjunction with Alice Boole (Mrs. Stott) he produced some
sort of order in the logical portion of the papers. They are I believe
the beginnings of a book designed to render the ideas of the "Laws of
Thought" more intelligible to the non-mathematical reader. The
papers after arrangement were copied, (3 typewritten copies were
made of which my father has one) and the originals with a copy given
back to the Royal Society where they now lie. The Royal Soc[iet]y
asked my father if he had any recommendation to make re
publishing, but apparently he did not like to judge for himself, and no
one else has taken the matter in hand. The papers may be worth
publishing and apparently all that is required is the judgement of
somebody qualified to decide in such a matter. If you would like to
see the papers (or have not already seen them) my father would be
glad to send you his copy after obtaining Mrs. Boole's permission.

xxii
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
The old lady is, I believe, rather a difficult person to deal with but I
expect there would be no opposition.
You will see that I rather overestimated the work which remains to
be done. I had heard my father talk of the confusion of the papers but
did not know that anything had been done to put them in order or
that they had been restored to the Royal Society.
Russell corresponded with his friend the logician Louis Couturat
(1868-1914) about the request at this time, correctly considering him to be a
far more appropriate candidate as editor; among other work, Couturat had
already written on the similarities between Boole's and Leibniz's logics (§13)
(l901a, 344-354, 385-387). On 7 February he wrote to Russell, regarding it as
"a great honour for me to be charged with the edition of these manuscripts,
on condition that they are worth the effort (that is to say that they are not
simple drafts or copies of what Boole had published) and on condition that
they do not pass my competence such as treating probability theory."s In
reply on 9 February, Russell offered to translate into English any editorial
material that Couturat might write.
However, after hearing nothing from Falk, he wrote on 13 October from
his home at Bagley Wood near Oxford:
I have never heard anything further from you about the Boole MSS
in your father's possession. As it occurred to me that perhaps you
were kept from writing by not knowing my address, I am writing to
say that the above is my permanent address. I heard from M.
Couturat that if the MSS proved interesting he would probably
undertake to edit them; & I feel no doubt that he is the most suitable
person living for the purpose.
This initiative inspired further recollections by H. J. Falk to his son on
18 October, which were forwarded to Russell:
My dear Oswald,
It would be well to make clear to Mr. Russell that the Boole MSS are
not in my possession or control. They are at the Royal Society to
whom they were committed by Mrs. Boole on her husband's death 40
years ago.
Any control I have is solely by courtesy through my having (with
Mrs. Boole's consent and permission of the Royal Society Council)
collated and arranged the chaotic mass of papers. I then had the
MSS typed, presented one copy to the Royal Society and retained
one. I have for 20 years wished to see the "Laws of Thought",
reprinted with some of these MSS and perhaps a biography added,
and would gladly give Mr. Russell and his friend any assistance of
which I am capable to that end. It would be a real public service and
I regret that there are objections in the family, which so far I have

§3
The fate of Boole's Nachlass
xxiii
never overcome. I feel bound to respect them, not merely on friendly
grounds. Mrs. Boole holds various metaphysical views as to Boole's
Logic, based chiefly on Gratry,6 which I have never been quite able to
follow. But I cannot venture for that reason to conclude that they are
without foundation.
She must remember much of her husband's thought, which no one
now can know. These views are not shared by her very able
daughters and especially not by Mrs. Stott, who has most of her
father's mathematical and logical genius. Now Mrs. Stott worked
very hard with me on the MSS, and I cannot disregard her wishes. To
put it briefly, her fear (in which the others concur) is that, if the L.T.
or M.S.S. be printed by anyone, Mrs. Boole will not only disown any
connection with the new edition but will attack it as an inadequate
presentation of Boole's thought. Hence they would prefer nothing
done during the old lady's life. A few words as to the M.S.S. -
In the
ten years between the L.T. (1854) and his death (1865) Boole was
continually working at a sequel to it. The important part of the MSS
consists of those efforts. His great mind sought to lift the Principles
and Methods of Thought even further than De Morgan and Jevons 7
seemed to see, -
into a clear region beyond the schoolmen and
formalists, whether logical or mathematical. Thus the beauty and
power of those MSS are, if I am any judge, too precious to be buried
for ever.
Russell responded to this envoi on 25 October as follows:
Many thanks for your letter, and for the letter from your father
enclosed. It would give me the greatest pleasure to meet your father
if it can be arranged. I hope if anything brings him to Oxford, he will
come here at any time that suits him; otherwise, we might meet in
London.
From his letter I see that the objections to printing during Mrs.
Boole's lifetime are very strong. I have always taken it for granted
that her views of Boole's opinions must be wrong, particularly since
I read Gratry about a year ago: Gratry seemed to me not nearly good
enough. I should therefore be quite in sympathy with the feeling that
it would be better to wait.
I am afraid from your father's letter that he thinks I am willing to
edit the MSS myself, in case at any time they are to be edited. This
is hardly the case. I have at all times a great deal of original work
that I want to do, & I should hardly be willing to give up so much
time. But M. Couturat is more learned than I am: he has done an
admirable edition of Leibniz's unpublished MSS on Symbolic Logic
[Couturat 1903a); he is willing to undertake the task and is far better
qualified for it than I should be. I should of course be glad to assist
him in any way, particularly as regards language. But he would be
the editor.

XXIV
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
Despite Couturat's willingness to act, nothing happened in the end.
However, a few years later the mathematician and historian of mathematics
Philip Jourdain
(1879-1919),
who
had
taken
Russell's
course
in
mathematical logic while an undergraduate at Cambridge in 1901-1902,
became interested in Boole, as part of a general study of the recent
development of symbolic logic. He wrote an article 1910a on Boole, borrowing
from the Stotts copies of various materials, and also from Boole's former
friend the mathematician and teacher Robert Harley (1828-1910) a bound
volume containing Boole's letters to him and copies of various others; sadly,
this volume has never been seen since. Jourdain's only other act was to
publish with the Open Court Company in 1916 a new edition of LT; however,
he contributed merely a two-page introduction, corrections of errata, and a
(very welcome) index, and did not include any manuscripts. Published as
"Volume 2", it was intended to be preceded by an edition of Boole's papers on
logic; but he seemed not to have started on this project before his early death.
His manuscripts were passed by his widow to A. E. Heath and J. M. Child as
literary executors (Rhees 1955a); but most have disappeared.
Thus ended serious Boole scholarship until the late 1940s. The
centenary of MAL in 1948 stimulated a survey Kneale 1948a of Boole's life
and work in Mind; and a photoreprint of the book that year aroused some
interest, such as an article Prior 1949a on propositions in Boole. Then four
years later two British philosophers used the collection. Mary Hesse quoted
a few passages in an article 1952a; and at the suggestion of Jourdain's
literary executor A. E. Heath, Rush Rhees produced Jourdain's missing
volume with a selected edition Boole 1952a of published and unpublished
writings on logic and probability, prefaced by his own informative "Note in
editing". (Jourdain's edition of LT was reprinted with it, for the second time.)
Both these works contain short quotations from some of the manuscripts
included here. In 1954 the Royal Irish Academy celebrated the centenary of
the publication of LT with a special meeting and proceedings; Rhees 1955a
and Feys 1955a will be cited from the latter.
After another pause, this time of 20 years, several historians used the
collection. Susan Wood worked on it, in the course of preparation of a
doctoral dissertation 1976a on Boole's theory of propositional forms. The
most noteworthy later results include Desmond MacHale's biography 1985a,
and Maria Panteki's exploration of the connection between algebras and
logic in Boole in her doctoral thesis 1992a on this theme in Britain over the
period 1810-1870.
The collection is currently stored in nine boxes, together with a separate
set of notebooks. Some general remarks on our editing and dating are given
in the short set of "Remarks" following this introduction, with the necessary
minimum of grim details supplied in the "Textual notes" which follow the
transcriptions.

§4
Organisation and explanation of the selected manuscripts
xxv
As with many figures, Boole's full Nachlass has become somewhat
scattered. In particular, quite a few documents found their way to the USA,
seemingly in the family of Boole's elder daughter Mary Ellen (1856-19??),
and were sold at auction to Cork University Library in 1983. They include an
unpublished biography by his sister Mary, quite a few letters and notebooks,
and some material from his school-teacher days. While we have consulted
them, none has been included in our selection.
§4 Organisation and explanation of the selected
manuscripts
Boole seems to have tried again and again to articulate his philosophy of
logic, usually starting each time from scratch (as he told De Morgan in a
letter quoted in §1l). Only rarely did he produce a substantial text; quite
often the outcome was more notes or another work-plan. He never dated a
manuscript, although occasionally he indicated a time by reference to MAL
or LT; and his handwriting did not noticeably change over the years. Another
complication is that sometimes he wrote essays or plans on logic on the
versos of discarded folios of mathematical remarks or calculations, and some
of these sequences have been ordered for mathematical rather than logical
continuity.
Thus our selection has been made from a scattered and chronologically
unclear textual universe. It comprises around 40% of Boole's unpublished
manuscripts on logic. We hope that it provides a wide and characteristic
cross-section of his meditations; it complements a few manuscripts which
were included by Rhees in his edition Boole 1952a. We have divided it into
four Parts lettered A-D, and also into Chapters numbered I-XVII. Most
Chapters comprise one integral manuscript, and some contain Boole's own
chapters or at least references to them; so to avoid confusion we refer to his
(and anyone else's) "chapter(s)". In the same spirit, this book has "page(s)"
while all others have "p(p)". Unless indicated by our square brackets, the
title of each Chapter is Boole's.
The orders of, and in, Parts A-C are hopefully chronological, at least
coarsely so. There seems to be nothing before MAL; Part A is placed between
MAL and LT, and is surveyed in §8. Part B contains manuscripts written
after LT (§10), and Part C those which seem to have been specifically
intended for the third book (PL) on the philosophy of logic (§1l); the division
between Parts follows the intention of Alicia Boole and Falk a century ago,
but we cannot claim it to be perfect. Those sections of all these writings
relating most closely to mathematics are highlighted in §12, and from them a
conjecture is made about his failure to produce PL. Part D contains two

xxvi
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
manuscripts of uncertain date (Chapters XII and XV) whose contents place
them rather outside Parts Band C, some interesting notes and undated
fragments, and a few letters; they are all noted in §8 and §10-§12 as
appropriate.
Mter the "Textual Notes" comes the bibliography, which combines the
items cited in this introduction, a few other historical writings of note which
have not been cited, and the works mentioned or alluded to in the
manuscripts and identified in the Notes. An index of names and subjects
completes the edition.
§5 The renaissance of logic in Britain
Boole's contributions to logic came at a time when the discipline was
experiencing a remarkable revival after a long period of quietude. While he
seems not to have been profoundly influenced by recent developments when
forming his own approach, he drew upon them, especially in his manuscripts.
Some main details, therefore, should be noted.
The study of logic in Britain was then in a peculiar state. The classical
tradition, based upon inference in syllogistic logic, was still in place. But for
a long time an alternative tradition had been developing; inspired by John
Locke
(1632-1704)
and
continued
in
some
ways
by
the
Scottish
Common-Sense philosophers of the late 18th century. Critical of syllogistic
logic, especially for its narrow concern with inference, adherents of the new
tradition sought a broader foundation for logic in the facultative capacity of
reasoning in man, and included topics such as truth and induction which we
might now assign to the philosophy of science. Showing more sympathy to
the role of language in logic than had normally obtained among the
syllogists, they laid emphasis on signs as keys to logical knowledge; indeed,
Locke used the word "semiotics" in the fourth Book of his Essay concerning
human understanding (1690) (Buickerood 1985a). At the cost of some
simplification, we shall refer to this approach as "the sign tradition".
The principal source of this revival of interest can be precisely identified:
the Elements of logic (1826) by Richard Whately (1787-1863), based upon his
long essay on the topic in the Encyclopaedia metropolitana, which had been
published in two parts in 1823. In the book version he surveyed syllogistic
logic in a "Synthetical Compendium" of nearly 80 pages, and used it in a
following chapter of equal length on "Fallacies". But he was much taken with
the sign tradition, endorsing some of its criticisms of syllogistic logic in his
"Introduction" and opening chapter.
Whately's book prompted an astonishing response; he soon produced
revised editions (the fourth in 1832), and further ones later. Several figures
wrote lengthy reviews or commentaries, or used it in writing textbooks for

§6
Boole, English algebraist par excellence
xxvii
university use. All figures in logic of that time drew something from him,
whether positively or negatively, at least in English-speaking countries. 8
Boole was one reader; so we use Whately as our main source for several
issues, although other authors doubtless also influenced him. 9
The main single innovation was made by George Bentham (1800-1884),
in his Outline of a new system of logic with a critical examination of Dr
Whately's "Elements of Logic" (1827); but it sold very poorly, and so was not
widely recognised until the 1850s. He greatly increased the number of forms
in syllogistic logic by adding to the standard ones such as "All As are Bs" the
types "AlVSomelNo As are AIVSomelNo Bs". The name "quantification of the
predicate" became attached to this extension during the 1840s (it is the
origin of the word "quantification" in logic). A priority row over its genesis
was initiated in the mid 1840s by the Scottish philosopher Sir William
Hamilton (1788-1856) (his approach to logic is summarised in §11). However,
although he had seen Bentham's book, his target was De Morgan (Laita
1980a). It was this contretemps which inspired Boole to write up his ideas on
logic, and to publish them as MAL in 1847.
§6 Boole, English algebraist par excellence
Boole's contributions to mathematics and logic were both characteristic
of and important for the development of English mathematics in his time; for
they were entirely guided by algebras of new kinds, which we consider here.
His earliest work extended the notion of the invariant, which was to become
a major English industry in the hands of Arthur Cayley (1821-1895) and J. J.
Sylvester (1814-1897) (Parshall 1989a). But his main concern was drawn
from the algebraic version of the calculus based upon Taylor series, proposed
by J. L. Lagrange (1736-1813), extended in the early 19th century by the
Alsatian L. F. A. Arbogast (1759-1803), and continued by a few minor French
mathematicians (Grattan-Guinness 1990a, chs. 3-4).
In this version the operation of differentiating a mathematical function
f(x) was represented by the letter "D", so that the derivative ('(x) (to use
Lagrange's notation) was written "Df(x)". An algebra was developed in which
second differentiation was written as the power "D2", the inverse operation
of integration was "D-I", and so on. The resulting theory was used principally
to solve differential and difference equations, sum series and evaluate
integrals. The results were often correct although the foundations of this
algebra were mysterious; for example, as critics pointed out, the orders of
differentiation were identified with the corresponding powers of the first
(dny/dxn) = (dy/dx)n for n~2).
Inspired partly by Gregory, Boole became a leading practitioner of this
theory, not only making new applications but also seeking to explicate the

xxviii
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
foundations and make the theory more rigorous (Panteki 1992a, ch. 4). His
principal paper, "On a general method in analysis", was submitted to the
Royal Society; after wishing to decline it, they published it in their
Philosophical Transactions as Boole 1844a, and then gave him their Gold
Medal for it. In this paper and related ones, he explored the D-methods to
new lengths, applying them to both ordinary and partial differential
equations, and examining non-commutative operator functions F and G for
which F(D)GCD)*G(D)F(D). He seems to have hoped that one general method
could be found; but his own work revealed the hope as overly optimistic.
Three years later MAL appeared, in which Boole gave the first version of
his logic. As its title shows, he saw his "mathematical analysis of logic" as
applied mathematics, a view which he always maintained. In this applica-
tion he worked with mental acts (called "elective symbols", in the manner
common to algebraists of that time of identifying the symbol with the object
or operation symbolised); the act of selecting, say, men out of the Universe of
humans. He also spoke of the class of men so selected, and interpreted his
theory for both operations (mental acts) and objects (classes). "Let us employ
the letters X, Y, Z, to represent the individual members of classes [and] The
symbol x operating upon any subject comprehending individuals or classes,
shall be supposed to select from that subject all the Xs that it contains"
(MAL,15). The "product xy will represent, in succession, the selection of the
class Y, and the selection from the class Y of such individuals of the class X
as are contained in it, the result being the class whose members are both Xs
and Ys" (p.16). "The equation y =Z implies that the classes Y and Z are equiv-
alent, member for member" (p.19).
Boole then set down the basic laws with these mental acts obeyed, in a
form closely similar to those for the differential operators in 1844a (MAL,
17-18). Writing 1t and r for functions of D operating on the mathematical
functions q and r, and u, v, x and y for elective symbols, he named and wrote
the laws for the two theories as follows; 10 I, m and n are positive integers,
with n;<:2:
1trq = r1tq
commutative law
xy =yx
(6.1)
1t(q+r) = 1tq+1tr
distributive law
x(u+v) = xu+xv
(6.2)
1t11trnq = 1t1+rnq
index law
x n =x
(6.3)
§7 Logic in Boole's Mathematical analysis of logic
Boole's principal single innovation was law (6.3)2 for logic: it stated that
the mental acts of choosing the property x and choosing x again and again is
the same as choosing x once, or that the class x taken together with the class

§7
Logic in Boole's Mathematical analysis of logic
xxix
Figure 6:
Painting of the young Boole in
his early thirties (around184S)
(Reproduction D. MacHaIe)
x over and over again gives the class x. (The possible parentage of this law in
Leibniz is considered in §13.) As consequences of it he formed the equations
x(l-x) = 0
and
x+(l-x) = 1
(7.1)
which for him expressed respectively the law of contradiction and the law of
excluded middle. The various symbols were interpreted as follows: for
brevity we mention just the readings as classes. "I" symbolised a "Universe"
which "comprehend[s] every conceivable class of objects whether existing or
not" (p. 15), and also the corresponding operation (p. 20); but this was rather
too Universal, since within this 1 true propositions cannot be distinguished
from tautologically true ones. "-" represented the subtraction of a class from
one of which it was a part; however, since he never used a symbol for "not",
his expression of that law was not complete (Ellis 1863a). "0" denoted
"Nothing" -
none too clearly, since it was a class of some sort. In addition,
the theory of classes which he used was the extensional part-whole kind,
with (for example) x as part of 1. He also defmed the conjunction (x+y) oftwo
classes only when x and Y had no parts in common: this met with a poor
reception (§14). He left implicit quite a few laws; associativity of addition and
of multiplication, for example, and those which 0 and 1 obeyed.

xxx
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
One main purpose of Boole's algebra was to take one or several
propositions as premises, express them as algebraic equations, and then to
relate a selected elective symbol to the others; the resulting proposition was
a logical consequence of the premises. The double interpretation of letters as
elective symbols or as classes gives the algebra a feel of model theory,
although he cannot be read in its modern terms, or even of its pioneers
around 1900 (Scanlan 1991a).
Boole realised that a given set of premises may not have any solutions, or
maybe more than one; and to accommodate the latter possibility he
introduced "V" to symbolise an indefinite proportion of members of a class,
from none through "some" to all of them; the corresponding elective symbol
was "v" (p. 21). This notion has often perplexed readers, but it allows him to
handle the lack of a cancellation law in his algebra: namely that
ifxy = XZ, then it is not necessarily the case that y = z.
(7.2)
In addition, it enabled him to express many propositions in terms of
equations rather than inequalities, which would have complicated the
algebra considerably. However, he offered no laws which "v" should satisfy,
and could not always distinguish between traditional forms of proposition
and those involved in the quantification of the predicate (which he did not
analyse explicitly); for example, "vx =vy" could cover both "Some Xs are Ys"
and "Some Xs are some Ys" (pp. 21-22).
Further, contrary to Boole's apparent belief, the solutions found by his
methods were not always complete (Corcoran and Wood 1980a). For exam-
ple, for the universal affirmative proposition "All Ys are Xs", symbolised as
(1-x)y = 0,
he put forward
y = vx
(7.3)
as "the most general solution" (MAL, 25); but he should have noticed that
x = 0 was missing from it, and that it did not hold if x = 0 and v was a class
such that vy 1:= O. It is curious that a logician should seem to slip over the
difference between necessary and sufficient conditions (another apparent
example arises in the manuscripts at (10.1), or that a mathematician with a
strong interest in singular solutions of differential equations (§12) did not
notice analogous problems in his logic. In fact, in this case Boole realised that
v = xy was a better version than (7.3)( so did the Irish mathematician
Charles Graves after reading MAL, and he told the Royal Irish Academy in a
note 1850a.
A substantial section of MAL (pp. 48-59) treated "Of Hypotheticals",
propositions composed of two or more propositions A and B linked by a
connective, such as "A and B", say, or "If A, then B". His procedure followed
the practise of Whately and others to treat them as categorical propositions
concerning their constituent propositions; but the resulting algebra was
rather strange (Prior 1949a, Hailperin 1984a). "1" was now charged to
symbolise the "hypothetical Universe" of all circumstances, so that x elected

§7
Logic in Boole's Mathematical analysis of logic
xxxi
those for which proposition X was true. Then, for example, "the Proposition,
either X is not true, or Y is not true, the members being exclusive" because of
the restriction on "+", came out as
y(1-x)+X(l-y) = 1
for
x-2xy+y = 1
(7.4)
(p. 53); the index law (6.3h converted it to a quadratic equation, and then
factorising yielded solutions. This part of his theory did not endure (§9).
In order to generalise his methods of drawing consequences from
premises, Boole devoted the rest of his book to various general expansion
theorems and processes of elimination of letters. The theorems were proved
by an extraordinary use of Taylor's series with (6.3h used to get rid of the
powers (pp. 62-63); they took these forms for a function "¢(x)" of one
mathematical act, and"¢(xy)" or a function of two of them:
"¢(x) = ¢(0)+{¢(1)-¢(0»)x = ¢(1)x+¢(0)(l-x)",
(7.5)
"¢(xy) = ¢(OO)(l-x)(1-y)+¢(01)y(1-x)+¢(10)x(1-y)+¢(1l)xy".
(7.6)
The basic components x and (1-x) of (7.5), or xy, ... and (1-x)(1-y) of
(7.6), perform like a basis in a space of expansions. Although vector space
theory was not yet explicitly in place, linear combinations were well
recognised, and Boole soon stated the generalisation appropriate to his
algebra on p. 64:
(7.7)
for base terms {til with coefficients {ai).
Boole obtained the solutions by the usual methods of linear equations
adapted to the laws of this algebra. As a result, some of them were expressed
as quotients of the functions, with particular values for the coefficients. For
example, (7.3h was solved for y from (7.5) as
"y = _l_ x + -.Q..... (l-x) =x+ Q(1-x)"
(7.8)
1-0
0-0
0
with "§,, was explained as an alternative to "v" (p. 74), a quotient notation
which was to feature prominently in LT. Despite the extended method of
solution, the same "complete solution" (7.3)2 was still found. These are the
principal mathematical features of Boole's MAL, deeply influenced by his
work on differential equations.
Philosophically speaking, as the references to "mental acts" shows, Boole
espoused a kind of psychologism. This word is much over-used in this
context, since most logics affirm some relationship between the mind and its
linguistic and logical products. So his sense needs specification.
One form of psychologism sought to reduce all knowledge to actual
mental processes; Boole deliberately avoided this form (for example, MAL,
16). At the opposite pole is a social psychologism, which ignored the inner
workings of the mind and relied upon empirical evidence as philosophical
basis. It was best represented at that time by John Stuart Mill (1806-1873),

xxxii
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
whose A system of logic was first published in 1843, four years before MAL.
Much of Mill's book would today be regarded as philosophy of science; on
logic he asserted empiricism to the length of claiming even that basic laws
such as that of excluded middle were formed by inductions from observation
(Richards 1980a). Boole cited Mill only once in print, on a neutral matter, in
the preface of MAL; but he objected to Mill's philosophy in a letter of 1855
(page 200), and avoided this kind of psychologism also.
Boole was psychologistic in that he saw his study as a normative account
of the correct use of thinking -
or, better, of thoughts, the products of
thinking, and without concern over the manner of manufacture. He always
stuck to this position. In MAL "That which renders Logic possible, is the
existence in our minds of general notions", and their "elementary laws upon
the existence of which, and upon their capability of exact symbolical
expression, the method of the following Essay is founded" (pp. 5-6); LT
opened with a declaration of intent "to investigate the fundamental laws of
those operations of the mind by which reasoning is performed"; while in an
essay destined for PL "by the term Logic in its primary and most general
sense we understand the Philosophy of the Laws of Thought as expressed"
(page 126). However, the means of expressing thoughts was to be a major
issue throughout his logical career.
§8 Between books, 1848-1854
Boole sent out copies of MAL to a few friends and colleagues. One of the
first to respond was fellow algebraist Cayley, who had already been in touch
over developing Boole's idea of an invariant, thanked him in December 1847
for the copy, noting the lack of a cancellation law (7.2) and wondering
whether "Has !x any meaning" (page 191). In the ensuing exchange Boole
stressed his important notion of (non)-interpretability, making analogies
between
~ + ~ =x and H. x H. =-1
(8.1)
where the combination of two uninterpretables yield an interpretable
quantity; Cayley was not impressed.
In the preface to LT Boole was to state that he had written MAL quickly
and "within a few weeks after its idea had been conceived"; in a paper of 1851
he had explicitly regretted its publication (l851a, 251). At some time he
annotated two copies with additions and comments (Boole 1952a, 119-124;
Smith 1983a), and he began to develop his theory in manuscripts. In 1848 he
wrote one on "The nature of logic" which launches our Part A as Chapter I.
Basing his task on the assumption that "The mind is not a passive recipient
of the impressions of external things but it has the power of modifying its

§8
Between books, 1848-1854
xxxiii
own conceptions according to the laws of its own nature" (page 3), he
expounded upon these laws in more detail than in MAL, though largely
within the same framework (including on page 10 the same very universal
Universe). He verbalised his index law by the case "good good men = good
men" (page 7), which he repeated in LT, 32 and 43.
Around this time Boole also made his first attempt to write an
"Elementary treatise" on his logic; it comprises Chapter II here. He stayed
around syllogistic logic, and did not use his index law. However, instead of
stressing its forms, he asserted instead that "in general we reason by signs.
Words are the signs most usually employed for this purpose" (page 14).
These words mark a conversion to the sign tradition in two respects: that
signs are primary, and that "language affords the signs by which these
operations of the mind are expressed and communicated", as Whately put it
(1826a, 55). It marked a significant change of emphasis from Boole's neutral
remark in MAL that "The theory of Logic is thus intimately connected with
that of Language" (p. 5, typically Endowed with Victorian Capital Letters).
Boole's adoption of this tradition was permanent, although he gave the mind
a more active role than was usual among its adherents.
In consequence of Boole's new position, elective symbols were demoted in
favour of classes; but in their turn classes were only one component, albeit a
major one, in the supervening notion of language regarded as a "system of
signs" (page 11). In a paper on "the calculus of logic" published in May 1848
in The Cambridge and Dublin mathematical journal (as the journal had been
renamed in 1846), he reviewed the methods of MAL and marked this change
by giving a greater presence to classes via this enigmatic identity (or
equality?) (1848a, 126):
"xl or x = the class X"
(8.2)
Boole always restricted his use of language to nouns, adjectives and
prepositions (page 14); nouns specified classes within the Universe, such as
"men" within "humans"; adjectives similarly determined sub-classes, like
"good men" within "men". Prepositions expressed the connectives: "except"
(-), exclusive "or" (+) and "and" O. He could have continued this pattern by
adding adverbs to his linguistic repertoire, forming, say, sub-sub-classes of
"(not) very good men" from the class of "good men". He seems not to have
done so, however; maybe he realised that not all adverbs obey the index law:
"very very good men" :# "very good men".
So one must be wary of modernising Boole's theories too much. The dash
of denoting theory on page 16 does not make him a budding Russell, and he
never envisioned propositional functions, or quantification in the sense in
which we now understand the term. Similarly, his theory of classes was
always the traditional one of part and whole; he never envisioned the set
theory of Georg Cantor (1845-1918), which was come into mathematics only

xxxiv
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
in the 1870s, and not into logic until a decade after that, with the very
different mathematical logic of Giuseppe Peano (1858-1932) (§14).
Another innovation in Boole's "Elementary treatise" was his distinction
of "primary" from "secondary" propositions, the latter being "propositions
which express a judgement with respect to other propositions" (page 29). The
ensuing analysis was to develop in LT as a new theory of hypothetical
propositions to replace (7.4) (§9).
Chapters I and II contrast in an important way. The first one treated
logic as a science by basing it upon signs; but its successor dealt with "Logic
as an Art" in "exhibiWng] the most useful general forms in which valid
argument may be expressed (page 13). The distinction was often stressed at
this time; in particular, Whately started his Elements of logic with it. Boole
was primarily concerned in his manuscripts with its scientific status.
Boole treated much of the subject matter of these two Chapters also in a
collection of short essays or a suite of paragraphs on various themes, each
given a title. Thus some essays, though maybe not all of them, date from this
time. He wrote them in a notebook and removed the folios at a later stage.
Chapter III contains from them selected "Extracts", as they shall be cited
below.
One extract shows Boole relating signs to words in a language
containing not only nouns, adjectives and prepositions but also verbs (page
48). Another one marks the debut of his concern with the role of integers in
his logic (Panteki 1992a, ch. 8); maybe Cayley's letter had initiated it.
Repetition of x to produce x2, x3,... leads to integers, similar to their presence
in powers of differentiation in the other index law (6.3h; so do the
expressions 2x, 3x, .... He defended them on grounds of generality, both as
constants and as symbols for operations, since raising powers is an operation
in mathematics (page 44). He also examined laws of division, and thought
about properties of inverses (page 45). He also pointed to differences,
especially that the logical Universe 1 satisfied laws not possessed by the
arithmetical 1 (page 45); the cause lies, of course, in the different index laws
(6.3).
These notes also relate to an essay written in two notebooks which Rhees
published in his edition (Boole 1952a, 141-166) and which we identify as
"Sketch". In it Boole initiated his interest in probability theory; we have not
included any other such manuscripts (there are in fact few of them), but a
letter of 1849 to the astronomer and mathematician Sir John Lubbock
(1803-1865) records the birth of his concern (pages 197-200). Thus he may
have started the notes in or around that year; and continued the file for a
period; the last extract planned out a book in four chapters to succeed MAL
which somewhat resembles the "Elementary treatise" but also included the
primary and secondary propositions (page 46).
A connected novelty in the notes is the (surprising) arrival of time in
Boole's logical scene, due to "the repetition of an operation as in successive

§9
Logic in The laws of thought
xxxv
Figure 7:
The house in Grenville Place,
Cork where Boole wrote LT
(photograph I. Grattan-Guinness)
periods of duration" (page 44). In "Sketch" he came to think of his elective
"symbols x, y, Z,
as representing the times in which the elementary
propositions to which they refer are true"; thus x represented the proposition
"it rains" by the symbolic proposition "x =1" (l952a, 146). One recalls W. R.
Hamilton's use of time in his definition of irrational numbers in 1837a; but
their lack of contact (§2) suggests lack of influence. This theory hardly seems
to be a philosophical improvement on the theory of hypothetical propositions
in MAL (Hailperin 1984a); nevertheless he was to use it in LT, to which we
now turn.
§9 Logic in The laws of thought
Boole wrote this book mostly at his residence in 5, Grenville Place, Cork
(Figure 7). He may have finished it by 1852; it was typeset in Dublin during
the next year, and published by MacMillan in Cambridge and Walton and
Maberly in London early in 1854 (Neil 1865a, 165-166).11 Boole and a friend

XXXVI
Bcole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
bore the expense (Boole, M, 1931a, 27);12 it is unlikely that they recouped the
costs, for it sold badly, much less well than MAL. l3 Yet it exhibited a major
extension of his logic. He seems not to have recognised the full consequences
of his own ideas when writing MAL, in that syllogistic logic provided the
main guide there; by contrast, it was relegated in LT to the last of the 15
chapters on logic.
The preceding 14 chapters were taken up with a much more general and
detailed account of Boole's logic, both philosophically and mathematically.
Although his psychologism (as specified in §7) was still fundamental, with
signs as the key notion in his Logic as a Science, language was very
prominent: for example, a major task was "To deduce a consideration of those
operations of the mind which are implied in the strict use of language as an
instrument of reasoning" (LT, 42).
Among these operations, Boole reduced the index law from (6.3)2 to
with
x(l-x) =0
(9.1)
as a principal consequence (pp. 32, 49). The reduction from the n-th to the
second power was first stated in "Sketch" without discussion (J952a, 141,
149); he now argued that any higher power of x would lead after factorisation
to the uninterpretable term (l +x), which could therefore be discarded (p.
50n). The symmetry of(9.1has a function ofx and (I-x) led him to name it
"the law of duality" (p. 51), and he deployed this important algebraic
property in several places later on in the book. One of them was in his new
theory of primary and secondary propositions, explained in ch. 4 and applied
in chs. 11-12, with "Time" as a major concept. It also underlay his claim that
"we can employ the symbol y to represent either 'All Ys' or 'All not-Ys', since
the interpretation of the symbol is purely conventional" (p. 232) and allowed
the absence of a symbol for "not".
The balance away from elective symbols towards classes continued
strongly, especially after a proposal to read 0 as Oy and 1 as ly (p. 47). Boole
had already defined the Universe more carefully than hitherto as the
"assumed or expressed limits within which the subjects of its [the mind's"]
operation are confined" in a given "discourse" (p. 42), a move heralded in the
"Extracts" (page 44).
A major innovation, heralded in "Sketch" U952a, 151-152), were the
elimination theorems; for one and two variables respectively,
"f(l) fCO) =0"
and
"fO,O) f(l, 1) f(O, 1) fCO,O) = 0"
(9.2)
(pp. 101, 103). Boole's proof of the first one was rather ponderously algebraic;
Harley 1871a was to show that it rested upon the theory of the roots of
equations adapted to variables which took only two values.
The expansion theorems (7.5-6) were given a much more important
place, and Boole now saw the role of all these theorems as not only solving
(sets of) logical equations but also laying down conditions for any solution to

§10
logic after The laws of thought
xxxvii
occur. For example with three classes, which class(es) z, if any, satisfies
given relationships with given classes x and y, and under what conditions?
Boole's method rested on taking all possible basic terms xy, x(l-y), ... and
using the appropriate version of (9.2) to calculate each of their coefficients c.
If c =1, then xy was part of z; if c = 0, then it was absent from z; if c = g, then
any part "uxy" of xy would be part of z, which therefore could not be specified
uniquely; and if some other value arose for c (often A; or 2, or 576.5 for that
matter), then not only was xy no part of z but the condition xy = 0 was
required for any classes z to be found at all. However, exceptional solutions
could still escape the clutches of even this version of the method, as with
(7.3). Hooley 1966a gives a method of obtaining all solutions of a linear
equation in two-valued variables satisfying (9.2); Boole does not seem to have
spotted it.
Chs. 16-21 of LT were concerned with probability theory, which we saw
born in 1849 in §8; his main innovation was to interpret compound events as
Boolean combinations of simple ones (and thereby increase the 'model-theo-
retic' character of his algebra). He also considered probabilistic inference,
and in estimating probability values of logical consequences he manipulated
inequalities in ways which anticipate linear programming (Hailperin 1986a).
Mter LT he produced important papers in this area; unfortunately none of
his contributions made a major impact.
The last chapter, "On the nature of science, and the constitution of the
intellect", shows Boole's psychologism well to the fore: "what is remarkable
in connexion with the processes of the intellect is the disposition, and the
corresponding ability, to ascend from the imperfect representations of sense
and the diversities of individual experience, to the perception of general, and
it may be of immutable truths" (p. 407). Mathematics was at the heart of
this; and psychology was influenced because the "mathematical laws of
reasoning are properly speaking, the laws of right reasoning only" (p. 408).
Among those laws, index and duality (9.1) were prime, with a long pedigree
in ancient Greek philosophy (pp. 411-416); they also deployed "a scientific
connexion between the conceptions of unity in Number, and the universe in
Logic" (p. 411). Boole now tried to develop the philosophy of his logic within
and around such considerations.
§ 10 Logic after The Jaws of thought
We treat now the manuscripts presented in Part B and the pertinent
items from Part D, all written seemingly after LT but not destined for the
third book, PL (§11). They are to be taken together with one which Rhees
included in his edition under his title "Logic and Reasoning" (Boole 1952a,
211-229).

xxxviii
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
Science dominated Art in most of the manuscripts in this Part-
explicitly so in the opening note of a collection forming Chapter VI (page
105). Boole continued there with a summary of a philosophical analysis of
logic drawn largely from the sign tradition (he mentioned Locke on page
106); Whately had summarised it as a prologue to his account of syllogistic
logic (1826a, 54-56). Boole presented it in more detail in a long essay of 1856
on "the foundations of the mathematical theory of logic", presented here as
Chapter V. 14 In his version of the analysis he paid rather better attention
than usual to the difference between a mental act and its product. The act of
Conception by the mind produced a Concept, such as "men" (or the class of
them); then the act of Judgement of the co-presence of Concepts produced a
Proposition, such as "this is a wise man"; finally, the act of Reasoning
produced a Conclusion, perhaps "wise men are ...", as delivered by his
algebra of logic (pages 88-95).
Throughout this essay, and indeed in all manuscripts assigned to this
and the next Parts, Boole remained in his linguistic territory of nouns,
adjectives and prepositions. To characterise mental actions he set aside
elective symbols (and also time, one may be relieved to note) and envisioned
logic as "conversant with things only as they fall under the general notion of
Class" (page 67). Two pages later he even associated this commitment with
the old and important notion of "second intentions" (or second-order
predicates), which in his time still was ignored; he went back for it to an old
source, Suarez 1605a. He also considered the intensional and extensional
conceptions of classes (pages 74-76).
Boole rehearsed his basic "Laws of conception" in class terms, imposing
his restrictions on addition and subtraction without discussion (pages 77 and
78 respectively). At a later point (page 92) he claimed a proof of the index law
from the argument
(x+y)2 = x+y;
:. xy+yx = 0;
:. xy =0 as solution.
(10.1)
However, as in (7.3), our logician has not sorted out his necessary from
his sufficient conditions. He also deployed and discussed his expansion
theorems and their enigmatic coefficients (pages 98-100, 187-188),
Alongwith his new allegiance to the sign tradition, Boole recognised the
importance of syllogistic logic. In particular, in the essay of 1856 (page 72) he
paraphrased from some edition of Whately that "since Logic is wholly
concerned in the use of language, it follows that a Syllogism (which is an
argument stated in a regular logical form) must be an 'argument so
expressed, that the conclusiveness of it is manifest from the mere form ofthe
expression i.e. without considering the meaning of the terms'" (1826a, 88).15
In all these manuscripts Boole's type of psychologism remained in place.
He developed one aspect in an undated note contrasting belief with
understanding (Chapter XII), and planned out a two-page piece on the place

§11
Plans and texts for "The philosophy of logic"
xxxix
of freedom within his stern Science of Logic and the laws that the mind
should obey (Chapter XIII).
§11
Plans and texts for "The philosophy of logic"
Despite the poor sales of LT, MacMillan's seem to have been ready to
publish a sequel on "The Philosophy of Logic", and to have stated it to be
"nearly ready" in 1857 (Neil 1865a, 172). But "the announcement was
premature", Boole told De Morgan in March 1859 (Smith 1982a, 77),
I have written at different times as much as would make two or three
books but when returning to a subject I can seldom make much use
of old materials. They have lost their freshness & I can only begin
again ab novo. And that is what I am doing -
but -
with a modest
plan before me, having certain things to say & only desiring to say
them. I am not going to set aside anything in the Laws of Thought -
but only to interpret now within the province of pure Logic what is
done there. When this is done I shall quit for ever.
But by then Boole must have been deep into his textbooks; in the
remaining five years of his life, his other publications were several papers in
the same area, and his final months were devoted to a second edition of the
book on differential equations. It seems that he had stopped working on PL,
perhaps in the early 1860s; he implied as much to De Morgan in a letter of
November 1862 (Smith 1982a, 102). On the other hand he had definitely
started; his wife had even helped by transcribing some manuscripts in the
preparation for the press. There is at least a preface and a table of contents
for a four-chapter work (Chapters VIII and IX); we place here also notes that
may have been intended for a revised preface, and a long manuscript which
looks like an attempt at the first two chapters (Chapters X and XI). The
latter manuscript contains comments on De Morgan which suggests that he
may have read De Morgan's paper 1860a; if so, it is among his latest writings
on logic. No other manuscript seems definitely to belong to PL.
In his preface Boole stressed again that Logic as a Science was his
concern (page 119). In the two drafted chapters he asserted that "the
[C?lonception of class really occupies a position of priority in the intellectual
order", but that its "narrower Logic of Class" would be developed "with
constant reference to that higher Logic [...] as expressed by signs" (page 129);
their laws "are a visible expression of the formal laws of thought" such as
"the conception of any collection of things as a whole" (page 131). Further, in
more detail than anywhere else he outlined and then criticised the
traditional "Methods of Logic" (page 132) centered on syllogistic logic, both
traditionally Aristotelian and as practised in his time by Sir William

xl
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
Hamilton and by De Morgan (pages 133-141). His main criticisms of
syllogistic logic were the emphasis on forms instead of signs, and words to
express them, and its limited scope: he gave as an example its inability to
state that equilateral triangles were identical with equiangular ones (page
136, perhaps to reinforce Whately's remarks on this example in 1826a, 42).
De Morgan's contributions to logic are summarised in §13; a word on
Hamilton's would be appropriate here. As was noted in §5, he popularised
quantification of the predicate, and is often falsely credited as its inventor. In
fact his contributions to logic and philosophy were slight, but he helped to
raise interest in syllogistic logic, to popularise commonsense philosophy, and
to bring German philosophy into Britain. In Boole's terms, he also saw Logic
primarily as a Science, and took as basic the laws of identity, contradiction
and excluded middle. Boole also agreed with him in construing Logic as an
"unexclusive reflex of thought" (page 140), that is, an all-encompassing
department of knowledge; he implied that he saw his own logic as more
effective for the task. This all-embracing view of logic as Logic is notably
different from modest modern approaches, where some logic among the
hundreds now available is examined for its local (meta-)properties.
But Boole was quite at odds (at MAL, 11-12) with Hamilton's detestation
of mathematics (Olson 1975a, esp. pp. 62_71).16 Indeed, his foundations of
Logic had to differ from those of all his contemporaries because his logic was
applied mathematics, and so needed a mathematical basis. This survey of
the selected manuscripts ends with his handling of that aspect of his
philosophy.
§12 Where was Boole's philosophy of
mathematics?
As algebra is an instrument of thought, applicable to our reasoning upon number and
quantity, as its validity for this purpose depends upon the existence of laws such as
[distributivity and commutativity ...J, so is language an instrument of thought ...
Boole 1848d
Boole's most extended manuscript on the philosophy of mathematics is
rendered here as Chapter Xv. Undated, it seems to be part of a book (though
not PL), for it contains a "ch.2" on geometry. He dwelt mainly upon
Euclidean geometry, and suggested that our understanding of the different
levels of generality of the assumptions in Euclid's Elements was not held by
its author (page 177). His claim that "it becomes possible to present the
entire procedure of the Science [of Geometry] in the forms of consecutive
Syllogisms" (page 169) fitted poorly with his allegiance to the sign tradition.
It also suggests that he had not read De Morgan's pioneering and far more
sophisticated examination of the logic of Euclid's geometry, although it had

§12
Where was Boole's philosophy of mathematics?
xli
been reprinted in De Morgan's book Formal logic (l847a, ch. 1), which was
published on the same day as MAL and of which he had received a copy. It
may have been stimulated by a long discussion earlier in the manuscript of
the role of definitions in mathematics; he saw them as "not description but
distinction", between those things satisfying a definition and those not (page
172) -
like the law of excluded middle, perhaps?
One issue in the relationship between logic and mathematics which
Boole seems not to have considered is the danger of a consistency loop.
Suppose that one wishes to found (a) logic L on a mathematical theory M. To
be worth using, M should be consistent; but that is already a logical notion,
no? Today we would instinctively switch into metalogic to handle this
question, but that distinction was not properly appreciated until the 1920s.
Curiously, in the course of analysing the general linear form (7.7) in MAL,
Boole had brought up the possibility of inconsistency in the case of "I = 0,
which would indicate the non-existence of the logical Universe" (p. 65); but
he did not pick up the point again. However, it lies at the heart of his task.
This was not the only lacuna in Boole's philosophy of mathematical
theories. All of his points were necessary but not sufficient for the needs of
his algebra of logic. Near the end of LT he had asserted, quite legitimately
within his philosophy, "The truth that the ultimate laws of thought are
mathematical in their form" (p. 407), and in his manuscripts he gave
examples; for example from a fragment, that the expansion theorems came
only from the basic laws, "not from a consideration of the possible relations of
things to each other" (page 187). In another fragment "on reducing the
Science of Logic in its technical development under the dominion of
mathematical forms" (page 188), he noted the expanding realm of "the
Science of Mathematics", which should be "no longer defined in its essential
character by the nature of its subject matter but by the forms and method of
its procedure" (page 189).
However, Boole was unable to find a philosophy of mathematics rich
enough to ground his logic; and it may have been realising this, at least
intuitively, which led him to stop working on PL. He needed something like a
universal calculus of symbols within which both mathematics and logic could
be sited (Laita 1977a); but he never found it, and in any case the consistency
loop might not be broken. He might have found something in the semiotic
tradition in France at the tum of the centuries, in which the Abbe Condillac
(1714-1780) was father-figure to a group of ideologues who emphasised the
place of signs on knowledge and thought,17 and also regarded (common)
algebra as the language par excellence (Panteki 1992a, ch. 1). However, like
his contemporaries, Boole did not pick up this tradition, although its own
parentage goes back to Locke (Auroux 1981a).
During the late 1850s Boole was spending the majority of his research
time on preparing his textbooks on the differential and difference equations;
but its subject matter was bound closely to his philosophy of logic by the

xlii
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
common factors of signs, operations and language. In the early "Extracts" he
gave an example from a method of evaluating a type of multiple definite
integrals due to J. P. G. Lejeune-Dirichlet (1805·1859), to which he was
alerted by Cayley (Boole 1848b, 140). In this method the integrand was
multiplied "by a factor of which the value is equal to unity in the range which
the integrations must cover, and which vanishes outside of this range"
(Dirichlet 1839a, 375); Boole saw this assignment of 1 or 0 as a "good
example of the real nature of an elective symbol" (page 45).
A more substantial example is singular solutions of differential
equations, which Boole was recalled as teaching at Cork "not like a professor
writing a demonstration on a blackboard, but like an artist painting from a
vision" (Boole M. 1931a, 76). Why? As he wrote in his textbook on differential
equations (l859a, 140), for "the two marks, positive and negative, by the
union of which [they] are characterised": solving the equation but lying
outside its general solution -
a perfect image of x+(1-x) = 1. During his last
summer he wrote to his wife that his work in the Library of the Royal Society
had brought the theory "in a state of unity" (Boole, M. 1931a, 444), and he
studied not only recent work but also the history of the topic (Boole 1865a,
9-37).
Elsewhere in that textbook occurred an even closer link (l859a,
398-399). The example in hand was f(fx), but this passage could have been in
PL: 18
In any system in which thought is expressed by symbols, the laws of
combination of the symbols are determined from the study of the
corresponding operations in thought. But it may be that the latter
are subject to conditions of possibility as well as to laws when
possible. And thus it may be that two systems of symbols, differing in
interpretation, may agree as to their formal laws whenever they both
express operations possible in thought, while at the same time there
may exist combinations which really represent thought in the one,
but do not in the other. [...]
Now all special instances point to the conclusion that this is
permissible, and seem to indicate, as a general principle, that the
mere processes of symbolical reasoning are independent of the
conditions of their interpretation. In the few instances we may have
occasion to employ, verification will be easy. We take occasion to
notice that whatever view may be taken of this principle, whether it
be contemplated as belonging to the realm of a priori truth, or
whether it be regarded as a generalization from experience, it would
be an error to regard it as in any peculiar sense a mathematical
principle. It claims a place among the general relations of Thought
and Language.

§13
Outside Boole's universe: Leibniz, Peacock, Babbage and De Morgan
xliii
§13 Outside Boole's universe: Leibniz, Peacock,
Babbage and De Morgan
From lacunae to omissions: these four figures are often associated with
Boole in some way; yet they appeared but little in his publications of
manuscripts. The reasons provide additional perspectives on his work.
Firstly, G. W. Leibniz (1646-1716) arises not only for his dream of a
universal language including logic but especially for a passage (transcribed
in the textual notes on page 219) in a manuscript 1681a in which he
expressed a law similar to the index law (9.1h: in those notations, it reads
xy =x, with x and y as terms and the product read as conjunction. Moreover,
it had been published, for the first time, in J. E. Erdmann's edition (Leibniz
1840a) of philosophical writings; so it was available to Boole (Peckhaus
1996a). However, it did not exercise influence upon him. Apart from the
possibility that he had already envisioned such laws from considerations of
monism (§2), he had not seen the edition, and he was informed of the passage
by his friend Robert L. Ellis (1817-1859) only in 1855, a year after LT
appeared (Harley 1867b, 5; compare Boole, M. 1931a, 1132). Boole's first
reactions are reproduced here among the fragments (page 185 and the
self-confessional page 188).
In any case, Leibniz had not developed his remark into any theory, so
that the anticipation is not substantial. In any case, which theory? When
Peano began to develop his mathematical logic in the 1880s, he also cited
Leibniz as father-figure ...
Previously Boole had not mentioned Leibniz much; a few places in
passing (for example, pages 133 and 179 here), and on the law (7.1h of
contradiction from a Leibniz publication (LT, 240: in Chapter XIV he noted
this law in Aristotle). Despite Erdmann, the logical and philosophical
writings of Leibniz were far less well known then than they are to us, in the
wake of Couturat 1903a and later research. Indeed, Leibniz was still
regarded in Britain as the stealer of Newton's calculus, although De Morgan
had recently started to undermine that story with proper historical research
(Rice 1996a).
Our next two figures were founders of the "Analytical Society" at
Cambridge (1812-1813), who played an important role in the revival of
English mathematics by adopting Continental methods. George Peacock
(1791-1858) later wrote a large "Report on the Recent Progress and Actual
State of Certain Branches of Analysis" (1834a), which historians often cite as
a landmark text in setting the stage for the development of English algebras.
His emphasis on symbolic methods and the (non-) interrelativity of a formula

xliv
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
in a given algebra doubtless reinforced awareness of the issues raised by the
French mathematicians cited in §6. His "principle of the permanence of
equivalent forms" asserted that if an equation A = B held in an algebra for
specific conditions on the components of the expressions A and B, then it held
in general; and Boole's analogies such as (6.1-2) certainly provided example.
But citation of Peacock by the English is less common than may be expected;
in particular, Boole seems not to have mentioned him at all. This silence is in
fact somewhat surprising; for Peacock had emphasised the role of signs in
algebra, and his line of thought shows some kinship with Locke (Durand
1990a), and so with the sign tradition.
The third figure is Peacock's Analytical colleague Charles Babbage
(1791-1871). He is sometimes mentioned with Boole; for his long concern
with calculating machines, which ran on throughout Boole's youth and
adulthood, seems so akin to our use of Boolean algebra. However, the two
men had no particular congress, and no manuscripts of one seems to dwell on
the other. On Boole's side, as we have seen, in both logic and for educational
practise he thought that the mind was capable of original action, such as
grasping general laws from particular cases (LT, 4; Boole, M. 1931a, 5-6),
and so he would not have welcomed the association of his logic with the
repetitive actions of computing; whether Babbagean mechanical or modern
electrical. For his part, Babbage disliked Boole's practise of allowing the
algebra of differential operators to be interpreted as operations and as
objects.
This contrast is stronger than it may seem; for in mathematics Boole and
Babbage had an important common factor. In the 1810s young Babbage had
worked on another new algebra encouraged by Lagrange's foundation of the
calculus (§6) -
functional equations, in which functions rather than
unknown constants were sought. For example, find the functions {(if there
are any) for which
{(x +y) ={(x){(y) for all real values of x and y.
(13.1)
The theory attending this algebra contained various features which are
evident also in his work on computing; iterations, algorithms, and especially
signs, whether physical, mathematical or mental (Grattan-Guinness 1992a).
The first systematic account of functional equations was written by our
fourth figure in this section: De Morgan, in a long article 1836a for the
Encyclopaedia metropolitana. It must have influenced his most original
contribution to logic, in 1860, a syllogistic logic of two-place relations (Merrill
1990a), for the analogy between this logic and functional equations is strong;
inverses, compounding,
and so on.
Boole used functional equations
occasionally, such as when finding his general expansion theorems (7.5-6)
(MAL, 60-63), but he never noticed this important aspect of logic. Nor did he
seem to react to De Morgan's paper, although by 1860 his main interest lay
in differential equations.

§14
Boole's immediate legacy
xlv
Previously De Morgan had extended considerably the realm of syllogistic
logic by applying various algebraic techniques, of both theory and signs
(Panteki 1992a, ch.
6); the quantification of the predicate (§5) is an
important example. (De Morgan 1966a is an edition of his main papers.) An
algebraist by mathematical inclination, he and Boole were the most
significant algebraic logicians of their time, and each man was influenced by
a new algebra. But their two approaches were quite different; although they
corresponded regularly (Smith 1982a), neither used the other's logic, and
they communicated more than discussed (Corcoran 1986a). Thus Boole's
comments on pages 138-141 noted in §11, his most extended statement on De
Morgan's logic, were not sympathetic.
§ 14 Baale's immediate legacy
While always staying with his psychologistic view of logic, in the sense
explained at the end of §7, Boole made various changes while seeking its
foundations. The most significant one was away from syllogistic logic to the
sign tradition; language gained ground along the way, and so did classes, at
the cost of elective symbols. Time made an appearance, though seemingly for
a short duration. The algebra received a very original (although not
complete) development; its central place in the logic required a rich
mathematical basis, which he was not able to find.
Boole's contemporaries knew little or nothing of his manuscript
ruminations. After his death, his reputation rested largely on his textbooks
in differential equations, which continued to be well used after his death and
indeed are still in print. But his differential operator methods became
generally eclipsed by other techniques from the 1870s, and his work on logic
remained rather marginal (Panteki 1992a, ch. 9).
Boole's most important initial follower in logic was Stanley Jevons
(1835-1872); they corresponded in 1863 and 1864, just before his death. The
main topic was considerable disagreement over "+", using "x+x" as a test
case (Grattan-Guinness 1991a). Jevons had no time for Boole's restriction,
which rendered the expression uninterpretable 19; in his book Pure logic
(1864), he wanted to allow that
x+x =x.
(14.1)
Shortly after Boole's death the chemist Benjamin Collins Brodie
(1817-1880) tried, unsuccessfully, to develop a similar algebra for chemical
combination (Brock 1967a). John Venn (1834-1923) was the sole close
adherent in Britain, mainly in his textbook Symbolic logic (1881, 1894); to
make
the
theory
more easy
to grasp he
introduced diagrammatic
representations of syllogisms -
not the ones which are misnamed after him,

xlvi
Boole's quest for the foundations of his logic
Part 1
which are due already to Leonhard Euler, but a rather clumsy procedure in
which all possible overlaps of convex shapes corresponding to the given
predicates are shown and the non-empty ones in a given set of premises are
examined.2o
Among other British semi-followers, Hugh MacColl (1837-1909) made an
innovation that was to be so durable that Boole is sometimes credited with it:
that "The calculus of equivalent statements", or the propositional calculus,
could be construed as a Boolean algebra, with addition and multiplication
read respectively as disjunction and conjunction, and equality as equivalence
(MacColl 1877a). This proposal, and the differences between Boole and
Jevons, were among the topics reviewed in a lengthy and influential survey
1892a of "The logical calculus" made in the philosophical journal Mind by the
Cambridge logician W. E. Johnson (1858-1931). A few years earlier Mrs
Sophie Bryant 1888a had swung against the trend in its pages, claiming that
Boole's logic should be understood as an operational calculus and lamenting
the preferred reading in terms of classes.
Outside Britain, Boole's logic gained some publicity during the 1870s.
The Frenchman Louis Liard (1846-1917) wrote an article 1877a on it, and
followed up with a book 1878a "On the contemporary English logicians"
which became quite popular although logic was not in general a well received
topic in France. G. B. Halsted (1853-1922) performed a similar service in the
USA with a survey article 1878a (and also a piece 1878b in Mind on Jevons's
modifications).
The most significant advance began also in the 1870s: the fusion of
Boole's algebra of logic with De Morgan's logic of relations. This was effected
by Halsted's compatriot C. S. Peirce (1839-1914), who also modified addition
to (14.1), independently of Jevons. The Scottish mathematician Alexander
MacFarlane (1851-1913) made a modest contribution of this kind in a short
paper 1879a (and in a contemporary book 1879b he modified Boole's logic by
distinguishing nouns from adjectives).
In Germany the German philosopher Hermann Ulrici (1806-1884) gave
Boole's logic publicity, starting out from a long review of LT in 1855 (Ulrici
1855a). It also came to bear upon a massive enterprise of algebraic logic
undertaken by Ernst Schroder (1841-1902); but he drew more directly on the
algebra of Hermann Grassmann (1809-1877) and the logic of brother Robert
Grassmann (1815-1901), and especially on Peirce. This work was taken up in
turn. In Russia from the mid 1880s, principally with P. S. Poretskii
(1846-1907) (Styazhkin 1969a, 216-253).
However, from the beginning of this century the whole algebraic
tradition in logic began to be eclipsed by the development of mathematical
logic with Peano and his school and then with the logicism of Russell and
Whitehead. It drew on completely different principles, including Cantorian
set theory, and furnished mathematical quantities such as real numbers and
lengths as well as qualities such as true and false; indeed, logicism was logic

§15
Introduction
xlvii
applied to mathematics instead of Boole's vice versa (Grattan-Guinness
1988a). The failure to produce an edition of Boole's manuscripts in the 1900s
(§3) was a sign of those times in symbolic logic.
The
psychological and
religious aspects of Boole's logic largely
disappeared with him, and they do not feature in his manuscripts. Perhaps
he could not see how to build them in effectively -
and since they came from
his Dissenting heart, how to convey them honestly. But there seems no doubt
that they always lay close to the centre of his logic. Boole's Boolean algebra
was another new algebra in the time of their proliferation, but one set apart
from the others not only by the index law (6.3)2 but especially consequences
such as (7.1) involving the all-important Universe 1. This remained with him
from youth throughout his mature career, especially in the image of the
unique Godhead and the ecumenism encaptured by Frederick Denison
Maurice. As he lay dying, in only his 50th year, he had Maurice's portrait set
by his bedside (p. 48):
I said, "Are you still willing to leave the future entirely to God?" He
nodded, and there came over him a smile of such wonderful peace
that I would not speak again; and so he lay quiet until the end.
Part
2: Boole's Psychologism
as a
Reception Problem
Gerard Barnet
§ 15 Introduction
More than 125 years after Boole's death, understanding his work is
accompanied by many difficulties of interpretation arising from the differing
backgrounds of the reader on the one hand and the author on the other. The
greatest obstacle to an adequate reception today is surely the psychologism
that pervades all Boole's logical work (§§7, 9, 10, 14). In consequence we have
sought to prevent an over-hasty dismissal of Boole's position by the reader

xlviii
Boole's Psychologism as a Reception Problem
Part 2
and to encourage a close look at what Boole is actually asking at his time
rather than a simple change of subject.
In this second part we briefly discuss three aspects in which reception of
Boole is hampered in connection with the word "psychologism". First (§16)
the epistemological framework in which the German mathematician and
logician Gottlob Frege (1848-1925) poses the problem of psychologism. Then
(§17) we show that Boole must be exonerated from Frege's criticism. The
second aspect deals with the question of art versus science. Here, the fact
that in the course of time the centre of general interest shifted from logic as
science to logic as art (§18) causes a reception problem. Doing Boole justice
means considering his psychologism as part of logic as science (§19).
The
problems
touched
on so far
relate
to
the
change
in the
understanding of logic in general and may crop up in connection with other
thinkers of this era. But the third aspect is essentially Boole's own
peculiarity and addresses difficulties faced even by his contemporaries. In
this connection today's attitude is to see these features of Boole's system as
quirky and therefore to be neglected. It will first be pointed out (§20) that
Boole does not use the psychological terms of ordinary language in their full
verbal meanings (compare also page 76). Then (§2l) the existence of a whole
group of signs central to Boole's system must be emphasised; signs which can
have no significance at all in the psychologistic sense because they are
"uninterpretable" in accordance with definition.
§ 16 Frege's psychologism criticism
Gottlob Frege, Professor of Mathematics at the Jena University
1879-1918, is regarded as the founder of modern logic and philosophy of
language.
His
work
influenced
thinkers
like
Ludwig
Wittgenstein
(1889-1951) and Rudolf Carnap (1891-1970) so deeply that he is the
so-called father of today's analytical philosophy. A characteristic of his
teaching included a strict anti-psychologism (of which more later) and so an
avoidance of anything that awoke the merest suspicion of psychologism
became a trait of his following. Thus among the ranks of the most likely
candidates for interest in Boole as a philosopher, the use of psychological
terms in mathematics and logic were no longer seen as de rigueur.
However, the sweeping verdict is at times applied to variations not
actually included in Frege's criticism, among them, as we shall show, those of
Boole as the author of Laws of Thought. For example Bertrand Russell
ludicrously suggested that Boole had given LT the wrong title: "He [Boole]
was ... mistaken [!] in supposing that he was dealing with the laws of
thought: the question how people actually think was quite irrelevant to him
..." (1901a, 366). Many later authors who, like Russell, mentioned Boole only

§16
Frege's psychologism criticism
xlix
in passing, had, with him, never read Boole's major work,21 having been put
off because the book's title seemed to signal contents irrelevant to logic,
namely the question of "how people actually think".22 But it was specifically
to avoid misunderstanding in this respect that it was declared, in §7 above,
that Boole wanted to give "a normative account of the correct use of thinking"
(our italics).
The false reading of the title testifies to the triumphal march of
experimental psychology, which barely existed in Boole's time. The first
institute in this field was established for Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920) in
Leipzig in 1875. Up to that time psychology and philosophy had in common
that they typically tackled problems theoretically. And as late as the early
20th century, it was not unusual for one university chair to cover both
disciplines. In his criticism during a period of radical change, Frege was
basically attempting to claim a separate field of study for Logic. Thus he
pressed in 1918-19a (implicitly already in 1884a) for an autonomous third
dominion. In this way he could make logic independent of nature on the one
hand and individual souls on the other, thereby freeing himself from the
authority of Physics and Psychology. Interestingly, a similar move by Boole
is found in a fragment of the Nachlass (MS B99.7):
The phenomenal study of things belongs to physics or to psychology,
the inquiry into their absolute nature if indeed such an inquiry be
possible is the business of metaphysics. Logic has other objects and
is concerned with other relations - but as the relations with which it
is
concerned
are
universal
(for
all existing things
can be
contemplated under the notion of class or kind) Logic stands related
to all other sciences.
As is well known, Frege (particularly in 1884a) put forward two
arguments against a psychologistic foundation for mathematics: that it
robbed mathematical reasoning of (a) its strict truth because it must be
inductively
gained,
and
(b)
its general validity
(in
the
sense
of
intersubjectivity) because it would in the end relate to subjective facts. His
arguments are so fundamental that they disprove the possibility of a
psychologistic foundation for any science - and in this sense they can be
applied to Logic too. By insisting on strict truth Frege excludes the use of
experimental methods in mathematics; and by stressing the point of general
validity Frege makes it obvious that the advocate of psychologism is left with
nothing he can objectively speak about.
Consequently only those varieties of psychologism fell under his verdict
which (a) used inductive methods or (b) related to subjectivity, that is
affections of individual human souls. In no way did Frege intimate that all
dealings with thought necessarily drew his criticism. On the contrary, in his
Begriffsschrift he himself proposed a formula language for pure thought,
offering the best count~r·argument.It remains to be added that despite the

Boole's Psychologism as a Reception Problem
Part 2
fact that Frege did indeed criticise Boole (§18), he did not reproach him for
psychologism. Knowing how quarrelsome the Professor of Jena was, that
equals exoneration.
§17 Boole's anti-inductivism and the problem of
introspection
In fact neither of Frege's anti-psychologistic arguments applies to Boole
though we can here only conclusively prove this for the first, the one from
strict truth. For the second, the one from general validity, the reader is
referred to page 68 or 1952a, 226, where Boole anchors the laws of logic in
the intelligible field, which is per se intersubjective. A psychologistic reading
of Boole in the line of the second argument is further also invalidated by the
circumstance discussed in §21 that Boole admitted signs which he expressly
described as uninterpretable - by which he meant that their meaning in the
psychologistic sense was not accessible to the human mind.
Frege's first argument is quickly demolished
for here
Boole is
unmistakable (LT,4; compare also page 32):
... the knowledge of the laws of the mind does not require as its basis
any extensive collection of observations. The general truth is seen in
the particular instance, and it is not confirmed by the repetition of
instances. [...] a general truth in Logic ... is made manifest in all its
generality by reflection upon a single instance of its application. And
this is both an evidence that the particular principle or formula in
question is founded upon some general law or laws of the mind, and
an illustration of the doctrine that the perception of such general
truths is not derived from an induction from many instances, but is
involved in the clear apprehension of a single instance. In connexion
with this truth is seen the not less important one that our knowledge
of the laws upon which the science of the intellectual powers rests,
whatever may be its extent or its deficiency, is not probable
knowledge. For we not only see in the particular example the general
truth, but we see it also as a certain truth,-a truth, our confidence
in which will not continue to increase with increasing experience of
its practical verifications.
Naming no names (cf §7) this was certainly aimed at Mill, just the
person Frege (l884a) explicitly targeted with his first argument. In this
instance Boole the seeker of the laws of thought is at one with the creator of
a language for pure thought.
However, there are also differences in their positions. Among other
things, Frege designed his Begriffsschrift for the purpose of being able to do

§18
Art versus Science
Ii
away with intuition in proof. He succeeded in this by making the unbroken
chain of evidence demonstrable by signs and rigorous detailed proofs. Boole
on the other hand, in the intellectual field too, speaks of "observation" and
"perception" as in the quotation above (LT, 4). Today's reader will, however,
not be content with the then-current usage of terminology and will require a
more exact picture of the mental processes described. Plain from his
presentation is in fact only that a "usual" observation cannot be meant, as
otherwise it would remain incomprehensible why a repeated examination
should not yield a sharper picture.
On the problem of introspection as here addressed, little information is
available in Boole. Most interesting is section 9 of the introductory part of
chapter iv (pages 52-53) where "facts of external observation" are opposed to
"facts of consciousness". In this connection an "appeal to consciousness" or a
reference to "the direct testimony of consciousness" appears as a matter of
course. But Fragment 1 on page 179 reveals that Boole was quite aware of
the special importance of the ability of introspection. If we find him here far
away from a satisfactory answer, we must honestly ask ourselves whether
one exists at all. For Boole, more closely considered, touches on one of the
"eternal" questions of philosophy. Our commentary in §18 points out that
progress since Frege, broadly speaking and confined to the matter in hand,
lies not in better philosophical answers but simply in the avoidance of the
relevant questions.
§ 18 Art versus Science
Skill in the processes of art or science applied is one thing. A thorough comprehension
of the grounds upon which those processes rest is another.
(BoDle, page 124)
The art of logic consists in using a given symbol system in one sphere. To
this, skills in symbol manipulation must also be added, for the greater the
skill of working in symbols, the easier is the employment of them. Against
that, science, in its usual meaning, delivers reasons and says why something
is as it is (compare page 13). That is in every way a philosophical problem,
and in Boole's time "philosophy" and "science" were nearer together than
they are today. Natural science instruments were wont to be described as
"philosophical instruments", and Boole himself speaks repeatedly of a
"philosophical language", meaning thereby a "scientific language" (e.g. MAL,
5). In the epistemic position of NaturaIism this close relationship between
philosophy and (natural) science is still alive today.
In the contention between art and science, two problems for the
reception of Boole present themselves. In the first place, since Frege logic as
art has developed, bringing with it a natural tendency for later recipients to
regard earlier logicians as "artists" and not as "scientists". And secondly this

lii
Bcole's Psychologism as a Reception Problem
Part 2
has been strengthened by Boole's own attempt to dissociate himself from
metaphysics (see quotation from MS B99 in §16); this despite the fact that
the borders between metaphysics and fundamental science come down to the
simple expression of a value judgement. This section deals mainly with the
first point, while the second forms the kernel of the next one. However, one
remark should be made in advance.
When Boole emphasised that he was not dealing in "the research of
causes" (already in MAL, 11ft), it was mainly with the purpose of avoiding
metaphysical discussion. In this sense he quite openly declares in LT, 11 that
(in his book) he would not provide an answer to the question for what reason
"the ultimate laws of Logic are mathematical in their form". And he
continues in a distinctly audible undertone: "Such knowledge is, indeed,
unnecessary for the ends of science, which properly concerns itself with what
is, and seeks not for grounds of preference or reasons of appointment." Taken
literally and isolated, this would show that Boole was not a scientist in the
sense first indicated above. But that he is in fact such, is, for example, clear
from page 141, where we find him searching for ultimate laws of thought
(emphasis added). For him the difficulty in a "science of logic" lay not in the
ascertainment of general truths of logic - these he recognised at a glance -
but in the defmition ofthose which are "primary and fundamental" (LT, 4£).23
In the public consciousness, however, such statements remained by the
way: Boole was above all known as the author of MAL (§2), that is to say as
an "artist". This fact led to the philosopher Edmund Husserl (1859-1938)
being able without quibble to offer him as an example of a person who could
be "a splendid logical technician" and at the same time "a very middling
philosopher of logic" (l891a, 9). This assessment has something tragic about
it for Husser! was another such man, who, at the tum of the century, came
down most heavily on the side of a logic as science. He would have been
highly delighted by Boole's differentiation between a noeton (i.e. an
intelligible) and an aistheton (i.e. a sensible) (page 68 or 1952a, 226) but the
writings in which Boole sought to bring this distinction to fruition had not
then be published.
So we see how Boole, in the eyes of later recipients, fell between two
stools. By not getting to the grips with metaphysical general truths of logic,
he was dismissed as a "middling philosopher" by those interested in such
truths. And since logic as art had bounded forward with Frege, he soon
seemed a "middling technician" too (in contrast to Husser\). And so Frege
discerned, before all else, in Boole "lack of art"24, as the following quotation
(l880-81a, 12) testifies to:
If I understand him aright, Boole wanted to construct a technique for
resolving logical problems systematically, similar to the technique of
elimination and working out the unknown that algebra teaches. To
this end, he represents judgements in the form of equations that he
constructs out of letters and arithmetical signs such as +, 0 and 1. ...

§19
Psychology as science
liii
In the main these means fulfil their purpose, at least as far as the
range of problems that Boole has in mind are concerned. But one
may think of logical problems lying outside this range.
Frege further found fault in that Boole's system for mathematical
reasoning was "completely unsuited" if only for the fact that "[Boolean logic]
employs the signs +, 0, 1 in a sense which diverges from the arithmetical one.
It would lead to great inconvenience if the same signs were to occur in one
formula with different meanings." (l880a, 13). As right as Frege is here, his
objections refer to Boole's art oflogic alone and not to his science, which is not
mentioned at all.
§ 19 Psychology as science
So much is plain: psychological considerations get logic as art no further.
We shall see in §21 that Boole of all people was aware of this. But in the
realm of logic as science the role of psychology is different. Here it provides
not skills but the necessary answer to the question of the subject area
covered by the science being referred to. Insofar as this question is thought
admissable, it can, even today, only be satisfied with a psychologistical
response. 25 For as Boole correctly remarked the term "logic" comes from the
Greek word X6yot;, where it "signifies not only the inward thought but also
its outward form or manifestation" (page 126).
However, the relationship between art and science has changed beyond
recognition. Although it is today possible as a logician to devote oneself to art
for art's sake and, say, concentrate exclusively on the syntactic properties of
a calculus, in the first half of the 19th century such an attitude was
absolutely
unthinkable.
Joan
L.
Richards
explains
why
English
mathematicians did not develop an abstract algebra as understood today
despite possessing all the elements for it. Because such an algebra was not a
goal worthy of endeavour (l980a, 345, emphasis added):
The issue which separates early English algebraic development from
modern algebra is ultimately grounded in a fundamental difference
between 19th- and 20th-century views of truth. For an English
mathematician in the early 19th century to devote himself to
developing an abstract algebraic system would have required a
major change not only in the interpretation of the nature of
mathematics, but more generally in the view of human knowledge.
... In the 19th-century English view, mathematical investigation
involved the scientific study of an external subject matter, and not
merely the logical development of theorems from given axioms and
definitions. The truth of a mathematical investigation, the goal after
which the mathematical researcher was striving, lay in the subject

liv
Boole's Psychologism as a Reception Problem
Part 2
matter his axioms and theorems described. The empty form of the
mathematical structure had no truth or value of its own.
Without external subject matter, no science. On this and no other
grounds, W. R. Hamilton (l853a), among others, felt obliged to develop
algebra as "the science of pure time" (§8). It was not his interest in time that
swayed him, but the status of algebra as science (also see 0hrstrllhm 1985a).
A proper assessment of Boolean psychologism must take this status into
account as well.
Anyone wishing to take Boole's demand to be seen as a scientist
seriously must also take note of a premise widespread (though not
undisputed) at this time: the possibility of a science being strict. This
pre-supposes the means of statements which are necessarily valid and which
despite being based on experience cannot be refuted by this. Such statements
cannot be inductively gained (as we observed already in §16 in connection
with Frege). If such a supposition seems rather strange to us today, it must
be remembered that only sixty years lie between the publication of Boole's
MAL and Immanuel Kant's "Copernican Revolution" (l787a), in which the
latter sought to rescue strict science from scepticism. And so Boole could
confidently write in LT, 3:
It is unnecessary to enter here into any argument to prove that the
operations of the mind are in a certain real sense subject to laws, and
that a science of the mind is therefore possible. [... J Let the
assumption be granted, that a science of the intellectual powers is
possible, and let us for a moment consider how the knowledge of it is
to be obtained.
From the acceptance of a possibility of a strict science of the intellectual
powers springs more than at first meets the eye. For instance, such a science
is inconceivable without a suitable means of expression. It was obvious that
Boole, unlike us, would see these means in the language of mathematics, for
had this not already made physics a "strict science"? Psychology can be
practised as a strict science only if its fundamental laws have a certain
simplicity in the manner of Boole's "Laws of Conception" (pages 76m. Laws
of experimental psychology are, in contrast, neither necessarily valid nor
simply formulated.
In order to understand the role the mind plays in logic as science for
Boole, he must be firmly placed in the "sign tradition" (§5). In this tradition
the processing organ for signs is the mind, not the brain. It would never have
occurred to Boole to found his logic on the "general laws of nervous actions"
as, for example, Peirce did in 1880a. Such speculation did exist at Boole's
time. For instance, Dr. Alfred Smee (1818-1877) proposed an "adaption of
process
of
thought
to
algebraic
formulre"
in
1851a
which
is
"electro-biologically" grounded. Again, I. P. Hughlings (dates not known)
could not resist enriching this introduction to the then-modern logic 1869a

§20
Boole's structuralism
Iv
with thoughts on nervous actions. So it is hardly surprising that Boole's
psychologism was associated with such thought processes. Yet it struck out
in a quite different direction in his philosophy. And thus we come to that
trait in Boole's teaching that is most often overlooked or misunderstood.
§20 Boole's structuralism
The fact that Boole did not have the structural terms of modern
mathematics at his disposal has already been noted (§19). There is, however,
in philosophy a more general concept of structure whereby the expression
"structure" describes the relationship between elements of a composite
whole. In the 20th century, structures in linguistics, ethnology and
psychology have been examined in this sense. Boole himself did not speak of
structures and treated them first and foremost as not having an independent
existence. He comes over as a precursor of structuralism, however, when he
publicly declares (LT 39): "The object of science, properly so called, is the
knowledge of laws and relations". Of the entities connected through these
laws and relations he intentionally says nothing. 26 A fine example of Boole's
"structuralism" can be found on page 157 (the inverted commas indicate a
pre-form, not modern coinage), where the author, in a discourse on belief, is
not concerned "to investigate the nature of that mental act which we
designate belief, but to state some of its general relations."
If science is concerned only with the structure of its subject, an
interesting and almost always overlooked consequence arises for the
meaning of normal language terms: they are over-defined. Boole illustrates
this with the example of controversy regarding cause and effect (LT, 39). One
person may see nothing deeper in this than a regular succession in time
whereas another might insist that there is an innate connection between the
perceived phenomena. The two persons may endlessly quarrel over
denotation, but even if the one accepted the words at face value and the other
sought deeper significance in the nature of causality, they would be agreed
on the fact that one of the two phenomena involved followed the other in
time. And with this they recognise, according to Boole, "a common element of
scientific truth, which is independent of their particular views of the nature
of causation." If Boole were to speak of causality - to stay with this example
- he would mean with this term only the (uncontroversial) "common element
of scientific truth".
This observation is as valid in the sphere of semiotics for the argument
between conceptualists and nominalists (page 70f) as in the sphere of
psychology, where Boole sets the position of the idealists against that of the
sceptics. Here too, there are common threads - and only these interested him
as a scientist (LT, 40):

lvi
Boole's Psychologism as a Reception Problem
Part 2
Let it even be granted that the mind is but a succession of states of
consciousness, a series of fleeting impressions uncaused from
without or from within, emerging out of nothing, and returning into
nothing again,-the last refinement of the sceptic intellect,-still, as
laws of succession, or at least of a past succession, the results to
which observation had led would remain true. They would require to
be interpreted into a language from whose vocabulary all such terms
as cause and effect, operation and subject, substance and attribute,
had been banished; but they would still be valid as scientific truths.
Hoole is clear that the terms used "in the science of the intellectual
powers become, in expression at least, almost necessarily mixed up with the
modes of thought and language, which betray a metaphysical origin".
(LT, 39). Nevertheless, he did not renounce employment of the suspect terms
(LT,41):
The course which it appears to me to be expedient, under these
circumstances, to adopt, is to avail myself as far as possible of the
language of common discourse, without regard to any theory of the
nature and powers of the mind which it may be thought to embody.
For instance, it is agreeable to common usage to say that we converse
with each other by the communication of ideas, or conceptions, such
communication being the office of words; and that with reference to
any particular ideas or conceptions presented to it, the mind
possesses certain powers or faculties by which the mental regard
may be fixed upon some ideas, to the exclusion of others, or by which
the given conceptions or ideas may, in various ways, be combined
together. To those faculties or powers different names, as Attention,
Simple Apprehension, Conception or Imagination, Abstraction, &c.,
have been given,-names which have not only furnished the titles of
distinct divisions of the philosophy of the human mind, but passed
into the common language of men. Whenever, then, occasion shall
occur to use these terms, I shall do so without implying thereby that
I accept the theory that the mind possesses such and such powers
and faculties as distinct elements of its activity. Nor is it indeed
necessary to inquire whether such powers of the understanding have
a distinct existence or not. We may merge these different titles under
the one generic name of Operations of the human mind, define these
operations so far as is necessary for the purposes of this work, and
then seek to express their ultimate laws.
So Boole argues that there is an ideal language, believing himself to
have discovered it in the form of the then-current algebra. His psychologism,
however closely it may be defined, cannot be made a case by simply pointing
to the notorious woolliness of the psychologistical terms involved. For not
only did he himself draw attention to this, he even sought clarity through
"translation" into an "ideal language".

§21
Uninterpretable symbols
lvii
§21
Uninterpretable symbols
This last aspect of Boole's psychologism provoked controversy from the
very beginning. Soon after MAL was published Arthur Cayley raised queries
(§8, Chapter XVII). Again in 1863, the subject reared its head in
correspondence with Stanley Jevons (§14; Grattan-Guinness 1991a, 26f.)
and later Rudolf Hermann Lotze in 1880a (quoted in Hesse 1952a, 76) made
insinuations.
What is it all about? Boole applied algebra for the purpose of logical
reasoning by forming the premises into algebraic equations, solving them
and transcribing the result into a conclusion. That many found the
intermediate steps logically uninterpretable did not only not worry him at all
(compare pages 43 and 146-148), but indeed was a circumstance to be taken
into account, otherwise it would be "manifest, that no such thing as a general
method in Logic is possible". (LT, 67). At the same time, Boole conceded,
... that this apparent failure of correspondency between process and
interpretation does not manifest itself in the ordinary applications of
human reason. For no operations are there performed of which the
meaning and the application are not seen; and to most minds it does
not suffice that merely formal reasoning should connect their
premises and their conclusions; but every step of the connecting
train, every mediate result which is established in the course of
demonstration, must be intelligible also. And without doubt, this is
both an actual condition and an important safeguard, in the
reasonings and discourses of common life.
The last sentence of the quotation betrays the source of a fundamental
misunderstanding in the assessment of Boole's psychologism. For there is
almost an acceptance that anyone who psychologistically interprets premises
and conclusions of logical reasoning grounds the validity of the final account
by making the steps on the way intelligible. Yet for Boole, the validity of the
logical ending did not depend on given psychological factors but on the laws
of symbols (compare page
70).27 That is why, when he later sought
popularisation, he defined logic as "the Philosophy of the Laws of Thought as
expressed" (page 126, emphasis added), and he began to stress that he was
concerned with the formal laws of thought.
The comprehensiveness of language transcends our imagination. Boole
declares this (page 41) when he says, "it is not true in thought that every
operation can be performed upon every subject but it is possible in language
to represent any operation as performed upon any subject, the laws which
that operation obeys when possible in thought being still observed." In the

lviii
Remarks on dating and editing the manuscripts
Part 3
same sense, Boole prefers the term "notion" to the term "concept" "because
the latter seems to indicate the formation of a mental picture or
resemblance" (page 68).
This distancing from a psychologistical interpretation of all terms
becomes understandable when Boole's work on differential operators in the
calculus is recalled (§6). He was also aware that the notion of limit was
notoriously difficult to specify (pages 38-40). As a mathematician, Boole was
well aware of its limitations and he always maintained this when he began to
apply mathematics to logical problems. Thus Boole wrote to Penrose (pages
200-201; compare also page 175):
"It seems to be a law of human reason that we can in various
instances affirm propositions ... respecting things which we can only
picture or represent to ourselves as the limits of an indefinite process
of abstraction. [...] [T]he object of all pure science are things which it
would baffie all our efforts to represent by the power of imagination
only and which can only be approved as the attainable limits of
thought, but concerning which nevertheless the most vigorous of all
propositions can be affirmed ...
We have now presented the factors that should be weighed up in an
interpretation of Boole's psychologism. The question as to whether these
allow for a coherent whole must be left open. Suffice it to say that we feel we
have shown Boole to be a great deal more interesting than legend leads one
to suppose.
Part
3: Remarks on dating and
editing the manuscripts
As was explained at the end of §2, the Royal Society collection has
become rather disordered in the course of consultation and transcription
over the decades. In recent times some valuable cataloguing has been
effected by Panteki in the late 1980s and continued by Bornet in the course of
his selection and transcription for this edition; both scholars have placed
their unpublished partial guides in the collection, to join one made by Alicia
Boole and Falk. We provide readers of this edition with the required

§22
Remarks on dating
lix
information in the Textual Notes, where a general explanation is followed by
the details required for each Chapter.
§22 Remarks on dating
Apart from the letters, no manuscripts are dated by Boole; thus
chronology is a matter of conjecture. A few papers contain conclusive
evidence by direct reference in the text such as "the present year 1848" or
"this is written two years after LT'; the rest contains only hints. The two
most important events regarding a chronology of the material are the
publication of LT in 1854 and the marriage to Mary Everest the following
year.
Mary helped George in the task of transcribing the manuscripts and in
preparing them for the press. When she thought about depositing the
unpublished works of her late husband she noted on the manuscript if it was
known to her and therefore "later than 1855". But this must not necessarily
mean that the work originated after her marriage. It could well be that only
the transcription was then made.
Regarding LT, the only clue for dating used here is an explicit reference
in the text to this work. We did not consider the state of the theory presented
in the paper when judging if it is prior or later than LT. Apart from the
difficulties of such an undertaking there was usually better evidence to
determine the date of the manuscript or the material was too fragmentary
for such a consideration.
§23 Remarks on editing
We aim to retain the original spelling of Boole, including his sparing use
of quotation marks. We keep his use of capitalization, although it sometimes
looks a little arbitrary. We have rendered his underlinings as italics. In some
cases he uses a vinculum instead of (brackets). This we also retained
regardless of the danger of misunderstanding because in logic a vinculum
often marks negation. Obvious mistakes of Boole have been corrected
silently. Boole frequently uses "as" where today "just as" or "such as" would
be used. Prescriptive modern commas have not been inserted where the
meaning is clear.
Some of the manuscripts are in a unfinished state and/or written very
hastily. It is not uncommon that references within the text are not supplied
so that we only have an empty pair of brackets ( ). Where Boole left a totally

Ix
Remarks on dating and editing the manuscripts
Part 3
empty space for a later reference we complete the brackets silently for
uniformity.
If a manuscript is in neat handwriting this is stated, but not otherwise.
The transcriber is (with one exception, see chapter II) not known, for possible
persons see §3 of the Introduction.
The footnotes of the manuscripts have no explicit reference in the text.
Such references are supplied here silently. Footnotes belonging to the text
itself are marked "*" and "t". The figures 1,2,3, ... in different print from
the basic text serve as reference to the Textual Notes at the end of the book.
Page numbers of the original version that appear in square brackets in
the text thus "[XX.nn]" concern the marking of the then end-of-page. The
"XX" identifies the document, "nn" the page number. Details can be found in
the Textual Notes pp. 206ff.
Works mentioned by Boole are identified in the Textual Notes with the
exception of his LT. In certain passages there would be simply too many
references. All Greek expressions and texts appear in the Textual Notes in
Latin script and where the meaning is not immediately obvious from the
context they have been translated.
In contrast to the scrappiness and disorder of the collection, the writing
itself is usually not too difficult to read. A typical folio is illustrated on the
following page. It is p. 106 of Notebook 6 Logic, transcribed as Fragment 7,
pages 189-190.
Acknowledgements
For access to the manuscripts, and much help from the library staff, we
wish to thank the Royal Society of London. Our information on the Falks in
§2 relied heavily on John Rollett, and on the letters to Russell held in the
Russell Archives at McMaster University in Canada (archivist Kenneth
Blackwell).
For help and advice we thank Desmond MacHale, Daniel D. Merrill,
Maria Panteki, Volker Peckhaus and Adrian Rice. Andreas Bachli translated
and explained all passages of the Boole material in Greek and Latin.
A special thanks goes to Elaine Lerf. She translated everything written
by Gerard Bornet in German: i.e. part 2 of the introduction and much
editorial material. She proofread the final copy.
The occupation of Bornet with Boole was part of a broader project on
philosophical aspects of the mathematization of logic, which project was
supported by the "Swiss National Foundation for the Advancement of

Acknowledgements
lxi
.
.Figure 8: A page from Notebook 6 Logic
(By permission of the President and Council of the Royal Society)
[transcription on pages 189-190]

lxii
Notes
Scientific Research" to whom thanks are due. We are also grateful for
financial support from the "Swiss Society for Logic and the Philosophy of
Science", which made a third visit by Bornet to the library of the Royal
Society in London possible.
Notes
Among biographical writings, the most distinguished is the book-length study 1985a by
the Cork mathematician Desmond MacHale; all further details should be first sought
there.
2 Neil's interests included logic and reasoning, which must have drawn him to Boole's
work; but it is quite unclear how, being based in Scotland, he came to know so much
about Boole, who seems not to have referred to him.
3 In addition, the Stotts seemed to maintain an interest in matters algebraic, including
connections to a Liverpool Mathematical Society. Mr. Stott was acknowledged in Ross
1905a, a re-creation (more or less) of Arbogast's methods which had been discussed
before this society.
4 Oswald Toynbee Falk (1879-1972) was a stockbroker who later became involved in
Treasury affairs and work with John Maynard Keynes (a younger friend of Russell,
incidentally). For context see Skidelsky 1983a, ch. 14.
5 The full extract reads as follows:
Pour ajourd'hui je ne veux repondre qu'a votre question touchant les mss. de
Boole. D'abord, je suis tres Honne d'apprendre que ces mss. se trouvent en d'autres
mains que celles de Mrs. Boole, qui, m'a-t-on dit, conserve les publication des son mari,
et a qui I'on doit s'adresser quand on veut se procurer certaines d'entre elles (c'est ce qui
m'est arrive quand j'ai voulu me procurer quelques memoires de Boole: mon Iibraire les
a demandes a Mrs. Boole). Quoi qu'i1 en soit, je suppose que I'authenticite des mss. en
question est assuree. Je considerais comme un grand honneur pour moi d'Hre charge
de I'edition de ces mss., a la condition qu'i1s en vaiIlent la peine (c'est a dire qu'i1s ne
soient pas de simples brouiIlons ou copies de ce que Boole a publie), et a la condition
qu'i1s ne depassent pas rna competence (je pense notamment a ce qui regarde Ie calcul
des probabilites, ou je vois pas encore bien clair, et oil. iI est si facile des se tromper:
Boole lui-meme s'est trompe dans une question capitale de probabilite, selon M. Mac-
Coli). Dans ce dernier cas, je demanderais au moins qu'on m'adjoignft un collaborateur
scientifique. J'aimerais que ce fI1t vous, ou M. Whitehead: mais je presume que, si vous
me proposez cette tache, c'est parce que vous ne pouvez pas vous en charger, car vous
vous en acquitteriez mieux que personne.
6 Alphonse Gratry (1805-1872), Oratorian Father and graduate of the Ecole Polytech-
nique (a striking combination), published a two-volume Philosophie -
Logique (1855
and later editions), conveying a mystical and deeply religious attitude to logic, stressing
unity, and also covering philosophical questions in mathematics such as infinitesimals
and the foundation of the calculus (Gratry 1944a). According to Mary Boole, George
also greatly liked his book, and the features just mentioned would have been congenial
for him; but the manuscripts do not confirm her claim.
The contact between Mrs. Boole and Russell may have occurred trough Una Birch
(1876-1949), who became a well-known literary figure as Una Pope-Hennessey. She

Notes
lxiii
wrote to Russell on 8 December 1904, thanking him for his views on Gratry and con-
trasting them with the enthusiasm of Mrs. Boole, who hoped for an English translation
of Logique.
7 On the contributions of De Morgan and Jevons, see §13 and §14 below respectively.
8 In contrast to the great impact of Whately, the treatment of his work and its back-
ground in general histories of logic is miserable, and sometimes non-existent. A good
start on him can be made with van Evra 1984a and Dessi 1988a. On logic teaching in
Europe and the USA at that time, see Blakey 1851a, chs. 14-22.
9 It is possible that Boole and Whately met; in a letter of 15 December 1847 to the Rev.
Edmund Larken (an old friend), Boole mentioned that John Graves, Professor of Juris-
prudence at University College London and amateur mathematician, was trying to
arrange
a
meeting to
discuss MAL (University College
Cork,
Boole
Papers,
BP/1/223(1l)).
10 For some reason Boole did not mention here his paper 1844a or cite Gregory, who had
stated the left-hand trio in the paper 1839a. In a footnote he allowed (3) to permit
"+n =+", which is also to be found in Gregory (l839b). In addition, Boole did not
attribute the names of the first two laws to F. J. Servois (1767-1847), a follower of Arbo-
gast.
lIOn 26 January 1854 Boole wrote to De Morgan, reporting that he had asked his London
publisher to send him a copy of LT. He also wished to send a copy to Sir John Herschel,
and sought his address; and also conuniserated with De Morgan on a loss in the family
(presumably the death of his eldest daughter Elizabeth Alice the previous month). This
letter was given in 1919 by De Morgan's grandson R. Campbell Morgan to the Bodleian
Library, Oxford, where it now resides (Ms. Autograph d.14, fols 46-47): it is missing
from the edition Smith 1982a of their correspondence.
12 The identity of Boole's financial friend is not known. Unfortunately no correspondence
between the Macmillan Company and Boole is to be found in the publisher's archives in
the British Library Additional Manuscripts, 54786-56035, 61894-61896. But the manu-
script of LT survives in the Royal Society collection (Ul-580), except for the last chap-
ter, which is lost.
13 An interesting example is provided by John Hoppus (1789-1879), the founder Professor
of Philosophy of Mind and Logic at University College, London. From 1855 until his
retirement in 1867 he used MAL for a few questions in class examinations but alluded
to LT only once. He was probably directed to MAL by his colleague professor De Mor-
gan, whose own book Formal Logic had already been used by Hoppus for questions. His
successor, G. Croom Robertson (1842-1892), stopped the practice (information from Col-
lege Calendars, held in College Archives).
14 Rhees published several bits of this essay in Boole 1952a, 240-266; the fragmentation
has not done it good service, so we give it complete here.
15 A textual puzzle attends this passage from Whately: he wrote 'force' rather than 'form'.
Presumably this is a misprint; however, it appears in every edition consulted, including
the original encyclopaedia appearance (l823a, 209). Boole rendered it as 'form', as
quoted here. 'Force' does appear sometimes in writings on logic of this period; for exam-
ple, De Morgan used it to characterise the intensionality of a term (l864a, 105-106,
129).
16 In 1852 Boole wrote a long letter to Hamilton in defence of mathematics and its educa-
tion; a copy survives in the Cork collection of Boole papers (BP/1/221(1), and was tran-
scribed in MacHale 1985a, 133-134. No reply seems to be extant.
17 The word "ideology" comes from "ideologie", proposed in 1796 by Destutt de Tracy to
express the triad of the idea, the notion to which it refers, and the sign used to effect the
reference. The quite different meaning which it carries today is due to the Marxists.

lxiv
Notes
18 The significance of this passage has been noticed independently in Deakin 1996a, in a
study of some of Boole's methods of solving differential equations. Note also the preface
to the book.
19 Boole may have restricted (x+x) to disjoint classes x and y to avoid multi-sets (as they
are now called), collections to which a member may belong more than once. The unre-
stricted form does occur occasionally in Boole, as "signed heaps", to use the phrase of
(Hailperin 1986a). The word "heap" comes from the introduction of multi-sets by the
amateur British mathematician A. B. Kempe (1849-1922). His long paper (Kempe
1886a) was published by the Royal Society, but it interested only C. S. Peirce and, in
the 1900s, the American philosopher Josiah Royce (1855-1916); for discussions, see
(Vercelloni 1989a, ch. 1).
20 Venn could only handle up to four predicates with convex shapes; an ingenious algo-
rithmic extension to any finite number is to be found in Edwards 1989a. On the differ-
ences between Euler's and Venn's methods, see Grattan-Guinness 1977a.
21 Moore 1993a, xxxvii refers to a letter of 13th June 1902 from Russell, who mentions
that after the (putative) completion of his work on The Principles of Mathematics (Rus-
sell 1903a) he was undertaking a "systematic study of the great philosophers prepara-
tory to my Logic". In this connection he got to work on LT (Russell Archives,
ms. 220.010630). The study cannot have been very intensive, for in the space of a few
days he also turned to De Morgan 1847a and Venn 1881a.
22 Passages where Boole refers to "the actual processes which take place in the mind of a
person" (page 56) must be balanced against passages where he makes clear that the
intellectual operations he is interested in are not concerned "with the nature of the
individual object of thought" (page 67). Accordingly Boole leaves "the material and sen-
suous element" of concepts out of consideration (page 68). He also refers in his reply to
the anticipated objection "that we do not actually reason thus" to an "ideal standard"
and remarks, "that the actual performances of our nature" does not "in any case fully
answer to its faculties and capacities" (page 111).
23 Here, it is true, Boole states in this connection the modernly assumed criterion that he
thinks of "as fundamental those laws and principles from which all other general truths
of science may be deduced, and into which they may all be again resolved." (LT 5). From
today's standpoint the adjective "fundamental" would thereby become relative to an
axiom system. The idea of such a relativity was, however, totally foreign at Boole's
time, see also §19.
24 Frege (see §14) had Ernst Schroder rather than Boole in mind here (private communi-
cation from Volker Peckhaus). Husserl's earlier-quoted statement too was made in con-
nection with a review of Schroder's work. This demonstrates how strongly Boole was
considered only as a precursor of Schroder by a later generation.
25 Apart from the concepts of statement and argument, the concept of signs so especially
central to formalism cannot be more closely defined without recourse to expressions
such as "consciousness" or "thought".
26 Modernly put, Boole in actual fact muses on that which makes up structures without
wishing to study structures as such as objects of investigation.
27 This lies behind the question discussed on page 72 as to whether logic is a noetic or
ostensive science. The psychologism that is required to be rejected in formal logic sees
logic as ostensive science; Boole, however, pronounces in favour of noetic science.

Part A
The Nature of Logic
and the Philosophy
of Mathematics

Chapter I
The Nature of Logic
------------[1848]------------
Logic is the sCIence of reasoning
Reasoning is for the most part carried on by the aid of signs. It has been
contended by some writers that it can only be conducted by this agency;
others maintain that the use of signs is not indispensable and this is the
more probable opinion. But it is universally agreed that the use of signs is a
most important aid and that without them no extended process or reasoning
could be conducted.
The signs by which we conduct the processes of common reasoning are
the words of our own language either spoken or thought. It has been
observed that they who are debarred from the use of words are led if capable
of reasoning at all to invent a substitute. Laura Bridgman, an American
young lady who was born deaf and dumb but was possessed of considerable
powers of intellect was accustomed to put her fingers in rapid motion when
she was occupied in thought,' Dr. Whately has written a tract 2 to prove that
it is not the faculty of reasoning but the faculty of reasoning by signs [that]
distinguishes man as an intellectual being from the lower animals.
Now logic while it is the science of reasoning in general is in a more
especial sense the science of reasoning by signs. It investigates the forms and
expressions to which correct reasoning may be reduced and the laws upon
which it is founded.
Of what does reasoning consist?
If we examine any regular discourse we shall find that [A 88.1] it
consists chiefly of Propositions, that is of assertions either affirming or
denying such and such relations of such and such subjects.
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

2
The Nature of Logic
A
When one or more propositions are given and from these we can infer the
truth of some other proposition not identical with the given ones such a
conclusion is obtained by a process of reasoning, and it is of such processes
that we are to give an account.
Now propositions relate to things either real or supposed and by
Language we express our conceptions of things. It will therefore be necessary
to examine under what aspects things are presented to us, what are the chief
varieties to be traced in our conceptions of them and under what conditions
we speak of them in common discourse.
General Considerations
Of our Conception of Things
For the first place it may be remarked that we are not confined to the
contemplation of things as individuals unconnected with each other but we
are able to conceive of them as arranged in classes each of which includes
many individuals and under this aspect we designate them by a common or
general name. We think and speak not only of Peter and John and other
individual men but also of men in general and under this conception of men
we include the particular individuals John, Peter, etc.
In like manner we are able not only to make assertions respecting
individuals as John is mortal but also respecting entire classes of individuals
as Men are mortal.
In short the world is so constituted as to embrace [A88.2] innumerable
individuals possessed of common properties and attributes and the human
mind is so constituted as to posses a capacity of forming general ideas and
contemplating classes as well as individuals. Finally Language is so
constituted as to admit of the expression either of individual things by proper
names or of classes of things by common names.
On the relations of individuals and classes
An individual may possess a great variety of attributes and thus belong
to a great variety of different classes. The individual John may be considered
as belonging to the classes Man, rational being, biped, white, civilized, moral
agent etc. The extent to which we are capable of carrying on this
classification depends in every instance upon the extent of our knowledge.
To every class there corresponds a contrary class. When we have
conceived the class of animate beings we can conceive the entire contrary
class of inanimate Le. not-animate beings, and it is obvious that these two

Of the mode in which the mind combines and modifies
3
together make up all beings. In like manner the class men and the class
not-men together make up all things that exist and similarly do any other
class and its contrary class taken together.
It is obvious that a given name and its contrary cannot be applied to any
individual. We cannot describe any being as at the same time man and
not-man, rational and not-rational.
On the other hand either a given name or its contrary may be applied to
every individual thing that exists. We may say of anything whatever either
that it is a man or that it is something which is not man Le. either that it is
man or not-man. [A88.3]
Of the mode in which the mind combines
and modifies its own conceptions
The mind is not a passive recipient of the impressions of external things
but it has the power of modifying its own conceptions according to the laws of
its own nature.
First, From the conceptions of two distinct classes of things it is able to
form the conception of another class as a whole of which those two are parts
and it has the power of expressing this aggregation of parts into a whole in
Language. Thus from the two distinct conceptions of the class oxen and the
class horses we can form a conception of the aggregate class oxen and horses
and we can reason upon this aggregate class just as we can reason upon the
distinct classes of which it is formed.
Secondly, From the conceptions of two classes of things not entirely
distinct we are able to form the conception of a class the members of which
shall be common to the two classes which are given. Thus from the two
classes of white cattle and horned cattle we are able to form the conception of
the class white horned cattle, a class each member of which is at the same
time a member of both the original classes.
Thirdly, We have the power of modifYing our conceptions by operations
inverse to those which have been considered. For as we can form the
conception of a whole from the conception of its parts so conversely from the
conception of a whole and of one [of] its parts we can form the conception of
the other part. Thus if we conceive of men as a whole class and of Europeans
as of a partial class included in the former then are we able to conceive of All
men except Europeans as the [A88A] remaining part and we can reason
upon this conception just as we can reason upon either of the conceptions
originally given. In like manner from the conception of the class white
horned cattle already adverted to we can revert by abstraction to the
unmixed conceptions of white cattle and of horned cattle. The operations
which have here been described both direct and inverse are subject to
determinate laws the investigation of which will occupy a future chapter.

4
The Nature of Logic
A
The laws of these inverse operations which are derivative and are founded
upon the laws of the direct operations already explained and upon a certain
other law of direct operation to be thereafter demonstrated will be considered
in another part of this treatise.
Of the nature of Propositions
The mind is not only capable of forming conceptions of individual things
and of classes of individual things and of modifying those conceptions
according to the principles already stated but it is also capable of perceiving
relations of equality among things and classes of things the conceptions of
which are thus formed and thus modified. The expression of any such
relation in Language constitutes a Proposition.
All discourse and reasoning may be resolved into a series of propositions.
In Reasoning these flow from each other according to fixed laws which it is
the business of the science of Logic to investigate.
The assertion All men are mortal is a Proposition. The assertion Peter is
a man is also a proposition. The inference that Peter is therefore mortal
constitutes with the propositions from which it is deduced an example of
reasoning.
Propositions do not always appear under the form of a [A88.5] relation of
equality among things or classes of things but they are always reducible to
such a form. The proposition Alexander vanquished Darius is equivalent to
Alexander was vanquisher of Darius in which form it expresses a relation of
equality between two individuals, that relation being referred to a certain
past time.
Of the limitation of the subject of discourse
Both in reasoning and discourse we form a tacit assumption as to the
range of things concerning which we reason or discourse.
Ordinarily this assumption amounts only [to] this viz. that the things
are things really existing as when we say Men are mortal in which case we
speak of all men that exist. Sometimes we implicitly confine ourselves to
things existing in a particular country or district as when we say Corn is
dear in which case we do not mean all the corn that exists but only the corn
that is for sale in a particular region. Sometimes we speak of things which do
not exist but are the mere products of the imagination as when we say The
Centaur is a fabulous being.
Now whatever is that range of things to which our discourse is confined
and from which all the things that we discourse of are taken - that range of
things we shall define as the Universe of Discourse.

Laws of the Mental Operation
5
And this defmition being laid down it is clear that the office of a word as
men is to mark out or select all individuals existing in the Universe of
discourse to whom that title may apply.
Suppose for further illustration that we take the following example. The
minds of men are agitated during this present year 1848 with aspects [0£1
political change which timid men view with dread and the ardent with hope.
By men are not meant all [A88.6] men - not the savage who never heard of
the events referred to - but men who are either witnesses or hearers of them.
And when we further limit the individual spoken of by saying timid men,
ardent men, by the words timid, ardent we mark out of the class before
denoted those who possess the particular attributes denoted by the words
timid and ardent.
These instances are confined to the employment of the substantive and
the adjective and it is very important to observe that the mental act
represented by both is the same in kind. The substantive selects and marks
out of an implied universe of discourse the individuals which answer to a
given description. The adjective selects and marks out of that class of things
denoted by the substantive to which it is prefixed those which answer to the
further description which it supplies. In the former case the subject upon
which the operation is performed is implied - in the latter case it is
expressed.
The articles and other attributives of the singular number represent a
similar operation - limiting the subject to an individual with or without
further definition.
Furthermore all expressions which serve for the purpose of definition
and
distinction whether one
or many worded represent the same
fundamental operation. In the expression The barbarians who subdued Italy
the clause "who subdued Italy" is an attributive of this nature. It selects and
marks out of the class barbarians those to whom a certain further
description may be applied.
Laws of the Mental Operation
The principles which have been established in the preceding chapter
may be stated as follows:
1st. The mental operation represented by the adjective [A88.7] the
substantive and by all descriptive and attributive expressions is that of
selecting from a certain class as subject all the individuals which together
answer to a given description.
2nd. If it is the substantive that is employed the subject class is the
Universe of discourse and is implied, if the adjective is employed the subject
class is expressed by that word or combination of words to which the adjective
is prefixed.

6
The Nature of Logic
A
The mental operation here described is subject to certain fundamental
and necessary laws which it is next proposed to investigate.
First: Let [us] take the substantive oxen and horses each of which
represents the operation of selecting from the Universe of discourse a certain
class of beings. It has been seen that by a combination of these results we can
form the conception of the compound aggregate oxen and horses. In forming
the conception of this aggregate class it is indifferent whether we add the
conception of the class oxen to that of the class horses or whether we add the
conception of the class horses to that of the class oxen. The resulting whole is
independent of the order of the component parts. This is a Law of Thought
and it is the basis of a corresponding law of Language. Thus as a particular
illustration of that law it is indifferent whether we say "horses and oxen" or
"oxen and horses". And for the general expression of that law it is obvious
that when words relating to different classes of things are connected by the
copulative conjunction it is indifferent in what order they are placed. [A88.8]
If we should represent the class oxen by x and that of horses by y and the
conjunction and by the sign + (which indeed was originally a contraction of
the Latin et) we might represent the aggregate class oxen and horses by x+y
and the aggregate class horses and oxen by y+x. It would then appear that
we should have
x+y =y+x
(1)
The truth of this equation is however quite independent of the particular
interpretation of x and y. If by x and Y we represent any other classes of
things the same equality will still obtain.
Secondly, From the conceptions of white cattle and homed cattle it has
been shewn that we can form the conception of white horned cattle.
It is indifferent in this process whether we begin with the conception of
horned cattle and limit the things involved under this conception by the
further condition of whiteness or whether we begin with the conception of the
class white cattle and limit the individual involved under this conception by
the condition that they shall be homed. This is a law of Thought and as such
it is the basis of a law of Language. The expressions white homed cattle and
horned white cattle are equivalent to each other and in general when several
terms expressive of equality or in any way serving to limit and define a
subject of thought follow each other the order in which they follow is
indifferent.
If now we represent the operation of the adjective white by x and the
operation of the adjective rhomed] by y it is clear that we shall have [A88.9]
xy =yx
(2)
and this relation is true whatever other interpretation of the kind we give to
x andy.
Thirdly, It is obvious that the expression white oxen and horses is
equivalent to white oxen and white horses. If we represent the operation of

Comparison of the laws of elective symbols
7
the adjective white by x, of the substantive oxen by y and of the substantive
horses by z and the conjunction and by + we shall have
x(y+z) =xy+xz
[3]
Again, let x represent the operation of the adjective fruitbearing, y that
of the substantive trees and z that of the substantive pear trees then y-z
would represent all trees except pear trees and by x(y-z) would be
represented all of this remainder that bear fruit. Now this result is the same
as we should obtain if we should first conceive of all fruitbearing trees xy and
then from these take all fruitbearing pear trees xz which would give xy-xz
whence we have
x(y-z) =xy-xz
Fourthly, Let us represent the operation of the adjective good by x then
to whatever substantive as men this adjective is applied it marks out and
selects the individuals of the class men which answer to the description good.
Now suppose the same operation repeated as in the expression good (good
men). Here from the class of good men we are supposed to mark out those
individuals which are good. It is clear that we mark out the whole and that in
fact
good good men = good men
Hence good being represented by x we have
xx =X
and if as in algebra we represent xx by x2 we have [A88.10]
x2 =x
(4)
I call the symbols x, y, z etc. elective symbols because they represent that
operation of the adjective the substantive or the attributive clause by which
they mark out and select from a given class of things those individuals which
possess a given character. This operation is the same in kind in all cases
whether the subject class be expressed or only implied.
Comparison of the laws of elective symbols
with the laws of arithmetical symbols
[1st.] It has been shewn that if x and yare any two elective symbols then
x+y =Y+X
Now the same equation holds true if x and y represent numbers. We
know 7 +5 =5+7, 6+2 =2+6 and generally whatever numerical values we
attach to x and y that x +y =Y+x.

8
The Nature of Logic
A
2nd. It has also been seen that x and y being any elective symbols we
have
xy =yx
and this relation is equally true if x and yare any arithmetical symbols. Thus
7 x 5 = 5 x7, 8x 9 = 9x 8 and similarly for any other values of x and y.
3rd. It has also been shewn that x y and z being elective symbols we have
always
x(y+z) =xy+xz
x(y-z) =xy-xz
This law is also obeyed by symbols of quantity. In fact the expression
x(y+z) then denotes the result of multiplying y+z by x which by the rules of
algebra is xy+xz.
4th. Any elective symbol x satisfies the law whose expression is [A88.1l]
x2 =x
It is not true that any numerical symbol satisfies this law. Out of the
entire range of numerical magnitude from minus infinity to plus infinity
there are but two magnitudes which satisfy this law they are 0 and 1. For we
have
and
OxO =0
lxl =1
or
or
These numerical magnitudes may in fact be introduced into the elective
system and admit of interpretation there as well as in the system of number
to which they also belong.
Consequences of the above analogies
1. It results from the analogies developed in (1) (2) and (3) of the
preceding chapter, that we can perform upon elective symbols the same
processes in subjection to the same rules as are performed upon the symbols
of algebra in the operations of addition, subtraction and multiplication.
2. Since x 2 = x it is plain that x xx2 = xx or x3 = x2, therefore by the
previous equation
and in like manner x4 = x, x5 = x etc., whence generally
From this it follows that if in performing any operation upon elective
symbols such a term as x2, x3, etc. should appear, it may immediately be
replaced by x.

Consequences of the above analogies
9
For example if we multiply x +Y by x +Y the operation performed as in
common algebra stands thus [A88.I2J
x+y
x+y
x2+2xy+y2
then replacing x2 by x and y2 by y we have
(x+y)x(x+y) =x+2xy+y
Examples for Practice
Multiply
x+y
by
x-y
Answer x-y
Multiply
x+2y
by
x-3y
Answer [
J
Multiply
x+y-xz
by
x+z
Answer [
J
Multiply
x+y+z
by
x-y+z
Answer [
J
If we multiply x by I-x we get x-x2 which is equal to 0 since x2 =x. In
like manner y(l- y) = 0 and so on. This result must be borne in mind as it will
greatly facilitate the operation of multiplication.
Example
Multiply
x(l-y)+z
by
y+z(l-x)
x(l-y)+z
y + z(l-x)
yz
+ z(l-x)
yz + z(l-x)
Here the term x(l- y) multiplied by y vanishes and the same term
multiplied by z(l-x) also vanishes.
Multiply
x+y(l-z)
by
z+l-y
Multiply
x-yz
by
y(l-x)
Multiply
x+2y(l-z)
by
z(l-x)+yz

10
The Nature of Logic
Of the interpretation of 0 and 1 as elective symbols
A
It has been shewn that the symbols 0 and 1 satisfy the conditions:
02 =0
12 =1
as well as the other laws of elective symbols. It remains [A88.I3l to inquire
whether we can interpret them in that system as well as in the system of
magnitude.
The classes of things which are presented to our notice vary very widely
as to their extent. There are some which consist of many individuals - some
of but one or two - and we can conceive of classes which have no existence.
On the other hand a class may be so extensive as to include the whole of
existing things and in short to fill up the Universe of Discourse.
The two limits then which bound the possible extent of classes are
nothing and the universe, and there is no difficulty in seeing that the former
of these may be represented by the symbol 0 just as we do in arithmetic. We
have then only to consider the interpretation of the other symbol 1.
Now it is the characteristic property of 1 in arithmetic that whatever
may be the value of any other quantity we have always
Ix =x
and if the symbol 1 is to be introduced into the elective system it must be
used in the same manner. The question then is what class must 1 represent
in order that the equation
Ix =x
may always be true whatever class is represented by x.
Now by the product of two symbols is represented that class of things
which is common to both the classes represented by those symbols. Hence we
see that 1 must represent such a class of things that the individuals which
are common to that class and to any other class x shall include all that are
[A88.I4l contained in the class x. Or to state this in other words whatever
individuals are found in any class whatever are found also in the class
represented by 1.
The class 1 therefore includes all other classes. It is therefore the
Universe of Discourse.
Expression of the class not-men etc.
By 1 we represent the Universe of Discourse. Suppose that x represents
the class men. Now all the beings in the Universe are either men or not men.
If we take away the class men the remainder will be the class of beings which

Expression of the class not-men etc.
11
are not men Le. the class not-men. Now this taking away is represented by
the sign -. Hence if x = the class men then
1-x = the class not-men.
And similarly if by y we represent the class plants, by 1-y we should
represent the class not-plants.
The symbol x by which we have represented the class men satisfies the
law
x2 =x
In like manner the expression 1-x which under the same circumstances
represents the class not-men ought to satisfy the condition
(l-x)2 =1-x
and this in fact it does. For if we multiply as below
1-x
1-x
1-x
-x+x2
1-2x+x2
and replace in the result x2 by x we get 1-2x + x or 1-x. Wherefore (1_x)2 =
1-x.
The
most general mode of describing any class of things is to
particularize certain properties which its members do possess [A88.15] and
to particularize certain other properties which they do not possess. We are
now in a condition to express classes thus defined. Suppose that by x we
represent the class of things that are white and by y the class of things that
are square. Then we shall have the following derived classes.
1st.
xy
Things white and square
[2nd.]
x 1 - y
Things white and not square
[3rd.]
(1-x) y
Things not-white but square.
[4th.]
(1-x)(1-y)
Things neither white nor square.
To recapitulate what has now been said it appears
1st. That we reason chiefly by the aid of signs.
2nd. That Language as a system of signs is adequate to the expression of
our conceptions of things and of the relations which we perceive to exist
among the things conceived.
3rd. That things as respects our conceptions of them are presented to us
under various forms 1st. As individuals (John) 2nd. As simple classes (men)
3rd. As classes formed by the aggregation of other classes (men and women).

12
The Nature of Logic
A
4th. As classes formed by contemplating the individuals which belong to
more than one simple class (white horned cattle) and lastly formed by
considerations the very opposite of the above as (All men except Africans) etc.
4th. That the relations among things are expressed by Propositions and
that such propositions may be sufficiently defining the classes of things
spoken of [as to] be reduced to expressions of identity or equality.
5th. That when from one or more Propositions another Proposition is
deduced as an inference the process of deduction involves an act of
Reasoning.
6th. That the same signs are not always used in the same sense but have
reference to such individuals answering [A88.16] the description which they
convey as are found in the implied Universe of Discourse whether it be 1st.
the entire Universe of existing things or 2ndly. a part of that Universe or
3rdly. The range of our own imaginations. [A88.17]

Chapter II
Elementary Treatise on
Logic not mathematical
including philosophy of
mathematical reasoning
----------[Probably before 1849]----------
The object of Logic as a Science is to explain the laws of those mental
operations by which ordinary Reasoning is conducted. The design of Logic as
an Art is to exhibit the most useful general forms in which valid argument
may be expressed. These objects are perfectly distinct. We might possess an
exact knowledge of the ultimate laws of thought without caring to deduce
from them the rules of Logic as an Art. On the other hand we might collect by
observation a large number of lawful forms of argument, without possessing
any acquaintance with the ultimate laws to which as their origin they may
be referred.
I design in this treatise to speak of Logic chiefly as an Art, and for the
following reasons. First, although Logic has been regarded as a science by
different writers it has never assumed a really scientific form. As exhibited
in the writings of logicians, it consists of little more than a collection of
forms. Secondly Logic as a Science is a branch of the larger science of
Reasoning by Signs, another form of which is exhibited in ordinary
Mathematics. When the signs which the mind employs relate to things -
their attri- [A89.1] butes - and qualities, as do the words of ordinary
language, they constitute the basis of Logic. When they relate to the
affections of Number, Magnitude and Direction in Space they constitute the
basis of Mathematics. Of logic in the scientific form here described, and of
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

14
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
the more perfect Art founded upon it, I shall speak in a distinct work. What I
here mean to exhibit is so much of the rules and forms of Logic as can
conveniently be exhibited without any exact inquiry into first principles, and
more especially such of those rules and forms as may be of service in the
elementary mathematics.
I design however in doing this to lay down nothing that is inconsistent
with the principles of that more general Science of Reasoning of which
mention has been made above. I shall without scruple disregard those
technical forms and overstep those limitations which have [been] imposed
upon the Art of Logic by almost every writer from the days of Aristotle to the
present time without at the same time possessing any real foundation in
Nature.
Of Signs
In general we reason by the aid of signs. Words are the signs most
usually employed for this purpose. It was observed of an American lady who
was both deaf and dumb that she aided the processes of thought by means of
signs made by the motion of her fingers. 1
Of Propositions
A proposition is a sentence by which a declaration or [C 26.1] assertion is
made, whether absolutely or conditionally as Men are Mortal. If we
transgress the rules of Virtue we shall suffer the penalties of Vice.
A proposition is either true or false.
By a primary proposition I mean a sentence which affirms or predicates
something of something as when we say Peter is a man. Here it is affirmed of
Peter that he is a man. In this example Peter and a man [A89.2] are called
the terms of the proposition, the connecting word is which defines the
relation between them is called the copula.
Primary propositions may be distinguished according as they either
simply affirm the existence or non-existence of the subject or as they assert a
relation between two or more classes of things, or between two or more
individuals. The simplest kind of primary proposition is that which only
affirms the existence or non-existence of the subject as The rhinoceros exists.
There is no centaur. Respecting any individual or class of individuals this
judgment may be affirmed that that individual or class of individuals either
exists or does not exist. This is a necessary proposition.
Of the two terms of a proposition that which is affirmed of the other is
called the predicate, that term of which the predicate is affirmed is called the

II
Of the Quantity of Terms
15
subject. In the example first given Peter is the subject, and a man the
predicate.
Both terms of a proposition we shall indifferently call names whether
regarded in grammar as substantive or adjective. So any descriptive phrase
used as a term of a proposition may be regarded as a many worded name as,
They who are moderate in their expectation (subject) are (copula) less liable
to disappointment than others (predicate).
Sometimes the copula and the predicate are combined either in single
verb or otherwise, as They who sow the wind shall reap the whirlwind. This
example may be resolved as follows. They who sow the wind (subject) are
(copula) they who shall reap the whirlwind (predicate).
Of the Quantity of Terms
In any primary proposition each term expresses either 1st an individual
known by a proper name or 2ndly a class of individuals known by some
common name or description, or 3rdly a part of such a class whether that
[A89.3] part be a single individual of the class, or a number of individuals
contained in it.
In the proposition Peter is a man, Peter is a proper name applying to an
individual, a Man is a term applying to some one individual of a class
described by the general name man.
In the proposition Men are mortal, the subject Men denotes all the
individuals of a certain class of beings to each of [C 26.2] which the name men
is applicable. The predicate mortal here denotes some out of that entire class
of beings to which the term mortal is applicable. We do not by the proposition
All men are mortal imply that All men are all mortals. There may be, and
there are, other mortal beings than men. The complete form of expression
would be All men are some mortals.
In the proposition Some men are virtuous, the subject Some men denotes
a part of the general class Men. The predicate virtuous denotes some
individuals out of the class of virtuous.
A term is said to be universal when in the proposition in which it occurs,
it refers to all the individuals of the class to which either as a descriptive
name or as a mere appellative, it applies. If it refers only to a part of the class
[A89.4] it is said to be particular or indefinite. In the Proposition Peter is a
man, the subject Peter is universal, the predicate a man is particular. For
Peter is the proper name of an individual and it is of that individual Le. of all
that is expressed by the name Peter that the subject speaks. The predicate a
man is particular for it does not refer to all the individuals denoted by the
word man, but only to some one of them.

16
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
In all particular terms the word some is either expressed or understood,
and generally in such case it is expressed in the subject, and understood in
the predicate. Thus Some metals are heavy is equivalent to Some metals are
(some) heavy bodies the word some being evidently understood in the
predicate, while it is expressed in the subject. So the proposition All sheep
are animals is equivalent to All sheep are some animals.
When by the nature of the proposition a particular term is limited to an
individual, the word some is replaced by the indefinite article a or an which
is equivalent to some one. Thus to take our old illustration Peter is a man is
equivalent to Peter is some one man.
The extent of the meaning of terms considered [A89.5] as universal or
particular is called their quantity. All men is a term whose quantity is
universal, some men a term whose quantity is particular.
When the subject of a proposition is an individual known by a proper
name, the subject is said to be singular. It appears from what has gone before
that a singular term is universal.
Of the Quality of Terms
The human mind is so constituted that with the idea of any class of
things, is suggested the idea of its opposite. The idea of men suggest to us the
idea of beings which are not men. To every name and descriptive title a
contrary name is conceivable which in some cases already exists in our
language and is in all cases easy to be formed by the prefix of the negative
particle not to the name given. Thus "imperfect" is in common language the
contrary name to "perfect", while we might employ the name not-men, as the
contrary of men Le. as the representative of all beings who are not men.
[A89.6]
Two contrary terms will in this treatise be considered as opposed in
quality, the one being said to be affirmative [C 26.3] the other negative. Thus
men being a term of affirmative quality, not-men will be a term of negative
quality.
It is a matter of indifference whether we assume a given term or its
contrary to have the affirmative character. If men be taken as affirmative,
not-men will be negative, and if not-men be taken as affirmative, men will be
negative. But for obvious reasons I shall in this treatise consider any term as
negative to which the negative particle not is prefixed.
It will be observed that the classes expressed by two universal contrary
terms are mutually exclusive, Le. that no individual found in one of them
belongs also to the other; secondly that the two classes together make up the
Universe. Thus as all beings in the Universe are either men or not men, the
two classes All men and All not men will make up that universe.

II
Division
Division
17
Every class of beings admits of division into two subordinate classes to
which opposite or contrary names are applicable. Thus the class men may be
divided into civilized and not-civilized, men again into white and not-white
men. It may at first sight appear that this proposition is not true because we
are accustomed in the use of common lan- [A89.7] guage to the use of terms
or names which are not really contrary to each other in the sense here
understood. Between "civilized" and "uncivilized" we may interpose the term
"half-civilized." But we cannot interpose any term between civilised and
not-civilized. For a proposition being either true or false, the term civilized is
either applicable to any individual or it is not applicable. But to all examples
of the latter case the term not-civilized is by definition applicable.
The division of a class into contraries is called dichotomy and the power
of mentally performing this process is of primary importance in the
operations of logical inference and is the basis of the most marked distinction
between the laws of thought concerned in ordinary reasoning and the laws of
thought employed in the analytical operations of mathematics.
Any two or more classes into which a given class is resolved by division,
I shall term the constituents of that class. Thus if the class Men is divided
into Europeans and not-Europeans, then Europeans and not-Europeans will
be the respective constituents of the class men. Let a second element of
distinction be adopted in the term civilized and we [A89.8] shall have in the
whole four constituent classes viz.:
1. Civilized Europeans.
2. Civilized not-Europeans.
3. not-civilized Europeans.
4. not-civilized not-Europeans.
and these constituents together make up the class Men.
Whenever there exist relations among the elements of distinction which
are employed in the division of a class, the number of constitutents will be
diminished. For example, let us seek the division of triangles with reference
to the elements of distinction implied by the words equilateral and isosceles.
If those elements were quite unconnected we should have the [C26.4]
fourfold division.
1. Triangles equilateral and isosceles.
2. Triangles equilateral and not-isosceles.
3. Triangles isosceles but not equilateral.
4. Triangles neither isosceles nor equilateral.

18
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
But the second of the above constituents has no existence, since all
equilateral triangles are isosceles. The first third and fourth would therefore
alone remain.
From all which precedes it will appear that the [A89.91 characteristics of
a sound division are:
1st. That the parts should be constituents which secures:
1st. That they make up the given class.
2nd. That they are quite distinct from each other, no
member of one constituent being a member of another
in other words that the parts do not overlap.
2nd. That the constituents really exist without violating
any known or expressed relation among their
elements of distinction.
These distinctions in the terms of propositions with respect to quantity
as universal and particular and with respect to quality as affirmative and
negative being premised, we proceed in the next place to consider some
among the different varieties of propositions.
Of Some of the Varieties of Propositions
I shall not in this chapter discuss all the forms even of what I have
termed primary propositions. To do this would be impossible as their
varieties [A89.10] are really unlimited. I intend merely to examine those
propositions which arise from the combinations of that variety of terms
which has been exhibited in the two previous chapters, Le. of terms regarded
first as universal or particular secondly as affirmative or negative with
reference to some one attribute or element of distinction embodied in their
name.
And even upon this limited class of propositions the custom of language
imposes a certain further restriction. This is that the predicate is always
particular. We are allowed to employ the universal sign "All" before the
subject of a proposition but it is never either expressed or understood before
the predicate. Although it would be a true proposition to assert that All
equilateral triangles are all equiangular triangles, the conventions of
language forbid us to employ such a form, and compel us rather to express
the full extent of its meaning by the double system of propositions:
All equilateral triangles are equiangular.
All equiangular triangles are equilateral.
propositions which are perfectly distinct and in each of which the predicate is
particular. [A89.111

II
Of Some of the Varieties of Propositions
19
All the kinds of propositions with which we have to do are illustrated in
the following set of examples.
Subject affirmative
1st.
All men are mortal.
2nd. All men are not-perfect.
3rd. Some men are civilized.
4th.
Some animals are not horses. [C26.5]
Subject negative
5th.
All not-virtuous men are miserable.
6th. All not-true opinions are not-lasting.
7th.
Some not-virtuous men are rich.
8th. Some not-virtuous men are not-shunned.
I do not exhibit these as forms to be imitated in ordinary discourse, but
as forms to which such propositions in common language as are essentially of
the same kind may at once be reduced whatever elements we assume to
possess the affirmative character. It is usual indeed to confine the attention
to the four first forms but that view would be quite insufficient for our
purpose.
The conventional use of language assigns to the second and sixth
Propositions of the above system [A89.12] a different form. Instead of saying
All men are not-perfect we say, No Men are perfect, but the former is the
really philosophical form of the proposition. For it is not our intention to
speak of a class of beings called "No Men" and to assert of these that they are
perfect. On the contrary we really indicate of Men that they are not perfect -
that they are imperfect. So instead of saying All not-true opinions are not
lasting, ordinary language would substitute No opinions which are not true
are lasting. But here also the former is the more philosophical expression.*
Although the use of general symbolic forms in an introductory treatise is
on the whole to be avoided, yet it may not be undesirable to exhibit in this
manner the system of general propositions of which the above is a particular
illustration. Its symmetrical character will perhaps be thus better perceived.
Subject affirmative
1. All Xs are Ys
2. All Xs are not-Ys.
=No Xs are Ys.
3. Some Xs are Ys.
4. Some Xs are not-Ys.
Subject negative
1. All not-Xs are Ys.
2. All not-Xs are not Ys.
3. Some not-Xs are Ys.
4. Some not-Xs are not Ys.
* In Hebraic constructions this form is often employed, "All they that put their trust in
him shall not be confounded".

20
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
[A89.13] Here X and Y stand for general names. Thus if we give to X the
meaning Men and to Y the meaning mortal being, then the first form above
given would represent the proposition:
All men are mortal beings,
which is equivalent to:
All men are mortal.
Propositions
whose
subjects
are
universal are
called universal
Propositions, and Propositions whose subjects are particular are called
particular propositions.
In the preceding chapters we have been chiefly occupied with definitions.
In the following we proceed to the business of Reasoning or logical deduction.
I apply these terms to every instance in which from one or more given
propositions another is deduced which differing from them in form is true
[C26.6] if they are true. Anyone of the given propositions I shall call a
premiss and any of those deduced a conclusion. The process of deduction I
shall also term inference. [A89.14]
Of the Limitation of Propositions
By the limitation of a proposition is meant the deducing from it of some
proposition less general, as if from the proposition All men are imperfect, we
should infer that All good-men are imperfect, or that Some men are
imperfect. Such limitation is effected either by dividing the subject or by
reducing it from a general to a particular form.
In deducing from the proposition All men are imperfect, the more limited
proposition All good men are imperfect we divide the subject. The class Men
is resolvable by division into the two classes Good Men, and Men who are not
good, and whatever is predicated of the members of the entire class Men is
predicated of each member of its constituent division.
In deducing from the proposition All men are imperfect the proposition
Some men are imperfect we limit the subject by making it particular instead
of universal. This reduction may be referred to the principle already stated.
In fact Some men may be regarded as an indefinite constituent part of the
class Men, the principle of division being left [A89.15] unstated.
The proposition No men are infallible when expressed in the more
philosophical form All men are not-infallible i.e. All men are fallible is by
what precedes reducible to
Some men are fallible
by making the subject particular, and to

II
Of the Conversion of Propositions
21
All wise men are fallible
All not-wise men are fallible
by division of the subject.
Thus by dividing the subject of a proposition a series of less general
propositions is formed and it may be remarked that the aggregate of such
propositions formed on any definite principle of division will be together
equal to the proposition from which they are formed. Thus the two
propositions
All wise men are fallible
All not-wise men are fallible
are equivalent together to the proposition
All men are fallible.
The general forms of reduction by limitation are these
1st. All Ks are Ys. [A89.16]
Reduced to Some Ks are Ys.
2nd. No Xs are Ys (= All Ks are not-Ys).
Reduced to Some Ks are not-Ys.
Of the Conversion of Propositions
By the conversion of a proposition is meant the putting of the subject in
the place of the predicate, and of the predicate in the place of the subject with
such change in the quantity and quality of both those terms as will make the
resulting proposition a logical consequence of the given one. Such a
conversion is in the language of logicians said to be illative, Le. obtained by
inference.
There are really but two forms of illative conversion, one applying to
particular, the other to universal propositions.
If we take such a proposition as Some English men are poets, it is
obvious that we may from this at once infer that Some poets are Englishmen.
This [A89.17] is the simplest kind of illative conversion. In the example we
have chosen, both the subject and the predicate are particular and
affirmative: Some Englishmen, (some) poets; and in the converted
proposition they are particular and affirmative also - some poets, (some)
Englishmen. [C26.7] The only difference is that the some which is attached
to Englishmen in the one case, is attached to poets in the other in accordance
with that custom of language already adverted to which confines the
expression of the word Some to the subject of a proposition.

22
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
From the proposition "Some Englishmen are not brave men", we may
infer that "Some who are not brave men are Englishmen". This is another
example of the illative conversion of a particular proposition and it is here
also seen that the quantity and quality of both terms remain unchanged.
From such examples we may establish the following Rule.
Particular propositions may be converted without changing the quantity
or quality of either term.
Let it be observed that from the particular proposition Some Englishmen
are not brave, we cannot infer [A89.181 that Some brave men are not
English, although the proposition is unquestionably true. The student must
be careful to distinguish between propositions which are true in themselves
and conclusions which are correct by way of inference from their premises.
From the proposition that All men are mortal we may infer that All who
are not mortal are not men. This is an example of illative conversion. In the
original proposition the subject is universal affirmative, the predicate
particular affirmative, but in the result obtained by conversion the quantity
and quality of both the original terms are changed. Instead of (some) mortals
we have All not-mortals, and instead of All men we have (some) not-men, the
conversion in fact being
From,
To,
All men are mortal.
All not-mortal are not-men.
Thus the original predicate with quantity and quality both changed,
forms the new subject, and the original subject with quantity and quality
both changed forms the new predicate. [A89.191
Let us next take the universal proposition No men are perfect beings. We
may obviously infer from this that No perfect beings are men. Now the real
meaning of our original proposition is that
All men are not-perfect
and the real meaning of our conclusion is that
All perfect beings are not-men.
Here it is also seen that the quantity and quality of both the original
terms have been changed in the process of conversion.
From all which we may establish the following Rule.
A universal proposition is converted by changing the quantity and quality
of both the terms which it involves.
It is to be observed that without such change of the quantity and quality
of both terms, a universal proposition cannot logically be converted. From
the proposition All men are mortal, we cannot infer that All mortals are men.
So neither from the proposition, All equilateral triangles are equiangular can
we infer that All equiangular triangles are equilateral, although the latter
proposition expresses a familiar truth. [A89.201

II
Of Syllogism
23
Formal examples of the above rules are exhibited in the following
scheme. [C26.8]
Propositions
1st. Some Xs are Ys
2nd. Some Xs are not-Ys
3rd. All Xs are Ys.
4th. No Xs are Ys
Conversions
Some Ys are Xs.
Some not-Ys are Xs
All not-Ys are not-Xs
No Ys are Xs.
Note. In a proposition in which both terms are singular, and therefore
both universal, conversion takes place according to both rules above stated.
Thus from the proposition
Victoria is our queen
we infer both the conclusions.
Our queen is Victoria
Whoever is not our queen is not Victoria.
It may also be remarked that in many cases a proposition is transformed
both by limitation and conversion. Both these processes are employed in
deducing from the universal proposition All ores are minerals the particular
converse Some minerals are ores.
Of Syllogism
The nature of a syllogism will be best explained by a few familiar
examples.
If we combine the premises [A89.21]
All men are mortal
Peter is a man
we may from these at once draw the conclusion
Peter is mortal
and the premises and conclusion together constitute a syllogism.
In the above example, we notice that there are two terms in the premises
namely, Peter and mortal which reappear in the conclusion, and two terms
viz. All men and a man which do not make their appearance in the
conclusion. Let us agree to call the two former terms the extremes, and the
two latter terms the middle terms. It is seen that the extremes involve
different elements, the middle terms the same element.
A syllogism may then be characterized as follows
1st. It consists of three propositions viz.: two premises and a conclusion
drawn from them.

24
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
2nd. Each premiss involves two terms viz.: An extreme and a middle
term, the middle terms being such as to involve some common element and
then connect the premises together.
3rd. The conclusion connects the two extremes so changed if necessary in
their quantity and quality as to make it a logical consequence of the
premises.
Let us take as a second example the regular syllogism. [A89.22]
Premises
All fishes inhabit the water
Some animals which have scales do
not inhabit the water
Conclusion
Some animals which have scales are
not fishes.
In any such case as the above it is desirable first to resolve the verbal
part of each proposition into a copula and an ordinary term. Thus we may
write our syllogism as follows:
Premises
All fishes are inhabitants of the
water.
Some scaly animals are not inhabit-
ants of the water.
Conclusion
Some scaly animals are not
fishes. [C 26.9]
The middle terms are "inhabitants of the water" and "not inhabitants of
the water", both of which are particular, but while the former is affirmative
in quality, the latter is negative.
The extremes in the premises are "some scaly animals" (particular
affirmative) and "All fishes" (universal affirmative). The corresponding
extremes in the conclusion are "Some scaly animals" (particular affirmative)
some not fishes (particular negative). Here then while one extreme remains
unchanged in the conclusion, the other is changed both in quan- [A89.23] tity
and quality. In the syllogism first discussed both extremes were unchanged
in the conclusion.
The object then of a practical analysis of the syllogism is to be
determined.
1st. Under what conditions syllogistic inference is possible.
2ndly. How the quantity and the quality of the extremes will be
affected in the conclusion.
I say syllogistic inference in the above case because from any pair of
premises and indeed from any single premiss other inference is possible.
[C26.10]

II
Conditions and Rules of Syllogistic Inference
Conditions and Rules of Syllogistic Inference
25
It has been seen that in the premises of every syllogism there occur two
middle terms, which serve as connecting links between them. Now the
nature of the connexion which they establish will depend upon the question
whether those middle terms are of like quality or of unlike quality.
This will be evident from the following consideration. If the middle terms
are of like quality [as] All men, Some men, they relate to individuals of the
same class, and it is by the connexion which [A89.24] the extremes severally
bear to this common class that their mutual connection is determined. But if
the extremes are of unlike quality, they relate to individuals of contrary
classes so that there is no direct medium of comparison between the
extremes. In such cases it is only by conversion of one of the premises that
the required medium of comparison can be established. For it has been seen
that in the conversion of a universal proposition, the quantity and quality of
both its terms are changed. Hence if the middle terms are unlike, and one of
the premises is universal, we can by converting that premiss reduce the
middle terms to likeness of quality.
In what follows I shall speak of classes or parts of classes as equal when
the members of the one are members of the other. In this sense of the word
equal, as well as in its mathematical sense it is an evident axiom that Things
which are equal to the same thing are equal to each other.
Now if we take the syllogism
All men are mortal
Peter is a man
Therefore Peter is mortal.
we see that in the first premiss an equality is [A89.25] asserted between the
entire class All men and some members of the class mortal. In the second
premiss an equality is asserted between the individual Peter and an
individual member included in the former class All men. It follows hence
that there exists an equality between the individual Peter and a member of
the class mortal. In other words the two extremes being compared, the one
with an entire class All men, the other with a part of that class, it follows,
that they may be compared with each other. The rule of inference in this case
is that we equate the extremes Le. assert an equality in the sense above
explained between them.* [C26.11]
* The principle which that rule embodies is that whatever is asserted of a whole class is
asserted of any collection of individuals contained in that class.2

26
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
And the rule applies whenever the middle terms are of like quality and
one at least of them universal.
Let us in the next place suppose that the middle terms are of unlike
quality. Two conditions of inference then present themselves.
The first is when either extreme is universal. This condition is
exemplified in one of our previous syllogisms the premises of which are
All fishes are inhabitants of the water.
Some scaly animals are not inhabitants of water,
in which the extreme, All fishes, is universal. [A89.26]
If we convert the premiss in which that term occurs we have the
following pair of premises.
All animals which are not inhabitants of the water are not fishes.
Some scaly animals are not inhabitants of the water.
The two middle terms now are All not-inhabitants of the water, and
(Some) not inhabitants of the water, and as they are alike in quality, while
the former of them is universal, we have, on equating the extremes by the
previous rule:
Some scaly animals are not fishes.
In this way any example of the above kind may be treated. But the
conclusion will more readily be obtained by simply changing the quantity
and quality of one universal extreme and equating the result with the other
extreme.
The second condition of inference is when both middle terms are
universal. The following premises will serve as an example.
All who are good are deserving of solid esteem.
All who are not good are not truly wise.
Here the middle terms are unlike, and both are [A89.27] universal.
By the conversion of the first proposition our premises become
All who are not deserving of solid esteem are not good
All who are not good are not truly wise,
the middle terms of which are alike, and one of them is universal, whence by
equating extremes we have
All who are not deserving of esteem are not truly wise,
as our conclusion.
Suppose in the above case that instead of converting the first premiss,
we convert the second. The given propositions then are,
All who are good are deserving of solid esteem.
All who are truly wise are good.

II
Conditions and Rules of Syllogistic Inference
27
Example 1st.
Here the middle terms are alike, and the former of them is universal.
Hence equating extremes we get the conclusion:
All who are truly wise are deserving of solid esteem.
Now this conclusion is equivalent to the one before obtained, for the one
is in fact the conversion of the other.
Thus also may any similar pair of premises be treated. But the
conclusion will be more readily obtained by simply changing the quantity
and quality of either extreme, and equating the result with the other
extreme. We will now recapitulate the rules [A89.28] at which we have
arrived. [C 26.12]
1st. Case: The Middle terms of like quality.
Condition of Inference. One middle term universal.
Rule. Equate the extremes.
2nd. Case: The middle terms of unlike quality.
1st. Condition of Inference, one universal extreme.
Rule. Change the quantity and quality of that extreme and equate
the result with the other extreme.
2nd. Condition of Inference: Both middle terms universal.
Rule. Change the quantity and quality of either extreme, and equate
the result with the other extreme.
These are the ultimate and sufficient rules of syllogism, and they are the
only exact system of such rules that has been published.
It will be useful to apply these rules to some general forms.
All Ys are Xs
All Zs are Ys
This belongs to Case 1st. All Ys is the universal middle term. The
extremes equated give
All Zs are Xs.
as the conclusion. Note that the only restriction upon the order of the terms
in the conclusion is that a universal term if there be one must be made the
subject [A89.29] since the predicate is particular.
Example 2nd.
All Xs are Ys.
No Zs are Ys.
These premises are equivalent to
All Xs are Ys
All Zs are not-Ys
They belong to Case 2, and satisfy the first condition. The middle term is
particular affirmative in the first proposition, particular negative in the
second. Taking All Zs as the universal extreme, we have on changing its

28
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
Example 3rd.
quantity and quality Some not-Zs and this equated to the other extreme
gives
All Xs are (some) not-Zs
Or No Xs are Zs
as our conclusion. If we take All Xs as the universal extreme we get:
No Zs are Xs
as our conclusion. These results are equivalent by conversion.
All Ys are Xs.
All not-Ys are Zs
This belongs to Case 2 and satisfies the second condition. The extreme
Some Xs becomes on changing its quantity and quality All not-Xs whence we
have the conclusion.
All not-Xs are Zs [A89.30]
The other extreme similarly treated would lead us to the conclusion
All not-Zs are Xs
which is equivalent to the former one by conversion.
Example 4th.
which is equivalent to
Some Ys are not-Xs
No Zs are Ys.
Some Ys are not-Xs
All Zs are not-Ys.
This belongs to Case 2 and satisfies the first condition. The result is
Some not-Zs are not Xs [C26.13]
or its equivalent by conversion
Some not-Xs are not-Zs.
There are two forms of argument depending upon the syllogism of which
it remains to give an account. They are the enthymeme and the sorites.
The enthymeme is a syllogism of which one premiss is not expressed, but
understood or taken for granted as, Corn is scarce, Therefore its price is high,
the suppressed premiss being that commodities which are scarce secure a
high price.
A sorites is a series of premises in which the predicate of one is made the
subject of the next followed by a conclusion which connects the subject of the
first with the predicate of the last as,
The possession of genius confers power.

II
General Remarks on Primary Propositions
29
They who possess power have the means of benefiting their fellow
creatures.
They who have the means of benefiting their fellow
creatures
are
bound to exercise those means.
Therefore: They who possess genius are bound to exercise their
means for the benefit of their fellow creatures. [A89.31J
General Remarks on Primary Propositions
In Propositions which express relations among classes, we not only meet
with the varieties above described, but an infinite variety of others in the
expression of which the conjunctions and, either, or etc., are employed. The
water consists of lakes, rivers and seas. Plants are either trees or herbs etc.,
are examples of this kind. For the general treatment of such propositions it is
impossible to lay down any system of rules at all analogous to those which
have been exhibited above. They nevertheless constitute the objects of a true
science - a science which is mathematical in its forms and expressions and
which, setting out from a few elementary laws of thought, establishes
General Methods adequate to all the purposes of analysis and of inference.
The doctrines which have been established in the preceding pages do not
constitute any part of the foundations of that science but they are consistent
with it and were in fact for the most part derived from an interpretation of its
results.
Of Secondary Propositions
By secondary or as they might be termed reflex propositions, I mean
propositions which express a judgment with respect to other propositions,
and this they may do in two ways. Either they express a judgment upon some
single proposition by asserting its truth or its falsehood, or they express a
judgment respecting two or more propositions by asserting the existence of
some relation or dependence among them.
When we say It is true that virtue promotes happiness, It is not true that
utility is the ground of moral obligation we state propositions of the former
kind. When we say, If virtue promotes happiness, then self-interest confirms
the decisions of conscience, we state a proposition of the latter kind. We
express a relation between [A89.32] the primary propositions "Virtue
promotes happiness" and "Self-interest confirms the decisions of conscience."
[C26.14J
The distinction here noticed is of the same kind as that which was
adverted to in ( ). And indeed both the varieties and rules of secondary

30
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
propositions have an
exact correspondence with
those
of primary
propositions. The difference which exists is in the subjects of thought, not in
its formal laws. I do not however intend to pursue the analogy of its minuter
details here.
From what has preceded we may remark that every primary proposition
gives rise to two secondary propositions, the one asserting its truth, the other
asserting the falsehood of a proposition contrary to the given one. Thus the
proposition All men are mortal gives rise to the two reflex propositions It is
true that All men are mortal. It is false that Some men are not mortal. To
this branch of our subject we may therefore refer the necessary relations
which exist among primary propositions. By necessary relations I here
understood those relations which are necessitated by the laws of Thought.
In this sense the propositions All men are mortal. Some men are not
mortal are said to be contrary to each other. If we compare them we see
[A89.33] that their subjects differ in quantity and their predicates in quality.
And thus to all the propositions of the systems given in ( ), the following rule
may be applied.
From a given proposition to deduce its contradictory:
Rule. Change the quantity of the subject and the quality of the predicate.
Thus the contradictory of the proposition No men are perfect, would be
Some men are perfect, and the contradictory of the proposition Some men are
not selfish would be All men are selfish.
If we are ignorant respecting a given primary proposition whether it is
true or false, we can yet form of it this judgment, viz. that it is either true or
false. This is a necessary truth, and it is analogous to that necessary truth
established in ( ) that a thing either exists or does not exist.
Secondary propositions which relate to more than one primary one are
usually expressed by aid of the particle if or the particles either and or but
they in all cases admit of reduction to another form which will be noted
hereafter.
Propositions which are expressed by the particle [A89.34] if are
denominated conditional propositions.
Ex. If two straight lines intersect, the angles which are vertical to each
other will be equal. Here the proposition Two straight lines intersect is called
the antecedent, and the proposition The angles which are vertical to each
other will be equal is called the consequent.
A hypothetical proposition of the above kind is similar to a universal
primary proposition, and is converted in a similar manner. Ex. If the clouds
shall have broken, the sun will shine, is converted into If the sun shall not
shine, the clouds will not have broken.
In general let X and Y represent the antecedent and the consequent.
Then a given hypothetical proposition is of the form
If X is true Y is true

II
Of Secondary Propositions
31
and its conversion is of the form
IfY is not true X is not true. [C26.15]
The proposition Sometimes if X is true, Y is true might be termed a
particular hypothetical proposition, and like the particular [A89.35J
propositions already discussed, it may be converted without negativing
either of the terms, the converse being Sometimes if Y is true X is true.
Various forms of argument to which particular names have been given
are subjoined.
Constructive Hypothetical Syllogism
If X is true, Y is true. But X is true, Therefore Y is true.
Destructive Syllogism
If X is true, Y is true, But Y is false, Therefore X is false.
Disjunctive Syllogism
Either X is true or Y is true, but X is not true, therefore Y is true.
[A89.36 / C26.16J
Simple constructive Dilemma
If X is true Y is true and if Z is true Y is true
But either X is true or Z is true
Therefore Y is true.
This however is an exceedingly imperfect account even of those forms of
reasoning which it professes to examine. It has been observed that ultimate
laws of secondary propositions are in perfect analogy with those of primary
propositions. So likewise are the forms of Inference. To shew this in
syllogism: Let the antecedent and consequent X and Y be called the terms of
the proposition and let them be similarly affected with quantity and quality.
The four following forms will then be analogous to the four first forms of ( )3
If X is true Y is true
If X is true Y is not true
Sometimes if X is true Y is true
Sometimes if X is true Y is not true
the terms being respectively of the same quantity and quality in each of the
above as in the proposition with which it is compared. The forms of
hypothetical will be co-extensive with those of ordinary syllogism and the
rules will be the same in substance, with this difference only in expression
that instead of saying "equate the extremes" we must say write them as

32
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
[A90.I] antecedent and consequent, the universal term when there is one
becoming the antecedent and the word "sometimes" being expressed when
the antecedent is particular. Ex[ample]
If X is true Y is true
Sometimes if Z is true Y is not true
Here the middle terms are unlike and one extreme is universal.
Condition 2nd. Case 1. Changing the quantity and quality of that extreme
and connecting it with the other extreme, we have indifferently
Sometimes if Z is true, X is not true
Sometimes if X is not true Z is true
It is needless to multiply examples.
Conditional propositions can always be reduced to the disjunctive form
and conversely disjunctive propositions can always be reduced to the
conditional form.
From the conditional proposition If the sky is clear the sun shines we
may deduce the disjunctive proposition Either the sky is clear and the sun
shines, or the sky is not clear, or we may deduce the disjunctive proposition
Either the sky is clear, or the sky is not clear and the sun does not shine. And
from either of these (equivalent) disjunctive propositions we may infer the
conditional proposition from which they were derived.
Every secondary proposition whether disjunctive conditional, or of any
other form may be resolved into a set of denials or negations. Thus from any
of the three propositions which have been given above we may deduce the
negation It is not true that the sky is clear and the sun does not shine.
[A90.2]
These remarks are useful not only as shewing the relations which exist
among the different kinds of propositions, but also as indicating that our
power of conceiving of these kinds is not to be referred to distinctive faculties
of the mind or to distinct conditions of thought as it seems to be thought by
some modern writers.
Of the Demonstrations of Geometry
The great divisions of modern mathematical science are Geometry and
Analysis the latter being distinguished from the former not so much by the
subjects of which it treats as by the use which it makes of symbols.
The demonstrations of Geometry are a particular application of Logical
argument, to questions of space, magnitude and figure. As all reasoning
consists in the deduction of conclusions from premises so geometrical
reasoning consists in deducing geometrical relations from geometrical

II
Of the Demonstrations of Geometry
33
premises which premises are either truths established by previous reasoning
or they are the axioms and definitions upon which all geometry rests.
A definition explains what the thing defined is - and so distinguishes it
from all other things. Hence a definition must be convertible with the name
of the thing defined. Thus the definition of an isosceles triangle as a triangle
having two equal sides, serves to distinguish the isosceles triangle from all
other geometrical figures. And as that definition is applicable to no other
thing it follows that a triangle having two equal sides is an isosceles triangle.
The definition "a triangle having two equal sides" is therefore [A90.3)
convertible with the name "isosceles triangle".
In this way Geometry defines the different varieties of lines angles,
surfaces etc., with their mutual relation to each other as parallel,
perpendicular etc. Such definitions are properly nominal because they are in
reality definitions of the meaning of terms.
Axioms (6c~1C~)IJOITOI)4 are self-evident truths. We cannot fix our attention
upon the conceptions of geometry without perceiving that certain relations
are universally true independently of any process of argument. Such truths
are called first truths necessary truths or axioms - first truths because they
serve as the starting points of demonstration, necessary truths because the
mind recognizes them not only as true but as necessarily true, - axioms
because they are worthy of acceptance per se. That two straight lines cannot
intersect in more than one point is a truth of this nature. It requires no
demonstration but on the other hand serves as a basis upon which other
truths may be established.
The axiom that Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to
each other is an axiom of this kind. The mind cannot avoid perceiving its
truth but it does not derive that perception from contemplating a defmition.
It has been much disputed whether our knowledge of the axioms of
geometry is founded upon experience alone i.e. from observing that they are
true in every particular instance, or whether the observation of a single
instance awakes the perception of a truth already existing in the mind. This
question does not belong however either to Logic properly so called or to
geometry. [A90A)
Note: 5 Perhaps it may be true that all axioms are dependent upon laws
of thought and ought rather to be referred to the organic constitution of the
mind itself than to its outward conceptions. The proposition a+b = b+a in
arithmetic is a truth which has that [?] nature and so are the fundamental
laws of words as symbols upon which Logic as a science depends.
There is nothing unreasonable in the supposition that the mind as an
instrument may be subject to laws by which the character of its operations is
determined. Whatever truths then are immediate consequences of those
Laws will assume a character of necessity. This view is equally remote on the
one hand from the doctrine that there are relations among geometrical

34
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
figures independent of the existence of a perceiving and conscious mind and
on the other hand from the doctrine that the mind is furnished with a store
of necessary truths to the consciousness of which it only awakes as
experience furnishes occasion.
To exhibit this view more fully let us examine one or two distinct mental
operations and endeavour to ascertain the laws to which they are subject.
The adjective in ordinary language may be regarded as the sign of a
mental operation Let us consider the term. By men we understand all the
members of a certain class possessing given characteristics: animal life,
rationality, the male sex etc., by good men we understand a certain portion of
that class the members of which possess another characteristic defined by
the word "good". The adjective then in its actual use represents the operation
of selecting from a class all the members which possess a given character and
this operation is of such a nature that if it be [A90.5] repeated any number of
times, the effect is the same as if it be performed only once. The term good
good men is equivalent in meaning to good men. This may be considered as a
law of the operation in question.
Again we can by a certain mental operation pass from the idea of an
effect to the idea of a cause of that effect and this operation is subject to a law
of thought of which we find an expression in the formula:
Cause of Cause = Cause.
If A is the cause of Band B a cause of C then A is a cause of C. The above
formula may be regarded as expressing a law to which the mind is subjected
whenever it deals with the conceptions of causality.
Now to pass to the geometrical axiom more immediately under
consideration it may reasonably be conceived than whenever the mind has to
do with the conception of equality its operations may be subject to a law the
actual character and expression of which will be suggested to us by
experience. And such a law may I think be detected in the axiom: If A is
equal to Band B equal to C then A is equal to C. Perhaps the truth - If a line
A is parallel to Band B parallel to C then A is parallel to C may equally [be]
referred to a law of the mental conceptions.
It is characteristic of all truths of the above kind that they are made as
evident to us by a single instance as by a thousand and that when once seen
they are seen to be necessary and universal. It is not so with the laws of the
material Universe our knowledge of which rests upon innumerable
observations and as such can never be emancipated from the [A90.6]
conditions of probability - high as the measure of that probability may be.
May we not assume it as a definition of necessary truth that it is such truth
as has its origin in the laws of the mind itself? Is it not clearly in this sense
that the conclusions of deductive reasoning are said to be necessary
consequences of the premises? Necessary because the mind cannot abrogate

II
Of the Demonstrations of Geometry
35
the laws of its own constitution - cannot in fact change the conditions of its
own activity. [End ofnote.]5
The successive steps in the demonstrations of geometry are usually
syllogistic e.g. Euclid Prop. 1.6
All the radii of the same circle are equal.
But AB and AC are radii of the same circle.
Therefore AB and AC are equal.
and again in the same proposition.
Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to each other.
But AB and CB are equal to AC.
Therefore AB and CB are equal to each other.
The general form of such arguments is
All Ys are Xs
All Zs are Ys
All Zs are Xs.
All the conclusions of geometry exhibited in the form of propositions are
universal Le. they have universal subjects.
Ex. All triangles on the same base and between the same parallels are
equal. All right angled triangles have this property that the square of the
hypothenuse is equal to the squares of the base and perpendicular etc. The
general logical type of such proposition is
All Zs are Xs
of which the logical conversion is [A90.7]
All not-Xs are not-Zs.
But it very commonly happens in geometry that the proposition All Xs
are Zs which is called the converse of the proposition All Zs are Xs is also
true.
Thus the converse of Prop. 5 Bk. 1. The angles at the base of an isosceles
triangle are equal is established in Prop. 6 viz.: If the angles at the base of a
triangle are equal the opposite sides are equal. It does not however always
happen that the converse of a geometrical truth is equally true. It is true that
Similar polygons have their corresponding sides proportional. It is not
necessarily true that if the corresponding sides of two polygons are
proportional those polygons are similar.
The converse of a given proposition in geometry when true is usually
proved by an indirect demonstration called reductio ad absurdum. This
consists in assuming that the thing to be proved is not true and deducing
from that assumption some conclusion which is manifestly false. Whence it
follows that the thing to be proved is true.

36
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
This method of demonstration depends on the principle that a false
conclusion implies an error in the premises - a principle which is in fact
exemplified in the logical conversion of the proposition:
If X is true Y is true
into the proposition
If Y is not true X is not true.
in which X represents the supposed false premiss or assumption, Y the
supposed conclusion drawn from it.
Euclid sometimes employs the disjunctive form of argument [A90.B] e.g.
Prop. XIX Bk. 1. The line AC is either less equal to or greater than AB. But it
is not less than AB and it is not equal to AB. Therefore it is greater than AB.
And he often proves a general theorem by proving it in all the distinct
cases which are conceivable. Ex. Prop. XX Bk. 3. This form of inference is
called a perfect induction or an induction per enumerationem simplicem. But
it would be better to regard it as a species of deduction. The word induction
is in the present day applied to another and higher process of thought - the
discovery of universal truths from a limited number of examples by detecting
the general law of their connection.
Ofthe Foundations of Algebra
Algebra in its ordinary acceptation may be defined as a system of
reasoning carried on by signs and characterized by the following marks.
1st. The signs are of two kinds, viz.: [Firstly] those which represent
numbers and Secondly, those which represent the operations which we are
capable of performing upon numbers.
2ndly. The symbols which represent numbers are either particular as 2,
5, 20, etc., or general as a, b, x, etc. and in both cases they are subject to laws
of combination founded upon the laws of combination of the things signified.
3rdly. The signs by which operations are represented are [A90.9] subject
to laws upon the nature of those operations and these laws constitute the
axioms of the science.
Let us endeavour to illustrate these positions. Algebra then in its
ordinary acceptation is a science which relates to Number. If the numbers
are all known and particular and it is only required to perform upon them
certain definite operations according to a rule the science merges into
Arithmetic which is in fact a particular Algebra or rather a particular Art
founded upon the Science of Algebra. On the other hand if the symbols of
number are general and we either seek to perform operations upon these or
from given relations existing among them to deduce others even as in logic
we deduce conclusions from premises the science we employ is that of

II
Of the Foundations of Algebra
37
Algebra in the larger sense applied to it by Newton of a Universal
Arithmetic.7
In general, Algebra investigates relations and prescribes general rules.
Arithmetic makes particular applications of those rules.
We see in Arithmetic that 7x8 =8x7, 5x3 =3x5 etc. A single example of
this kind suggests to us the general principle that if two numbers are
multiplied together the order of multiplication is indifferent. Algebra
expresses this truth in the general theorem:
ab = ba
which exhibits in fact a law of combination of the symbols a and b equally
applicable whether a and b have integral or fractional values.
Other laws of combination for algebraic symbols are expressed in the
forms [A90.10]
a+b =b+a
a(b+c) =ab+ac
etc. And such elementary laws of the symbols are the foundations of the rules
of algebraic addition multiplication etc.
Similar in origin to these are the laws of signs
+ax-b =-ab
-ax-b =ab
Beside the above Algebra recognizes certain general axioms which are
common to it and Geometry such as If equals be added to equals the results
are equal. If equals be taken from equals the remainders are equal etc.
Perhaps these axioms may be generalized into the following "If equivalent
operations be performed on equal subjects the results are equal" and may be
considered as expressing a law of thought to which the mind is subject when
dealing with the relation of equality.
The operations of Addition and Subtraction may be considered as inverse
to each other - so likewise may the operations of Multiplication and Division.
A given subject produces a certain result; the inverse operation
performed upon the result reproduces either the subject as in Algebra or a
more general result comprising that subject - as in some other branches of
mathematics.
The very idea of an operation suggests the idea of an operation inverse to
itself Le. of an operation which has the power of undoing what the other has
done. A direct operation performed upon a given subject produces a given
result, the inverse operation performed upon that result reproduces either
the subject given as in Algebra or a more general result comprising that
subject as in the Integral Calculus. The operations of addition and
subtraction those also of multiplication [A90.11] and division may thus be
considered as mutually inverse.

38
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
Thus the elements which are expressed by the symbols of algebra are
1st. Numbers whether integral or fractional, whether particular or
general.
2nd. The direct operations of Addition and Multiplication and the
corresponding inverse ones.
3rd. The relation of equality.
And upon these simple elements variously combined the entire
superstructure of the science 8 is based.
The rules and methods of algebra once established, it becomes applicable
to all sciences in which either number or anything which is capable of being
represented by number is concerned. Thus in Geometry a given line being
assumed as the unit of linear measure, suppose 1 foot, any other lines may be
referred to it as a standard of length and the length of that line may be
represented by the number of times which it contains the length of the given
line. And a given surface as a square foot being assumed as the unit of
square measure the area of any other surface may in like manner be
represented by the number of times which it contains the given surface. And
similarly for solids. Now the elementary propositions of Geometry express
the relations among the lengths of lines or between the lengths of lines and
the areas of surfaces. Hence they imply relations between the numbers by
which the lengths of those lines or the areas of those surfaces are expressed,
a given length or a given area being the unit. Those relations may be
expressed in the language of algebra and new truths deduced from them by
the methods of algebra. This gives rise to the Cartesian method of the
"Application of Algebra to Geometry". [A90.121
In like manner in the Science of Mechanics a given weight being
assumed as a unit any other weight or pressure may be represented by the
number of units of weight which would be equivalent to it. So also may Force
which is the cause of Weight, and Velocity and Time and other elements be
expressed by symbols of Number.
And thus as the forces and energies of the material Universe, the effects
which they produce, and the conditions of Time and Space under which they
operate have been made subject to numerical evaluation, the sciences of
Algebra and Geometry are indispensable prerequisites to the study of its
phenomena.
Of the Differential Calculus
If the preceding chapter has been understood there will be little
difficulty in comprehending the fundamental principles of the DiffIerential]
and Int[egral] Calculus which are in fact an extension of ordinary Algebra,
that extension depending upon the introduction of a new Idea - the Idea of a
Limit.

II
Of the Differential Calculus
39
In ordinary algebra we have to do with fIxed quantities alone, Le. with
quantities whose values are fixed and constant whether we know what those
values are or not. In the differential calculus we regard them as varying and
in that variation passing from one magnitude to another through all
intermediate stages of magnitude.
Now this is in accordance with
observation. A stone falling by the force of gravity has at the instant of its
reaching the earth a certain velocity. But in order to reach that velocity it
has passed through all inferior stages of velocity.* [A90.13]
While the stone is falling the space which it has described continues to
increase. But it does not increase uniformly with the time. The rate at which
it is increasing at any instant is measured by its velocity at that instant, a
velocity which was less in any preceding instant however near and will be
greater in any subsequent instant however near.
Now the conception of this varying velocity or varying rate of increase
involves the idea of a Limit.
If the velocity were uniform we could express it numerically by
comparing any space described with the time in which it was described. Let
1 foot be the unit of space 1 second that of time and let a uniform velocity of
1 foot per second be called the unit of velocity and be represented by 1 then a
velocity of three feet per second would be represented by 3 a velocity of three
feet in two seconds by
~ and in general any velocity would be found by
dividing the number of feet described by the number of seconds in which it
was described. [A90.14]
But if the velocity were constantly increasing as in the case supposed
and we seek its value at a given instant we could not thus proceed. If we
measure the space described in the second which commences with the given
instant would give us too high a value since the velocity is constantly
increasing during that second. To measure the space described on any less
duration from the given and compare it with that duration would give a
nearer result because there would be less variation of velocity - but not an
accurate result because there would still be some such variation. However,
two things are clear, 1st., That by taking a duration sufficiently small we
may (supposing our measures accurate) arrive as nearly as we please to the
measure of the velocity sought, 2nd. That we can never by this process
actually reach it. In these two particulars is involved the true idea of a Limit
* Quantity in the mere arithmetical view may be considered as extending from 0 nothing
up toward infinity. In algebra we recognize it as extending also in an opposite direction
towards negative infinity. Thus if we imagine a straight line infinite in both directions
and fix upon a given point in it as a zero point or as the origin of measures of distance
then distances measured from it in the one direction may be called positive and those
measured in the opposite direction negative and the numbers by which they are
represented may in the one case be affected with the sign + and in the other with the
sign -.

40
Elementary Treatise on Logic not mathematical
A
which may be defined as a fixed value toward which some varying value may
be made to approach as nearly as we please, but which it cannot be made to
reach. A rate is a limit of a ratio. In the above example we have the following
elements, 1st. Time increasing uniformly. 2ndly. Space described increasing
with the time. 3rdly. Velocity which is the limit of the ratio which space
described bears to the time of its description reckoning from a given instant.
Now the Dift1erential] Calculus takes up and solves the general problem
of which the above is a particular example. Given the expressions of two
quantitie& one of which X increases uniformly and the other increases with it
but not necessarily in a uniform manner - required the expression of the
limit of the ratio which the increase of the latter bears to the increase
[A90.15] of the former reckoning from a given value of the former. By the
expression of the limit of the ratio I mean an expression from which exact
value of the limit of the ratio may in any particular instance be calculated.
That quantity whose variation is uniform as in the above case the
element of Time, is called the independent variable. That quantity whose
variation is referred to the variation of the former is said to be a function of
it. The Differential calculus enables us in every case to pass from the
function to the limit. This it does by a certain Operation. But in the very Idea
of an Operation is involved as we have seen the idea of an inverse operation.
To effect that inverse operation in the present instance is the business of the
Int[egral] Calculus. This it accomplishes in a large number of cases but not
in all. The process is called Integration.
The integral calculus proposes and in many cases resolves a yet higher
problem. Given any relations among limits to determine the corresponding
relations
among the functions.
This process
is termed
Solution of
Diffierential] Equations.
The integral calculus is the. great instrument of physicomathematical
investigation. The phenomena of the material Universe so far as they depend
on figure and motion are usually of that kind which is characterized by
continuous variations and they are moreover consequences of the laws of
mechanics. The direct knowledge which those laws afford to us is a
knowledge of the rate of change which is going on at a given instant. It is
therefore a knowledge of limits. To estimate the total effect of such changes
continued through a given time would require a knowledge of the functions
from which those [A90.16] limits are derived and that knowledge can only be
obtained through the agency of the Integral Calculus. Hence the extreme
importance of that Science 9 as an instrument both for the verification of
known laws and for the discovery of others.
Of the logical forms of reasoning which are exhibited almost exclusively
in the mathematics the following are the most deserving of notice.
It is sometimes required to prove a theorem which shall be true
whenever a certain quantity n which it involves shall be an integer or whole
number and the method of proof is usually of the following kind.

II
The Real Nature of Mathematical Analysis
41
1st. The theorem is proved to be true when n = 1. 2ndly. It is proved that
if the theorem is true when n is a given whole number, it will be true if n is
the next greater integer. Hence the theorem is true universally. For
according to the second principle established, if it is true when n is 1 it will
be true when n is 2 and if it is true when n is 2 it is true when n is 3 and so
on ad infinitum. This species of argument may be termed a continued sorites.
The real nature of mathematical analysis
That Geometry is nothing more than an application of ordinary
reasoning to the particular subjects of which it treats is sufficiently manifest.
In Algebra however and in all those applications of analysis in which
symbols are made use of, another element is introduced the nature of which
it remains to investigate.
We have seen that our conceptions of number and magnitude are subject
to certain fundamental and necessary laws. If we
represent those
conceptions by symbols our symbols must be made subject to the same laws.
In other words our language must be [A90.17] so constructed as to represent
in its laws the laws of our conceptions as well as in its symbols the
conceptions themselves.
Further we represent by the signs of addition, multiplication, etc., those
operations to which the things we conceive of are subject, and by the sign of
equality the relations which they may be supposed to bear to each other. This
being done we possess a language which is in every respect an image of
thought, the subjects of thought are represented by its symbols, the
operations of thought by its signs and the laws of thought by its laws. All the
operations of that language will consist in the substitution of expressions for
equivalent expressions, the equivalence being determined by the laws above
referred to. Grant that the data of a given problem are accurately
represented by that language. Whatever conclusion then its lawful
operations may conduct us to, will though merely formal in itself if it admit
of interpretation represent a conclusion true in the subject. I say if it admit of
interpretation because it is not true in thought that every operation can be
performed upon every subject but it is possible in language to represent any
operation as performed upon any subject, the laws which that operation
obeys when possible in thought being still observed.
We may distinguish in any given example of symbolic reasoning the
following elements.
1st. The data of the question considered as relations among things.
These we may term the real premises.
2nd. The symbolical equations by which those relations are expressed.
These we may call the symbolic premises. [A90.18]

Part B
The Philosophical
Interpretation of
a Theory of Logic

Chapter III
[Extracts from a notebook]
-------[Probably between 1849 and 1850]-------
Miscellaneous Observations on Logic
It would perhaps be better to exclude the Baconian induction from
formal logic & to call the "perfect induction" as the "proof by enumeration". It
indeed strictly belongs to the deductive logic by which I mean that logic
which deduces certain conclusions from premises.
The Baconian induction may be regarded as leading to material
consequences -
the common logic is formal [N.l]
*
*
*
The ideas which are suggested by the purposes of thought are the ideas
of Succession of Distribution of Equality. The subjects of thought are things,
or states of things or in other words things or conditions. We contemplate
either objects in which case we assert relations existing among [N.7v] them
or we contemplate the cases in which such conditions are fulfilled and affirm
so to speak relations among those relations. The former case is that of
categorical assertion the latter that of hypothetical or disjunctive assertion.
[N.8]
*
*
*
The laws x(y+z) =xy +yz and xy=yx are the only laws of algebraic symbols
devoid from the conception of quantity. The law xffixn=xffi+n merely implies
that if the results of the operation x be performed n times, and then m times
upon the result, the final result is the same as if it were employed m+n
times. In full it merely expresses a law of number, i.e. of the number which
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

III
Miscellaneous Observations on Logic
43
expresses how often an operation is performed and indicates that that
number may be considered as a whole m+n, and resolved into parts. Hence
the law x mxn=xm+n is a law quite independent of the nature of the operation
denoted by x. It is for example true in the Differential Calculus that
(~)m(~)n=(d)m+n
dx
dx
ax
.
To the above' it would seem that we ought to add the law whose
expression is
x+y=y+x.
[N.8v]
*
*
*
Equal inverse operations of division give indefinite results which are
equal on the proper determination of the indefinite function. [N.9]
*
*
*
If we had a problem to solve relative to some particular numbers such as
10, 20, 30, and could not conceive of others - we might investigate the laws to
which 102030 are subject and employ general symbols subject to these laws
finally interpreting the result - the intermediate steps being uninterpretable
for these numbers. We interpolate for other values of the general symbols.
[N.10v]
In fact we may employ signs to represent particular conceptions
determine [how] the laws of those signs operate in accordance with these
laws so as to pass through forms quite uninterpretable with reference to the
original conception but finally obtaining a result which is thus interpretable
and rely[ing] upon that interpretation as correct.
Here the dominion of the laws is more general than the particular
operations in which they are first observed to prevail. [N.ll]
*
*
*
In applying the method of indeterminate multipliers in the calculus of
Logic we pass through uninterpretable forms to forms finally interpretable
through development. Number is introduced in the Constant multiplier.
[N.llv]
There is an important distinction between the interpretation of the
symbols in any proposed form of analysis and the forms under which these
symbols enter into the analytical expression. There seems to be no limit
theoretically to the former but the latter are apparently fixed and are the
same for all symbols.

44
[Extracts from a notebook]
A
Suppose x, y, z to represent any operations we can then only combine
them mentally by distribution or succession, and even some of these modes
may give uninterpretable results. We can [N.l1v] conceive of such forms as
(x+y)l
xyl
xx
and can in various instances interpret them and determine the laws of com-
bination. But the very laws of combination have reference to special forms.
An operation like an event is hypothetical, may be regarded either as produc-
ing its effect coordinately with some other operation -
or in a determinate
succession with reference to that operation or with reference to itself by rep-
etition.
From this repetition we got
xxx or x3
&c
whence we have the idea of number. Or we have
x+x = 2x,
x+x+x=3x
&c
whence also the idea of number. In the latter case it must be supposed that
the xl in
xl+xl+xl+
&c
refer to different or mutually exclusive entities so that we may have the pos-
sibility of aggregation.
We can also conceive of the existence and investigate the nature of an
operation which being performed n times may produce the same effect as the
operation x performed [N.12] m times and thus we get xm/n. And we can
conceive of an operation the result of which being aggregated n times shall
give the same result as the operation x aggregated m times, i.e. of 'ifx and
from these considered as single operations we have by the principle of
aggregation already stated
ax(l+bx~+cxY,
abc a~y being integral or fractional.
It is clear from the above that the idea of number is introduced by the
repetition of an operation as in successive periods of duration. It is equally
introduced by the consideration of individuals of the same kind as defined by
a common name simultaneously existing.
Both the system of elective symbols and the system of numerical
magnitude set out from the same [N.12v] point - the consideration of the
whole or unity. In the case of magnitude we are led to contemplate different
wholes without speculating on the constitution of anyone - in the system of
elective symbols we have but a single whole, the Universe whether it be the
actual Universe or some portion of it to which the discourse is limited and we
define more or less its constitution by specifying the classes which enter into
it.

III
Miscellaneous Observations on Logic
45
A great distinction between the system of elective symbols and that of
quantity is that in the former the equation may relate to several distinct
classes of things included in the universe 1 - in the former [latter] we only
relate to one description of thing viz. the unit itself to which all the
numerical coefficients are supposed to apply.
In the mathematics of quantity we proceed by the combination or
repetition of the unit. In the mathematics of Logic we proceed by the analysis
of the Unit.
The analysis of the Unit is effected by the combination or repetition of
operations and hence regarding [N.13] one of these operations as a whole we
have quantity introduced into the elective equation.
The language of quantitative mathematics is independent of the
particular nature of the unit. The language of analysis in general is therefore
independent in its forms of the particular nature of the operation
represented by the operating symbol.
A good example of the real nature of an elective symbol is afforded by the
discontinuous integrals which are employed as multipliers in the calculation
of the values of definite multiple integrals according to the method of M.
Dirichlet.2 For these multipliers are equal to unity for certain points in space
& to 0 for others. The product of two such multipliers would therefore
represent all the points in space which are common to the representations of
each. [N.13v]
Of Inverse Operations
It has been remarked that beside considering the results of direct
operations we can propose to determine the nature of a subject upon which
the performance of a given known operation shall produce a given known
result.
It would appear that question is in its very nature indefinite. If we
obtain a solution we cannot a priori prove that it is the only one -
only by
considerations proper to the cases. It is like the inquiry into cause. If a
particular state of things as cause produces a particular effect we cannot
from this alone be sure that there exists no other state of things which will
produce the same effect. [N.14]
*
*
*

46
[Extracts from a notebook]
Introduction
A
Relation of this work to the Mathematical Analysis of Logic exhibited in
the history of my investigations. Its principles the same. But that work
founded upon the plan of the common Logics. Its insufficiency for the
examination of complex arguments. The general inutility of technical forms.
Attempt to arrive at a general method upon the principles previously arrived
at. The present work the result of that inquiry.
When completed this work will consist of two parts the science of
necessary and the science of probable inference. The present work confined
to the former subject which serves as an essential preliminary to the latter.
Analysis of the work according to its chapters
1st The nature of signs in general. The analysis of the elementary signs
of reasoning with their laws.
2nd The division of Propositions into primary and secondary - the
expression of the former. [N.15]
3rd The Rules of Elimination Solution and Development.
4th Their application 1st to the analysis of definition 2nd to general
reasoning.
The expression of Secondary Propositions. Their analogy in rule and
expression with primary propositions. Nature of the inferences to which they
lead.
Uses of this inquiry in a speculative point of view.
As throwing light on the laws of the human mind, on the question on
Human Liberty etc. As illustrating the progress of ancient philosophy and
metaphysics etc.
Uses in a practical theory of view.
As affording a general method of the correctness of any process of
reasoning.
Hence its utility extends to all sciences which proceed from exact
definitions and general principles. Conclusions are drawn by common
reasoning. [N.15, verso]
Political Economy Theology Natural History Law and Morals? are
examples of this kind.
In fact there are two processes in every true science. One is the discovery
of true principles, the other the deduction from them of correct conclusions.
The former the more difficult and more important task. The latter however
equally necessary. Its importance to be judged of by this consideration.
Suppose that we could for ever banish false vague and inconclusive
reasoning from the discussion of social moral and other questions. Would not

III
Introduction
47
those sciences receive a vast benefit [?] Would it not become the main
business of readers to inquire into the truth of the premises and when it was
seen how small is the number of these general principles (out of the circle of
the confessedly exact sciences) upon which an absolute dependence can be
placed, it might tend somewhat to promote peace and charity in the world.
To this end it would contribute much if men considered that while
probabilities are [N.16] in most instances a sufficient guide of conduct and of
action - they are not sufficient to warrant us in uncharitable condemnation
of those who differ from us. [N.16, verso]
*
*
*
Of signs
3
1. Language is not only a medium for the expression of Thought but also
an instrument of the Reason.
2. Its elements are signs subject to laws.
3. A sign is an arbitrary mark having a fixed interpretation &
susceptible of combination [N.17] with other signs in subjection to definite
laws.
4. 1st Arbitrary. Therefore a sign may be either a notion or a word, or a
letter. 2nd fixed. Therefore it must always be used in the same sense
throughout the discourse. 3rd susceptible of combination according to
definite laws. A combination of signs may be replaced by a single sign, or ... 4.
Signs are thus susceptible of combination in so many ways that it becomes
important to inquire where are really those elements and signs of Language
which are essential to & sufficient for all the purposes of Reasoning. They
are
5. 1st Signs expressive of a name quality or circumstance. These have
contraries expressed by not and are subject to the commutative law.
6. 2nd Signs which relate to the mental operation of dividing a whole
into its parts or aggregating parts into a whole.
Subject to the law of distribution.
7. 3rd Signs expressive of the substantive & propositional relation
implied by is or are.
8. Law of transposition. [N.17v]
9. More [?] particular examination of the analogy between the literal
symbols above and the adjective.
The adjective in common discourse elective as well as attributive. Sole
difference that the literal symbol when standing bare or alone becomes a
substantive or that the word things is always understood, those things being
confined to the Universe of discourse. [on N.18]

48
[Extracts from a notebook]
A
10. Other signs are either subsidiary or resolvable into the above or they
have an analogous meaning and are subject to the same law.
11. Thus the prepositions are subsidiary to the purpose of expressing
quality or circumstance. Verbs are resolvable into the substantive verb & an
element expressive of circumstance. The conjunctions if, either, or &c are
used in the expression of relations among propositions and their relations. It
will in the end be seen as analogous to those which have been considered as
expressible by signs subject to the same laws.
12. The laws above assigned for the fundamental signs of reasoning are
identical with the laws of the signs of quantity in Algebra. [N.18J

Chapter IV
Prolegomena
----------- [La te r th an 1854]-----------
1. Writers on Logic may be divided into two great classes as the first
consisting of those who regard all Logic as having no other ultimate object
than Reasoning and who contemplate all reasoning as typified in the
Syllogism, the second consisting of those who recognize the independent
value of the study of the intellectual operations of Conception and Judgment
and who endeavour to refer the Laws of Universal Logic including therein
the syllogism to certain primary laws as principles of thought e.g. the
principles of identity, contradiction excluded middle and sufficient reason.
2. The consent which binds together the members of the first of the above
classes is tolerably complete. The theory of the all-sufficiency of the syllogism
is a principle of union which has the great advantage of being easily
intelligible and of being one. It does not harass the mind with conflicting
claims.
3. The consent however which exists among the members of the latter of
the above classes is very imperfect. Some make no mention of the principle of
sufficient reason, but regard all Logic as based on the principles of identity,
contradiction and excluded middle. Some again regard the principles of
identity and contradiction as one. Other differences exist e.g. as to the import
of the proposition.
4. As the principles of identity and excluded middle [A94.1l in which at
least the members of the second class agree are true principles and are
moreover either first principles or as consciousness informs us lie close to the
very ground of the possibility of thought (it matters not here that they have
been regarded by some as metaphysical and not logical and by others have
been considered frivolous and trifling). A theory of Logic which does not both
recognise them and give to them a very important place must be a very
imperfect theory. It does not suffice that their existence should be casually
noticed.
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

52
Prolegomena
B
5. On the other hand it is very evident that the principles of identity,
contradiction and excluded middle are rather principles which relate to
conception and to judgment - to the power by which [we] conceive of things
as existing and as existing in relation expressible by propositions - than to
reasoning. To the latter they seem so belong only or chiefly in an implicit
manner inasmuch as reasoning presupposes conception and judgment as the
sources from which the materials upon which it operates are derived.
6. Even if to the above mentioned principles of identity contradiction and
excluded middle we add the principle of sufficient reason we are still far from
possessing an adequate basis for the Science of Logic. For to say that no
proposition must be accepted as true no conclusion admitted as valid except
upon sufficient grounds (and such is the form in which the connection of the
principle of sufficient reason with Logic is usually expressed - indeed I do
not know of any other form in which it has ever been expressed) affords no
satisfaction to the enquirer who demands what are the grounds in question.
The principle of sufficient reason has no more special relation [A94.2] to the
laws of inference than has the principle of universal causation to the laws of
any of the physical sciences. It furnishes the ground upon which we may
affirm our right to enquire what the laws of logical inference are - it does not
anticipate or forestate the results of that enquiry.
7. Accordingly it may be remarked that they who perceiving the
insufficiency of the principles of contradiction, identity and excluded middle
have proposed to supply the defect by the principle of sufficient reason have
never shown or even attempted to show how the acknowledged rules of
syllogism are to be deduced from that principle. Still less have they
attempted to evolve out of that principle whether simply or in combination
with the other principles above referred to any system of general rules and
methods applicable to all logical inference whatever.
8. Nor again does it appear that even if we make abstraction of all those
laws of thought which have a primary reference to conception and judgment
and confine ourselves as far as possible to the consideration of the process of
inference alone that anyone has shewn [that] a sufficient and complete
account of that process is contained in the laws of syllogism. It has indeed
been affirmed with endless iteration that syllogism is the one universal type
of all valid inference, but no proof of that assertion has been offered. The
difficulty of reconciling with that assertion the cases of what is termed
"immediate inference" has been felt and more extended examination would
have shewn that this is but one of the difficulties with which the theory of the
sufficiency of the syllogism has [A94.3] to contend.
9. Although logic when reviewed in relation to any other science occupies
a position of priority and of predominance we are not exempted in the study
of it from those conditions to which we are subject in all other investigations,
which have truth for their object. Facts of external observation are indeed
replaced by facts of consciousness but we are still bound to attend to them as

IV
Prolegomena
53
facts. We must not frame theories which either contradict them or neglect
them. For instance the enquiry into the distinct operations of thought is
entirely based upon an appeal to consciousness. We could never have
affirmed a priori that thought is resolvable into the three operations of
Conception, Judgment and Reasoning. But having established this fact by
the direct testimony of consciousness as manifested in individual acts of
thought, we must henceforth respect it as a fact. So too if further analysis of
the facts of consciousness should show that any of the above operations as
Conception is resolvable into other operations distinct in species but
generically agreeing we are bound to respect that analysis and the facts to
which it leads in our theories and systems.
10. And it concerns us not only to analyze and to classify the operations
of thought, but also to determine their laws. The former object howsoever
completely attained can only constitute the Natural History of Thought - the
latter is indispensable to its Philosophy.
11. As every law not only colligates but arranges many facts, so does
every theory which has any real foundation in [A94.4] the nature of things
bring into some harmonious connection and subordination many laws. All
science tends toward unity. Were it otherwise we should be lost in the
multiplicity even of laws and relations. And thus in the science of the
intellectual operations where while some recognise only the one principle of
the dictum of Aristotle as governing every form of inference others have
discovered in each distinct form of argument the embodiment of a distinct
principle there is at least the presumption of analogy that some system of
primary laws not less truly partaking of the character of unity than the one,
and wider in the compass of its relations than the others may exist.
12. But dismissing all considerations of analogy we possess a negative
test of the completeness of any account of laws of thought professedly based
upon the testimony of consciousness in the completeness of the system of
methods and processes into which the supposed laws are capable of being
developed. For if there exist any valid processes of logical inference which are
not included in the list of their consequences (since methods and processes
are truly the consequences of laws and do not spring up arbitrarily into
existence) we may certainly conclude that the system of laws in question is
imperfect.
13. And on the very same ground viz.: that methods and processes do not
spring up arbitrarily into existence there is a strong presumption that where
a system of methods is as such complete Le. where it accomplishes all the
objects which can be demanded of it, there is I say in such case a presumption
that the basis upon which it rests is not merely empirical or analogical.
[A94.5]
14. The conclusion to which these observations tend is that in the
attempt to construct the Science of Logic we must seek 1st. to distinguish the
several operations of thought and determine their laws, consciousness here

54
Prolegomena
B
taking the place of experience. 2ndly. to construct upon the basis thus
obtained the general methods and processes of the science. 3rdly. To
ascertain whether there exist any valid processes of thought (consciousness
being again the seat of appeal as to their validity) which are not included
under the general methods and processes above referred to. [A94.6]
Results of the Analysis of Conception
1. The analysis of Conception may be resolved into two distinct portions:
1st. That which relates to the primary genesis and to the nature of a
conception e.g. to the mode in which from our experience of individual men
we arrive at the concept expressed by the term "men" and to the import of
that term 2ndly, That which relates to the combination of concepts already
existing as elements of thought e.g. to the operation by which from the given
concepts gold and mountain we form the concept golden mountain.
2. It may be doubted whether the first of the above processes viz. the
primary genesis of concepts from the presentations of the senses or of
experience falls within the domain of formal Logic. The question is in some
degree parallel to the question whether the origin of our conceptions of
Number falls within the province of Arithmetic as a science. Perhaps the
proper answer would be that the enquiry into the genesis alike of those
concepts which are expressed by general terms in Logic and of the concepts of
Number in Arithmetic belongs to an earlier stage of psychology than either
Logic or Arithmetic but [are] so allied with those which follow it that its
neglect must give a character not indeed of imperfection but of isolation and
also of technical formality to the study of them.
3. All that need here be said of the genesis of logical concepts is that they
originate in certain prior acts of the understanding following in an orderly
sequence viz.: 1st. the direct presentation of the senses or of experience
2ndly. comparison by which we note the particulars in which different
[A94.7] individuals agree or differ 3rdly, generalization by which those
which agree in certain selected particulars are contemplated by the mind
under a certain mental type common to them all and which mental type may
be represented by an external sign - a notion - a word - a symbol. The
mental type thus capable of association with an external sign is what is
termed in Logic a concept - it is that which corresponds within to the sign
without. It is to be observed that a concept is not an abstract idea in the
sense in which that term is commonly employed. It does not represent an
abstract or ideal entity possessing only the essential qualities of the class of
things represented to the exclusion of all other qualities. In its most definite
form it is the mental representation of a particular individual but with the
convention that it is to stand for any individual of the class. It is a specimen
understood as a type. It is not however requisite that it should resemble an

IV
Results of the Analysis of Conception
55
individual at all. That which is essential to the office of the concept in
thought is that and only that which is essential to the sign in language, viz.
that it should have a fIxed association (fIxed only however by a convention of
the understanding) with the individuals for which it stands, and should in
virtue of that association represent them in thought.
4. As to the second part of the analysis of conception viz. that which
relates to the combination of conceptions already given the following results
are very generally accepted viz.: 1st. that we are able to conceive of things
under two wholly distinct relations - the relation of whole and part and the
relation ofsubject and quality and that these relations are the basis ofthe two
great logical processes connected with [A94.8l conception viz. division and
definition.
The relation
of whole and part is exemplified when we
contemplate any collection of things as formed of parts which by simple
aggregation or putting together form that whole just as we may conceive of
the sun, the primary, the secondary planets etc., as comprising the solar
system omitting from our idea of the solar system any notion [ofthel physical
relations of those parts.
The relation of subject and quality is exemplifIed when we contemplate
any subject of thought as possessing different qualities by anyone of which it
might be described but by the combination alone of which it can be defined.
e.g. Man may be described as rational or as an animal but he is defined as
rational animal.
It is very manifest that the mode in which the conceptions implied by the
terms rational and animal are combined in thought in order to form the
concept man is different in kind from that by which suns, planets etc., are
put together to form the concept solar system. And this difference is
recognised
in the construction of language.
We usually employ the
conjunction and to express that aggregation by which parts are simply
collected into a whole and thus we say the sun and the planets etc., are the
solar system. No conjunction is employed or if one is employed it is only
employed by way of analogy to connect together concepts which stand in the
relation of subject and quality. We say Rational animal - not rational and
animal - is man.
The analogical employment of the conjunction is exhibited in such
expressions as "wise and good man". That it is only analogical will appear
from the fact that we may omit the [A94.9l conjunction without impairing
the sense. "Wise good man" is the same as "Wise and good man". The And is
in fact wholly superfluous.
As to the laws of division and defInition it is posited
1st. That the parts of a division must be mutually exclusive and must
together make up the whole.
2ndly. That in definition we cannot combine together a concept and its
contradictory e.g. we cannot apply the epithets rational and not-rational to

56
Prolegomena
B
the same individual. This is the formal statement of the principle of
contradiction.
Thus, to recapitulate what has been said, the received analysis of
Conception consists of two parts. The first part explains in a manner to
which there is not much to be added the genesis of conceptions from the
presentations of the senses. The second part recognises in conceptions
actually formed the two relations of whole and part of subject and quality.
The former relation it exemplifies in the process of division which it
contemplates as subject to two laws viz.: 1st. that the parts must be exclusive
2ndly. that they must together constitute the whole. The latter relation it
exemplifies in the process of definition which it contemplates as subject only
to the "principle of contradiction".
The above is a sufficient summary of logical doctrines on the subject of
conception - for although the principle of excluded middle is sometimes
regarded as regulating that process it belongs properly speaking to the
analysis of judgment.
The first observation which presents itself in considering the above
scheme is that neither of the processes of division and definition as above
described is necessarily a simple [A94.10] process. Each is composed of a
more elementary character. Thus division involves an act of judgment in
addition to acts of conception. To conceive of a whole belongs to conception, to
conceive of parts aggregated together also belongs to the faculty of
conception, but to realise mentally the equivalence of these two products of
conception belongs to judgment. Its outward expression is a proposition e.g.
the sun and the planets are the solar system. Similar observations may be
applied to definition.
Accepting however that limitation which applies the term division to the
operation by which we can see of parts aggregated together even this
operation is generally resolvable into distinct steps or stages each consisting
in the addition of one new part to the aggregate of those which have been
connected before. When we say "the sun, the planets and the comets" the
actual processes which take place in the mind of a person to whom the
language is addressed are 1st He forms the conception of the sun, 2ndly, he
connects with this concept that of the planets so as to form the whole
expressed by sun and planets 3rdly, with the whole thus formed he connects
the concept comets so as to form the larger whole "sun planets and comets".
Here beside that primary operation by which a sign calls up in the mind the
conception of the things signified we have two other operations each of which
consists in the connection or to speak by way of analogy the aggregation of
two concepts in thought so as to form a whole. We cannot resolve the latter
operation into anything more elementary.
This operation of aggregating parts into a whole suggests another
operation which is properly its inverse viz. the [A94.11] operation by which

IV
Results of the Analysis of Conception
57
from the concept of a whole we by removal or separation of the concept of a
component part arrive at the conception of the remaining part.
It is plain that the operation just described is inverse to the one before
considered. As from the conception of [the] sun, we by addition if we may so
speak of the conception planets arrive at the aggregate conception solar
system so from that aggregate conception solar system by "subtracting" if we
may so speak the conception planets arrive at the conception "sun". Here the
second operation exactly undoes what the former operation has done and
brings the mind back to that state from which it set out. And this is the true
idea and definition of an inverse operation.
Although the inverse operation just described is suggested by the prior
operation of addition to which it stands in the relation of an inverse, its
existence does not depend upon that association. It is intelligible in itself. We
can directly perform that operation which consists in the removal or
subtraction of the conception of a part from the conception of the whole in
which that part is involved. And it may be added that the symbol or verbal
equivalent of this operation forms an element of ordinary speech. The word
except when employed as a preposition 1 not as an adverbial conjunction
expresses the operation in question.
Again the process of definition is not usually a simple process. Setting
aside the act of judgment which it involves it consists of one or more distinct
stages or steps each of which involves a mental operation. If we define "man"
as animal rationale then beside that operation of judgment which [A94.12]
pronounces the equivalence of the two concepts "men" and "animal rationale"
the formation of the concept "animal rationale" implies a selecting out of the
class "animal" all those individuals which possess the attribute "rationale"
and fixing the attention upon those selected. If the male individual of the
race should be defined as animal rationale barbatum, in the formation of this
complex concept two distinct operations of the above character will be
involved viz.: 1st. that by which from the class animal we select and fix the
attention upon the individuals possessing the quality rationale. 2ndly. that
by which from the class whose concept is thus formed we select those
individuals which possess the further quality barbatum. And such processes
may in the more complex examples of definition be indefinitely repeated.
The operation which has just been described is not represented like the
two former ones by a distinct symbol or verbal equivalent in language - but
it is represented by certain well-marked constructions - e.g. the immediate
connection of the adjective with the substantive - the immediate connection
of several adjectives which are applied to the same substantive, no sign of
connection being required - the adoption of some periphrases involving the
relative pronoun, where the concepts to be connected are separately
expressed by substantives e.g. those minerals which are of vegetable origin
and possess commercial value. - Here three concepts are combined not by
way of the aggregation of parts into a whole but by that species of

58
Prolegomena
B
composition which enables us to rend more definite and complete the
conception of a subject by distinct acts each of which involves the attribution
of a quality or property. [A94.13]
To the direct operation which has just been described there exists a
corresponding inverse which it also serves to suggest. We may define that
inverse as the operation by which from the conception of a given class of
things we ascend to the conception of some larger class from which the given
class would be formed by the mental selection of those individuals which
possess a given property. Thus as by a direct operation of thought we descend
from the conception animals to that of rational animals by the mental
selection of those individuals which possess the property of rationality - so
by a corresponding inverse operation we should ascend from the conception
of rational animals to that of animals.
It will at first sight seem that the inverse operation just described is the
same as the mental operation commonly known by the term "Abstraction" -
and the example which has just been given of it is in reality a case of
Abstraction. But in strict truth Abstraction is only a particular form of the
inverse operation in question when considered in its largest sense. What for
example is the most general conception which we can form of that class of
things from which if we select all which possess the property of rationality
the result attained will be the entire class rational animal. It is evident in
the first place that the class sought must include the class rational animals
in the second place that it must contain no rational beings besides. No other
condition can be assigned. We may therefore say that the class from which by
selecting rational beings we obtain rational animals is in its most general
conception a class which comprehends all rational animals with an indefinite
remainder of irrational beings. [A94.14] This general conception includes the
particular conception of "animals" before obtained. For the class animals
consists of all rational animals together with a definite remainder of
irrational beings viz. irrational animals. The indefinite remainder which
enters into the general conception is here made definite and specific. And
thus abstraction in its ordinary sense is seen to be a specific determination of
the inverse operation whose larger meaning has been exemplified.
In that larger meaning the operation under consideration has no verbal
symbol or equivalent construction in language. It is in fact only conceivable
by means of that operation of which it is the inverse and therefore only
expressible by an indirect definition. We can only define it as the undoing of
something the doing of which can be defined directly. Further it may be
observed as a consequence of what has been now said that the inverse
operation does not enter among the elements of definition or description as
the three other operations before considered do. In its more general form it is
capable of fulfilling this office because of its indefinite character. In its more
specific form of abstraction its employment even supposing the nature of the
specification to be thoroughly understood would be superfluous. We should

IV
Results of the Analysis of Conception
59
never think of employing instead of the term "animals" the periphrasis "that
class of beings from which if we mentally select those which are rational we
shall obtain the class rational animals."
But although the inverse operation under consideration does not form
any part of definition either in the special sense in which the term definition
is usually understood or in the larger sense explained in ( ) it is a real and a
[A94.15] very important operation. If it does not belong to the faculty of
conception as exercised in definition it does belong to that faculty as
exercised in some of the processes of inference. The following would be
admitted to be a legitimate problem in Logic. Given the definition of clean
beasts in Jewish Law viz.: Clean beasts are beasts which both chew the cud
and divide the hoof required a direct expression for beasts which chew the
cud in terms of clean beasts and beasts which divide the hoof. Now the first
step to the solution of this question obviously is to say "Beasts which chew
the cud must be a class of beasts from which if we select those which divide
the hoof2 we shall obtain the class of clean beasts". But this only indicates
that the complete solution depends upon the performance of the inverse
operation above described and here more than one question of deep interest
and significance presents itself. The operation which we are called upon to
perform is the inverse of a direct operation which is undoubtedly a simple
one. But is the inverse operation itself a simple one? If it is wherefore has it
no verbal symbol no equivalent construction in language. If it is not what are
really the mental operations of which it is composed? What new mental
processes must we take into our account? These are questions of which it is
needless to say the ordinary treatises of logic as they contain no intimation
so they offer no solution.
Something must here be said of the origin of negatives although their
theory can only be completed when we come to treat of propositions and of
the relations to which they are subject. Indeed we must to some degree
anticipate that subject here. Such a proposition as Men are not perfect may
be [A94.16] understood in two distinct ways - distinct but so connected that
the one necessarily implies the other. 1st. It may be considered as a denial-
as if some assertion had been made that men were perfect or that some of the
race [were] perfect and as if the truth of that assertion were to be denied. A
denial must be a denial of the truth of a proposition and there is a branch of
Logic as will be seen which relates to propositions in their special attributes
of truth and falsehood and in the relations flowing from those attributes. To
that branch of Logic we shall hereafter have occasion to attend. 2ndly. It may
be considered like an ordinary affirmative proposition as an assertion viz. as
an assertion of which the subject is men and the import that they are
not-perfect Le. that they are imperfect beings. In this mode of considering the
proposition things are divided into two great classes viz. perfect beings and
imperfect beings and the class men is referred directly to the latter.

60
Prolegomena
B
According to the former mode of consideration the negative particle not
determines the nature of the proposition according to the latter it determines
the import of the predicate. But both are valid and as has been said the one
implies the other.
Inasmuch however as the second mode involves only those operations of
thought which have at present been considered operations which belong
directly to conception and do not presuppose the relations of propositions it is
necessary to consider it first. Two methods of passing from the concept
"perfect beings" to the concept "imperfect beings" present themselves. We
may employ either the second or the fourth [A94.17] of the mental operations
which have been described.
First we can do this by subtracting the positive concept of perfect beings
from the positive concept of universe, the aggregate of all existing beings.
What remains will be the concept imperfect beings.
In this mode of genesis we avail ourselves of the principle that any
concept as perfect beings together with the corresponding privative
imperfect beings will make up the universe that to every existing individual
one of the two opposed terms perfect being, imperfect being may be applied
(Law of excluded middle) and to none of them both (Law of Contradiction).
2ndly. We can also arrive at the concept imperfect beings by enquiring
what class of beings that is, which combined by the third operation of
thought with the concept perfect beings will produce the concept nothing.
The answer is that the class must consist of imperfect beings. It need not be
the whole of that class. Any indefinite portion of it satisfies the conditions.
The class which by combination (operation 3rd.) with the class perfect beings
produces the concept Nothing is in the most general manner defined by the
expression Some imperfect beings.
According to this mode of genesis we make use of the principle of
contradiction only. But it is to be observed that it does not as the previous
modes did define the extent of the concept generated. It determines its
quality but not its quantity.
The first mode which rests upon both principles of contradiction and
excluded middle is then the only perfect mode [A94.18] of passing from the
concept perfect beings to the concept imperfect beings without transgressing
the range of the operations described in the previous sections.
To recapitulate what has been said. The negative not either directly
qualifies propositions or it directly qualifies the terms of propositions. These
two offices are so related that the one usually implies the other. The latter
office alone however viz. the qualifying of the terms of propositions falls
entirely within the sphere of conceptions as defined by its fundamental
operations already described. Within that sphere the only definite mode of
passing from the complete concept "perfect beings" to the complete concept
"imperfect beings" is by subtracting (operation 2nd.) the concept "perfect
being" from the concept universe.

IV
Results of the Analysis of Conception
61
It is to be remembered that when we say "within the sphere of
conception" we mean thereby to exclude the introduction of the notion of a
proposition which properly belongs to judgment. Undoubtedly the term
imperfect beings does usually convey an idea of denial, and therefore of a
proposition. But it is important to shew that the concept may by legitimate
operations of thought be generated without that notion.
Thus far we have been occupied in classifying the operations of
conception and examining their meaning. Another object of not less
importance is to determine their laws.
These have been investigated in the Laws of Thought and the following
results are chiefly taken from that work. But some important additions will
be introduced chiefly relating to the conditions under which the operations
are possible.
The operation of addition presupposes as a condition of [A94.19] its
performance that the things added together should be distinct. When we say
Men and Women it is implied by the very form of the expression that the
concepts Men [and] Women belong to distinct classes of things.
It will be said that in a parallel example "orators and poets" no such
implication as of the distinct and mutually exclusive character of the
concepts involved is really made - that the expression is used and properly
used with a distinct understanding that there may be orators who are poets
- that the two faculties in question may be combined in the same individual.
If however we attend to the mental process rather than to the language we
shall perceive that when by the term "orators" the concept of the class
thereby signified has been raised in the mind the additional words "and
poets" do not lead us to attempt to annex to that concept by way of
aggregation the entire concept poets but only the concept of such poets as are
not already included in the class "orators". I rather apprehend that the real
office of those words is to lead us first to resolve the class orators into two
portions viz. the orators who are poets and the orators who are not poets and
then to add to these concepts the new one of poets who are not orators. And
here the final concepts actually added together satisfy the condition of being
mutually exclusive. The use of language is not always determined by its
mere form.
The condition of possibility of the operation of addition having been thus
stated the first law of the operation is the following. If two or more concepts
are added together the order in which they are presented to the mind in the
performance [A94.20] of the operation is indifferent.
Thus if to the concept men we add the concept women the result is
equivalent to the result which we should obtain by forming first the concept
"women" and then adding thereto the concept "men". The term men and
women represents the same class of things as the term women and men; but
the order of the mental processes which the one term expresses is different
from that which the other term expresses.

62
Prolegomena
B
When we endeavour to illustrate the laws of thought by the forms of
language we must be careful to distinguish between the two offices or
functions of language, viz. its office of representation by which words
represent outward things, and its office of expression by which words express
the states and operations of the mind. If this distinction is forgotten such
illustrations as that which has just been given must appear frivolous. What
it may be asked do we learn by being told that the expressions "women and
men" [and] "men and women" are equivalent? Certainly we do not thereby
arrive at the knowledge of any material truth; but we do learn that certain
real operations of thought are subject to a certain law, which it may be
observed does not belong to them merely as operations of thought but as
operations of thought of a certain kind.
The condition of possibility of the second operation of conception viz. of
subtraction is that the things to be subtracted should be entirely included in
the things from which they are to be subtracted. Such an expression as "All
men except negroes" is unintelligible unless it be supposed that negroes are
men.
This condition being attended to the operation of [A94.21] subtraction is
governed by a law similar to that which governs the operation of addition to
which it is inverse viz.: If different acts of subtraction are performed in
succession the order in which they succeed each other is indifferent.
Thus if from the concept men I first subtract that of negroes then that of
Europeans the result will be the same as if from the race men we first
subtract the Europeans and then the negroes.
We are hence naturally led to consider the case in which any series of
acts of addition and subtraction follow in any mixed order. It is evident that
supposing the conditions of possibility still observed the order of the mixed
operations in question is perfectly arbitrary. If to the class trees we add
mentally the class flowers and then mentally subtract the class pine trees
the result is the same as if from the original class trees we first mentally
subtracted the pine trees and to the concept then remaining added that of
flowers.
But though the above is the most general expression of the law of
addition and subtraction it admits of doubt whether it is a development of
the simple law of addition first enunciated. For it is to be remembered that
although the operation of subtraction is one the possibility of performing
which independently of any direct and explicit reference to addition seems at
first sight to be manifest yet it is capable of perfect definition as the inverse
of addition. The analysis of consciousness seems further to indicate that in
all cases the reference to addition though only implicit is real and
indispensable. [A94.22]

Chapter V
On the Foundations
of the Mathematical
Theory of Logic and
on the Philosophical
Interpretation of Its
Methods and Processes
------------[1856]------------
It may be necessary to inform the reader that the mathematical theory of
which some illustrations will be given in the following Essay is the one which
I have developed in a treatise published about two years ago and entitled "An
Investigation of the Laws of Thought in which are founded the Mathematical
Theories of Logic and Probabilities". It may also be proper to premise that I
do not employ the term mathematical with reference to the theory of Logic as
if with any covert implication that reasoning always and essentially involves
the ideas of extension, magnitude, number etc. but that I employ that term
solely as descriptive of the methods and forms on which the theory set forth
in the work above referred to obtains its practical development. The
foundations of that theory are laid professedly at least where alone the real
foundations of Logic can be laid in an analysis of the intellectual operations.
As moreover this paper is in some measure introductory to another
containing a special application of its principles 1 I deem it right to state the
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

64
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
circumstances in which it originated. Some time after the publication of the
"Laws of Thought" my attention was directed by the Bishop of Edinburgh to
a question in the theory of probabilities not noticed in the above work upon
which conflicting opinions had been formed by different writers, and the
fallacious character of some of the reasonings which had been employed was
at the same time pointed out. In the course of the correspondence which
followed I was led to express a hope that Bishop Terrot would publish his
observations upon the subject and I placed at his disposal such results as I
had myself obtained. Without entering further into the details of the
correspondence let it suffice to say that it was finally agreed that the
publication of an analysis of the question in accordance with the principles
developed in the Laws of Thought should be undertaken by myself. 2 As this
analysis involved the application of the Mathematical Theory of Logic, I
found it necessary after an unsatisfactory attempt to combine that
application with a philosophical statement of its principles in a single paper
to divide the task. The present essay contains therefore an account freed as
far as possible from the language of symbols of the grounds upon which the
mathematical development of the Science of Logic rests. It is proposed in a
subsequent paper to publish the solution of the [B2.1] question in the theory
of probabilities to which reference has been made. 3 I am not without a hope
that the present attempt may possess some degree of independent interest to
those who are interested in the Philosophy of Mind. The need of some such
exposition of the principles of the Mathematical Theory of Logic as should be
intelligible to those who had little familiarity with the use of symbols has
more than once been urged upon me. Even among those who have
approached that theory with all the advantages which previous mental
discipline could furnish some need of further exposition has been felt. This
may be due in part to the novelty of the theory but it is due I believe in a
much larger degree to the imperfect mode in which it has been presented as
a philosophical system in the Laws of Thought. This defect I trust to be able
in some degree to remedy here. I shall endeavour to state first those general
principles of the philosophy of Logic which are anterior to and superior to all
the special forms of its development. I shall then investigate in a manner
which will I trust be deemed far more complete than my former efforts the
primary laws of the faculties of Conception Judgment and Reasoning and
briefly state the grounds furnished by the investigation for the mathematical
Theory of Logic. I shall finally shew and this part of my design is I believe
new that even the methods developed through the medium of the
mathematical theory admit of illustration in ordinary language and may be
understood and to some extent applied by those who are unacquainted with
the use of mathematical symbols.
As a consistent and well understood nomenclature is of essential
importance in all such inquiries as the present it may be proper to say that
by the terms Conception Judgment and Reasoning I shall in accordance with

v
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
65
the usual practice of logicians designate both the intellectual faculties to
which these terms are usually understood to have reference and the
operations of those faculties. Wherever there is danger of ambiguity from
this source, I shall explain whether it is in the sense of faculty or operation
that the particular term in question is employed. The term Conception is
commonly used in a third sense viz. to designate the product of the faculty of
operation which that term represents. This seems objectionable and the
substitution of the term concept suggested originally I believe by Sir W.
Hamilton has recently obtained ground. The use of the term judgment to
represent a proposition although sanctioned by high authorities appears to
be liable to an objection of the same kind. In the present essay the products
of the respective operations of Conception Judgment and Reasoning will be
represented by the corresponding terms Concept Proposition and Conclusion
or Inference. The word Inference I of course employ here in the sense of
"inferred proposition." When it is necessary to speak of the intellectual
faculties or operations generically, I shall employ such terms as "Thought"
the Rational Faculty etc. Nor does this recognition of a higher unity merely
depend upon classification or upon our internal consciousness of the oneness
of the understanding. Between the intellectual operations of Conception
Judgment and
Reasoning exist clear scientific distinctions but the
investigation of their actual laws demonstrates also the existence of a basis
of unity. Thus as will hereafter [B2.2] be shewn the laws of Conception are
expressed in the form of necessary propositions and hence their recognition
involves an art of Judgment. On the other hand the foundation of all
necessary propositions is to be sought for in the laws of Conception.
That which we conceive I shall term when considered in itself the object
of thought. As any object may be presented to us in different aspects we may
form of the same object different concepts. Language as the instrument of
thought is related both to the object and to the concept which we form of it.
The former as external it may be said to represent, the latter as internal to
express. In the following pages frequent occasion will arise for referring to
the functions of language and the above distinction will be kept in view.
Indeed the strict etymological use of words is often of itself a safeguard from
errors against scientific precision. An unconscious philosophy finding
expression in the common sentiment and approval of mankind has
consecrated terms physical in their origin to intellectual and moral uses and
this it has done not arbitrarily but in accordance with a real analogy
connecting the material and the mental world.
The tripartite division of the intellectual operations into Conception
(more commonly termed Apprehension), Judgment and Reasoning has been
recognized in all ages and it has been agreed by all who regard Logic as a
science that it is the business of that science to investigate the laws of those
faculties. Perhaps it has not been so generally perceived that these laws may
in some measure depend upon the nature of the object of thought or more

66
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
strictly speaking upon the nature of the general notion under which that
object is contemplated. The concepts with which we have to do in Arithmetic
and Geometry are peculiar and for aught that can be seen beforehand this
peculiarity may affect nay it actually does affect the laws of the intellectual
operations within the limits of each special province of thought. Still it is
true that there exists above all these differences a philosophy of the
intellectual operations which furnishes equally to the formal logician and to
the student of the relations of Number and Magnitude a basis of first
principles. There is indeed a large sense of the term Logic which embraces
this general philosophy of the intellect. And such a sense it must be admitted
accords well with the derivation of the term -
~ AoYII(~,4 the science which is
concerned with the operations of the rational faculty in general. The science
of Formal Logic however if estimated not by the claims which have been set
up for it but by the conquest which it has actually achieved is of a much more
limited character. It embraces the operations of thought or the rational
faculty only in so far as they have to do with the notions and relations of
genus, species, individual, etc. It is an arbitrary and what is more an
erroneous assumption which claims for Logic the title of Ars Artium the
[B2.3] Science of which all other intellectual Arts are but applications and
which yet in the scientific exposition of that Art recognises no other notions
and relations than those to which attention has been directed. In the present
essay the term Logic will always be used in its narrower and more technical
acceptation. Returning however to the more general philosophy of the
intellectual powers to which reference has been made the following
principles may I conceive be regarded as of general application viz.:
1st. That Conception has to do with the object of thought only as it falls
under some general scientific notion e.g. in Arithmetic under the general
notion of Number with its affections in Geometry under that of Figured
Space with its affections in Logic under that general notion of Class of which
genus and species may be considered affections.-That the analysis of the
laws of Conception must consciously or unconsciously precede the analysis of
the laws of Judgment and Reasoning.-That none of their laws can be
determined a priori that is independently of the nature of the concepts
involved.-That Judgment consists essentially in a perception of the
agreement of concepts but that the nature of this agreement depends upon
the nature of the concepts to which its relates; in Geometry for instance it is
usually agreement in magnitude, supposed capable of being ultimately
tested by superposition, in Arithmetic it is that agreement in respect to
number which is termed equality, in Logic the fundamental agreement is as
will hereafter be shewn that of identity.-That Reasoning consists in the
inferential succession of the propositions by which Judgment is expressed its
fundamental principle being that of substitution viz. that two concepts
between which an agreement has been established in our premises may in
any proposition expressive of the same kind of agreement be substituted the

v
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
67
one for the other.-That there are two fundamentally distinct methods in
which this principle is applied viz. the method of synthesis and the method of
analysis in the former of which we begin with the premises or given
propositions and by successive applications of the principle of substitution
arrive by a direct process at the conclusion while in the latter we begin by
expressing the conclusion in the form of a necessary proposition involving
arbitrary elements to be determined and apply the principle of substitution
so as to determine these elements in accordance with the premises.-Finally,
that the intellectual operations generally conducted by means of their
instrument, language, are formal, concerned not with the nature of the
individual object of thought but only with the scientific notion under which
that object is apprehended and with such notions only as they are of
influence and in determining the laws of Thought.
We now proceed to the more detailed statement and application of these
principles in relation to Formal Logic.
I. Formal Logic is conversant with things not phenomenologically as
objects of perception, nor absolutely as they exist in themselves but only as
they fall under the general notions formed by the mental process of
abstraction and termed by some of the older writers "logical relations" viz.
genus, species, individual etc.
II. These notions are again reducible to that single general notion which
may be expressed by the term "Class" and in virtue of which things are
capable of being represented by [B 2.4] general names.
III. Logic therefore is conversant with things only as they fall under the
general notion of Class and under the several relations or affections of that
notion.
The knowledge of external things is in the first instance afforded by
perception or at any rate begins with some form of experience. Upon the
materials thus furnished the mind operates by its inherent activity. First it
forms from those materials the elementary concepts which are expressed by
general names and the elementary notions and relations to which those
concepts are subject. Secondly it combines these elements together by
operations subject to definite laws. It is in the analysis of the second of these
processes which begins with concepts and relations already formed that the
science of Formal Logic according to the views which I have been led to take
of it consists. At any rate this analysis forms of itself a very distinct and
definite science.
At the same time the analysis of the primary process which explains the
genesis of the elements of Logic from the materials which experience
supplies is an interesting branch of mental philosophy and to some extent it
involves the consideration of the same faculties as are employed in the
subsequent operations with which Logic is more especially concerned.
Comparison by which we note some particular in which different objects of
experience agree. Abstraction by which we fix the attention upon that point

68
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
of agreement for the exclusion of all other considerations and Generalization
by which we conceive of a class of things of which that property shall be the
distinguishing mark or attribute seem to be the mental elements involved in
the formation of concepts. Sometimes the term Abstraction is used singly
and in a larger sense to designate the whole of the process above described.
In every concept thus formed we may distinguish a material and a
formal element the former more immediately connected with sense or
experience the latter more directly related to the faculties by which we hold
converse with the scientific forms of truth. And a further act of Abstraction
in the larger sense explained above enables us to attend to this scientific or
formal and lay aside the material and sensuous element. Thus if in the first
instance the concept "white things" be formed from the perception of "white
flowers" "white stones" etc. the concept men from the perception of particular
individuals of the race as "Peter" "John" etc., a comparison of these distinct
concepts leads us by abstraction to the contemplation of an element in which
they agree viz. in that they both involve that notion of Class or Kind which as
it has been said is distinctive of the science of Logic.
The proof that the science of Logic is in fact a development of this
"notion" will be furnished by the analysis which will follow. But as concerns
beforehand the metaphysical possibility of such a notion it may be said that
it stands upon the same ground as nearly all other scientific notions e.g.
Extension, Substance. It may be and is I doubt not perfectly true that such
notions can only be pictured or mentally represented in the concrete
individual existence. They may however be contemplated in another way as
the vnoC7TOlC7Il; 5 if I may so speak the subjective unity which constitutes the
basis of [B2.5] formal laws - laws capable of distinct expression and which
though manifested only in the special instance are seen nevertheless to
possess a necessary and universal truth. When therefore I speak of the
general notion of Class with its several affections already enumerated I use
that term to designate the common subject of such laws. In reference to that
subject, I think the term notion preferable to the term concept because the
latter seems to indicate the formation of a mental picture or resemblance.
That which is known only by its laws and relations belongs to the
understanding rather than to the fancy or imagination; it is a VOl'lTOV 6 rather
than an OliC78I'lTOV.7
A doctrine closely resembling that which has been maintained, was held
by many of the schoolmen and was expressed in the formula "Logic is
conversant with second intentions" (secundre intentiones). This term was
employed to express not as has been erroneously stated* the technical as
distinguished from the common use of words but the notions of genus and
* The error was first pointed out by Sir W. Hamilton in a review of Whately's Logic. I
have taken my own account from Suarez's Metaphysica, Vol. II, p. 516.8

v
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
69
species of subject and predicate of antecedent and consequent, etc. Such
notions it was affirmed are rational not real, formal not material. They were
specially called "second intentions" because formed by a secondary or reflex
act of the intellect from the previously formed first intentions given in
perception. The term "second intentions" it is observed was not applied to the
notions of Genus Species Individual, etc. alone, but to all the abstract notions
and relations furnished by the three mental operations of Conception,
Judgment and Reasoning.
IV. Whereas in our concepts of things under the general notion of Class,
two distinct elements are involved, viz.: lst.-The representative by which
these concepts image forth things. 2nd.-The noetic by which such imagery
or representation is made in subjection to the general notion of Class; the
laws of the intellectual operations with which Logic is concerned are
independent of the former and are dependent solely upon the latter or noetic
element.
Thus the concepts "men", "stars", "minerals", etc. refer to different
classes of material objects but they are all formed by the same intellectual
faculty of abstraction from materials furnished by experience and they all
embody the same general notion of Class. They might in effect be regarded as
different special determinations of that notion. Now the intellectual
operations of Conception, Judgment and Reasoning as applied to the above
concepts are independent of their special differences [B2.6] and are
dependent only upon the general notion which underlies those differences.
Thus in forming from the concepts "men" "things white" the concept "white
men" we should obey the same laws of the faculty of conception as in forming
from the concepts "mountains" and "things burning" the concept "burning
mountains". In predicating of men rationality and of stars brightness we
should exercise the same faculty of Judgment. And the same process of
Reasoning would be employed in concluding that some general property of
the heavenly bodies must belong to Sirius or Aldebaran as in concluding that
some general attribute of humanity must be found in the Negro or the Malay.
The principle which has just been illustrated
is of fundamental
importance in the Science of Logic. But its full value can only be appreciated
when through the instrumentality of language Logic is developed into a
system of methods and processes which though embodied in signs have their
ultimate ground and reason in the laws of the intellectual operations.
V. Our concepts of classes of things the intellectual operations by which
such concepts are compounded and the relations under which when
connected by propositions they are contemplated can be expressed in a
manner adequate to all the purposes of Logic by signs.
We have now arrived at the point of transition from a speculative Logic
occupied only with the laws and the relations of abstract thought to a
practical Logic based upon a system of signs in whose laws the laws of

70
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
thought are embodied and by whose combinations their relations are
expressed.
Every spoken or written language may indeed be considered as a system
of signs adapted to the expression of thought and to the conducting of the
intellectual operations in which thought is manifested. And there are certain
fundamental principles derived from the constitution of the thinking mind in
which all spoken and written languages agree. But in none of the actually
developed forms of human speech are these principles found pure and
unmixed. They are clogged in their application by the cumbrousness of
words. They are distorted by peculiarities of idiom and diversities of
construction. For the due and normal development of the Science of Logic it
is therefore necessary to lay again the foundations of its sematology where
language itself begins - in the processes of thought. To this object we shall
proceed in a future section.
As these preliminary observations are intended to be confined to the
Philosophy of Logic the determination of the actual laws of the Science being
the subject of another part of this paper it may be proper to notice here a
question of great importance in the history of logical speculation. What is the
real nature and office of signs in the intellectual processes?
The principle which makes the use of signs possible and legitimate is
laid down in IV. The validity for instance of the process of reasoning depends
not at all upon the pictorial element in our concepts whereby the images of
sense are reproduced but only upon the formal laws and relations of those
concepts. Any mental state or impression which is definite and which can be
recalled at pleasure may be substituted for a pictorial concept provided only
that it be used in subjection to the same formal laws. The office of external
signs is to produce such definite and definitely governed mental state. [B2.7]
Whether these mental states may themselves be considered as signs is
merely a question as to the use of words.
If the above is as I conceive it to be a statement of fact, the discussion of
the question at issue between the conceptualist and the nominalist will be
seen to resolve itself very much into an inquiry about the meaning of words
and especially about the extent of meaning of the word sign. Let us suppose
two rival disputants each retaining the language of his sect to seek to
interpret that language in accordance with the facts of consciousness. The
nominalist must then admit that signs need not necessarily be external that
they may be mental representations. The conceptualist on the other hand
must admit that the concepts which he considers as the immediate objects of
the mental regard in Logic need not be actual pictures or resemblances of
things. Definite and definitely governed impressions of any kind will serve
the same purpose. Here then the two doctrines meet. The language of either
must be so interpreted as not wholly to exclude the ideas upon which the
language of the other is founded. The existence of mental impressions which
do not need to bear any resemblance to the outward realities for which they

v
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
71
stand, impressions which the nominalist would term signs, which the
conceptualist would designate as concepts but which both would admit to be
formed by abstraction which both would contemplate as determined to actual
use only through the medium of formal laws and relations - this is what I
regard as the true basis of the science of Logic.
The objection to the nominalist mode of statement I conceive to be the
following. By regarding signs as the only objects of Logic it tends to make us
forget that signs even in their most visible and material aspect are still
mental in their origin and that their laws belong to them not merely as
representative of something external but as formed by an intellectual
process of abstraction and deriving from this process their office and
constitution. The conceptualist statement is liable to objection on a different
ground viz. that it favours a presumption contrary to fact - that we reason
only by means of mental pictures or resemblances.
In this as in most other controversies each party seems to confine his
gaze either exclusively or by way of preference to a single phase of a
many-sided truth. Indeed whenever a theory of phenomena and more
especially of mental phenomena is attempted to be condensed into a word
that word becoming the symbol of a sect such a result must almost
necessarily follow. Even the Realists who gave to the abstract notions of
Logic an existence out of the mind and out of language saw but misapplied a
great truth viz. that the distinction of genus and species has a real ground in
the actual constitution of things which presents to us the spectacle not
merely of physical laws maintained but also of organic types preserved
unbroken amid cosmical revolutions and through countless ages.
VI. The laws of the signs which express our concepts of things or which
express the intellectual operations and relations to which such concepts are
subject are independent of the special meaning or content of those concepts
and are dependent solely upon the general notion of class, which they
embody.
This is an immediate consequence of IV. When mental concepts [B 2.8]
and mental operations are expressed by signs the laws of those concepts and
operations become the laws of the signs themselves. But the laws of the
mental procedure are independent of the special meaning or content of the
concepts involved and depend only upon the general notion of class under
which those concepts fall. Hence therefore the laws of the signs by which that
procedure is symbolized are equally general in their application.
Perhaps there is not a single principle in the Science of Logic which has
been avowed more generally or in a manner apparently more unequivocal
than the above. Aristotle in expressing the terms of propositions by letters
set an example of its adoption which nearly all subsequent writers have
followed. It is on the ground of this same principle too that modern
authorities have described the validity or conclusiveness of arguments
regularly expressed as "made evident from the mere form of the expression

72
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
independently of any regard to the meaning of the words"*. It seems
doubtful however whether to its full extent the above principle has been
really admitted or even understood by logicians. Its illustrations seem to
have been almost exclusively borrowed from the syllogism. Neither am I
aware that it has been noted in connection with such statements as have
been quoted that the meaning of words is not always wholly independent of
the form of the expression in which they occur. Thus the formula "Xs and Ys"
does not express an intelligible concept unless the symbols connected by the
conjunction and be interpreted to signify classes of things wholly distinct.
Either symbol indeed taken by way of preference may be considered as
arbitrary but when the meaning of one has been fIxed that of the other is no
longer wholly arbitrary. If by the term "Xs" we agree to mean "mammalia"
we cannot interpret the term "s" by "marine animals" because cetacre which
are marine are included in the class of mammalia and the expression
"mammalia and marine animals" taken in strictness would be unmeaning.
But the condition that "Xs" and "Ys" must represent distinct classes being
attended to the interpretation of those terms is in all other respects
arbitrary. If we trace to its origin the principle of which the above is not the
only kind of example we shall see that the intellectual operations connected
with the faculty of Conception do in certain cases impose conditions upon the
otherwise arbitrary concepts which are submitted to them and hence it is
that the forms of language which is but the outward expression of thought
impose conditions of interpretability upon the symbols which they connect.
This leads uS to the threshold of perhaps the deepest question in the
Philosophy of Logic viz. Are we bound when conducting the processes of
reasoning by means of language to keep constantly in mind the conditions of
interpretability and therefore to employ forms which impose such conditions
then only when those conditions are actually satisfIed? Is Logic necessarily
ostensive in its character? Or is the intellectual procedure in Logic governed
solely by a reference to abstract forms and laws? If the latter view be adopted
Logic might be described (to use a term which has already been employed) as
a noetic not an ostensive science. [B2.9]
I hold, as will be evident from the unfettered statement of VI, the latter
view. And the investigation of the laws of the faculties of Conception,
Judgment and Reasoning to which I shall shortly proceed will tend I hope to
throw upon that view a clearer light than has yet been shed upon it. For I
shall while investigating the laws of the intellectual operations determine at
the same time the conditions of their interpretability and then shew that the
application of the formal laws as a completed system does implicitly and in a
very remarkable manner supply the place of that direct consideration of the
conditions of interpretability which the ostensive view of the subject would
* Whately's Elements of Logic Bk. I, Sec. 3.9

v
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
73
render necessary. At the same time it is to be observed that whether we
adopt the ostensive or what I have termed the noetic view of the Science of
Logic the foundations of that science must equally be laid in an analysis of
the laws of the intellectual operations.
VII. The formal development of the Science of Logic requires: 1st. an
investigation of the laws of the intellectual operations of Conception as
connected with the formation of the terms of propositions 2ndly. an adequate
theory of the nature of Judgment by which terms are connected into
propositions 3rdly. an analysis in accordance with that theory of the primary
laws of Reasoning or of the process which determines the inferential
succession of propositions.
It is not necessary to vindicate the above principle which indeed I have
stated chiefly with a view to explain the course of the investigations which
will follow. The prevalent but very erroneous doctrine which regards all the
business and all the interest of Logic as either centered in or converging
upon the syllogism has led to a general neglect of the analysis of the faculties
of Conception and Judgment. Both the evil and its cause have been made the
subject of just comment by Sir W. Hamilton (Discussions on Philosophy and
Literature, p. 134.)10
By an adequate theory of Judgment I mean a theory which while it is
based upon a just whether or not it be a complete view of the nature of a
proposition is at the same time sufficient for the purposes of logical
deduction. It is essentially requisite to such a theory that it should be of
uniform application. A theory which would only apply to some particular
species of propositions would be inadequate. The primary laws of reasoning
or of the inferential succession of propositions must in expression at least
depend upon the view which is adopted with respect to the nature of a
proposition.
VIII. The form which the developed Science of Logic must assume cannot
be determined a priori but must depend upon the nature of the laws
established by a direct analysis of the intellectual operations.
When it is said that such an analysis of the intellectual operations as I
have described is necessary to the formal development of the Science of Logic
no principle is asserted which is not equally applicable to every other
department of scientific inquiry. The form of a science can never be
determined a priori. A special and careful analysis of that which constitutes
its matter is an essential prerequisite in the first place of all valid reasoning
concerning that matter in the second place of all legitimate speculation
concerning the nature form and method of the science of which it forms the
[B2.10] subject. It would betray a rash self-confidence if we should
endeavour to prescribe the forms and conditions of the Science of Dynamics
without a previous enquiry into the laws of motion, or of the Science of
Morals without an analysis of the nature and the grounds of moral
obligation.

74
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
Analysis of the Operations of
Conception as Exercised within
the Sphere of Formal Logic
B
As Logic is concerned with things under the general notion of Class, we
must in the analysis of the faculty of Conception resolve all elementary
concepts into concepts of things. The proposition "Stones are heavy" must be
contemplated under the form "Stones are heavy things" for thus and thus
only it exhibits a relation between things viewed under the general notion of
Class. Here it is proposed to determine in what manner and in subjection to
what laws and conditions new concepts are formed from elementary concepts
previously given. How these elementary concepts are formed has been
explained in ( ).11
According to a recognised division the concept of a class of things may be
considered 1st. with reference to its extension as a whole made up of parts
2ndly. with reference to its intension as formed by the union or combination
of qualities common to all the individuals which it comprehends. The concept
"minerals" as a class of things including gold, silver, iron, aluminium etc. is
viewed in extension; the concept "minerals" as involving the qualities of
ductility, fusibility, a peculiar lustre etc. qualities common to all the
individuals of the class "mineral", is viewed in intension.
Now the elementary operations of Conception are four in number two of
them founded on the extension two on the intension of a class. And of these
four operations each pair consists of operations mutually inverse to each
other. All this will appear from the definitions of the operations to which we
next proceed.
Operations founded on Extension
1st. Addition by which from the concepts of parts we form the concept of
the whole which they constitute as when from the concept "men" and the
concept "woman" we form the concept "men and women". The sign of this
operation in language is the conjunction "and".
2nd. Subtraction or the inverse of addition viz. that operation by which
from the concepts of a whole and the concept of one of its parts we form the
concept of the other part, as when from the concept "stars" and the concept
"planets" we form the concept "stars which are not planets" or "stars except
planets". The sign of this operation in language is the conjunction "except".

v
Analysis of the Operations of Conception
Operations founded on Intension
75
1st. Composition by which from the concepts of two classes of things we
form the concept of that class which consists of all the individuals which are
common to the two classes as when from the concept "men" and the concept
"white things" we form the concept "white men". [B2.11]
2nd. Abstraction defined as the inverse of composition viz., that
operation by which from two given concepts one of which enters into the
other by way of composition the other component concept in its utmost
generality may be determined. The term abstraction in its usual acceptation
(and it is thus that I have employed it in the introductory portion of this
paper),12 denotes a particular and special form of the operation which has
just been defined. For instance when from the concept of "white flowers" and
that of "flowers" we form the concept "white things" we indeed arrive at the
concept of a class of things from which if we mentally select those which are
"flowers" we arrive at the original compound concept "white flowers". But
this concept "white things" is not the only one from which by composition
with that of flowers the concept "white flowers" may be formed. To the
concept "white things" we might add the concept of any class of things
possessing neither whiteness nor the floral character or of any indefinite
portion of such a class of things and still the resulting concept would be one
which by composition with [that] of "flowers" would generate the concept
"white flowers". Thus if from that class of things which consists of "white
things together with red leaves" we mentally select those individuals which
answer to the description "flowers" we arrive at the concept "white flowers".
Or if from the concept "white things" we subtract the concept of any class of
things which while white are not flowers or of any indefinite portion of such
a class of things we still arrive at a concept which by composition with
"flowers" generates the concept "white flowers". When therefore abstraction
is defined as the inverse of composition its office must be regarded as the
determination not merely of some particular and definite concept answering
a given requirement but of some general form of thought expressible in
language and including all possible concepts however indefinite in extent by
which the same requirement is answered.
It is obvious from what has been said that the operation of Abstraction
differs in some important respects from the operations of Addition,
Subtraction and Composition. When by mental addition we form the concept
of a whole out of the separate concept of its parts, or by the inverse operation
of subtraction that of a part from the previously given concept of the whole
and of the remaining part no individual can be classed under the final
concept which was not present to the mind in the concepts originally given.
There is no individual under the class "men and women" which is not

76
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
comprised under one or other of the separate classes "men", "women",
neither is there any individual in the concept "men" as a part which was not
comprised under the initial concept "men and women" as a whole from which
the part is derived by mental subtraction. So the operation of composition
introduces as is obvious no individuals not comprised in the initial concept to
which it is applied.
But the operation of abstraction brings before us individuals not
previously contained within the sphere of Conception. When from the
concept of "volcanoes" we form that of "mountains" by abstraction of the
quality "burning" we are led to the contemplation of things not contained in
the initial concept. The class "mountains" includes individuals not comprised
in the class "volcanoes". In this respect as well as in the indefinite extent
already noticed of the concepts to which in its most general acceptation it
leads the operation of Abstraction differs from the three others with which it
is connected.
It is to be noted that the terms addition, subtraction, etc. [B2.12] are
applied to mental operations only in a derived and metaphysical sense. Thus
it is nowhere meant to be affirmed that we can add two concepts together in
the same way as we can collect into one whole two physical parts. But the
term addition when employed to represent an operation performed upon the
concepts "trees", "herbs", means only that operation whatever it may be by
which from these concepts we form the concept "trees and herbs". We can in
no other way describe mental operations than by terms material in their
origin and here and throughout this paper the primary meaning of the
operations described is to be sought for in their physical analogue. Should it
be asked-Why then the introduction of mental operations and relations is
necessary it
is
replied that they
possess
a truth and
application
independently of the conditions under which their physical or objective
realization is possible. [B2.12a]
Laws of Conception
Addition
LAW. In forming the concept of a whole from the concepts of its parts by
addition whether 1st immediately or 2ndly mediately by connecting any of
those parts into partial wholes and then connecting those partial wholes into
the final whole the order in which the several mental acts are performed is
indifferent.
Thus in forming the concept "trees and herbs" we can either begin with
the concept "trees" as the primary object of thought and then by mental
addition of the concept "herbs" form the concept of the whole "trees and

v
Laws of Conception
77
herbs" or we can begin with the concept of "herbs" and then by mental
addition of the concept of "trees" form the equivalent whole "herbs and
trees". I say equivalent whole, for while the concepts "trees and herbs" "herbs
and trees" differ in the order of the intellectual operations by which they are
formed and in the order in which the partial concepts which they involve are
presented to the mind they agree in their material signification and in their
logical value. By this latter expression I mean that the one form of the
concept may in any process of reasoning be substituted for the other.
Again if we had to connect together the partial concepts "trees" "grasses"
"mosses" "ferns" into a single total concept by addition we might either do
this immediately by adding to the concept of "trees" that of "grasses" to the
resulting concept that of "ferns" and to the result thus obtained that of
"mosses" or we might form first the concepts of the partial wholes "trees and
grasses" "mosses and ferns" and connect these by addition. Or any other
grouping or arrangement may be adopted which takes into account all the
partial concepts and connects no parts which are not distinct.
CONDITION. In order that two or more concepts may be formed into the
concept of a whole by the operation of addition the classes of things which
these concepts represent must be wholly distinct.
This condition has been already exemplified and it is only stated for the
sake of formal completeness.
Subtraction
Subtraction is the inverse of addition. For as we pass from the concept of
"trees" to that of "trees and herbs" by mental addition of the concept "herbs"
so by mental subtraction of the same concept "herbs" we revert from the
concept of "trees and herbs" to that of "trees".
It would be easy but it is unnecessary to investigate the laws of
subtraction. For as the process of subtraction is the inverse of addition and
as it is fully defined by that relation its laws are necessarily founded in the
law of addition and this has been determined already. We might indeed have
in the most general case to consider a series of mixed operations some
belonging to addition others to subtraction and with reference to any such
series the following law may be established viz.: [B2.13]
LAW. Whenever a concept is formed from other elementary concepts by
the operation of the mental faculties of addition and subtraction the order of
possible succession of the mental acts is indifferent.
Thus the concepts expressed in the two following forms are equivalent
though arising from different but possible series of mental acts.
"Trees and herbs except pine trees"
"Trees, except pine trees, and herbs".

78
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
But this law may as I shall hereafter shew be deduced as a consequence
of the Law of Addition already established and of the definition of
subtraction as the inverse of addition and it is therefore not to be ranked
among those laws which in the scientific exposition of logic must be regarded
as primary. At the same time it is to be remembered that the principle of
classification which makes addition a direct and subtraction an inverse
operation is in some degree arbitrary. That the operations are mutually
inverse is clear, that we should avail ourselves of this relation for
diminishing the number of the laws of thought which are to be considered
primary is a scientific necessity, and few will doubt that if one or the other of
the mutually inverse operations is to be regarded as direct the preference
should be given to addition. Still it is not to be forgotten that the operation of
subtraction is intelligible in itself and that its laws may be independently
determined.
CONDITION. In order that any concept may be mentally subtracted from
another concept it is necessary that there should be comprehended under the
former concept no individuals which are not comprehended under the latter.
Thus the expression "Trees except pines" is interpretable in thought
because and only because pines are understood to be a species of trees.
Composition
LAW
1ST. When concepts are combined by composition whether
immediately or mediately the order in which the several mental acts of
composition are performed is indifferent.
Thus in forming the concept "white flowers" from the elementary
concepts "white things" "flowers" we can either begin with the concept
"flowers", then mentally fix the regard upon those of the class which also
come under the general concept "white things" or we can begin with the
concept "white things" and then mentally select those individuals of the class
which fall also under the concept "flowers". The concepts to which we are led
differ only formally. In material reference and in logical value they are equal.
Of the law of Conception above stated abundant illustrations are found in
language. The indifference of the order in which in any language two
adjectives absolute in their meaning and applied to the same subject succeed
each other affords a familiar example. To say "white scented flowers" is
equivalent to saying "scented white flowers". Of the permitted inversions of
structure in the Greek and Roman languages a large portion (perhaps all
that are not idiomatic) depend either upon the above or upon some cognate
principle.
It is further evident that in Composition it is indifferent whether
elementary concepts are combined immediately or mediately. Thus in
combining the concepts expressed by the terms [B2.14] "white" "scented"
"fading" "flowers" it would be permitted to form first the compound concept
"white scented things" secondly that of "fading flowers" and then by a final

v
Laws of Conception
79
act of composition combine together these compound concepts. This is that
method of composition which I have termed mediate.
LAW 2ND. When the two elementary concepts which are compounded are
the same so that one might be regarded as a reproduction of the other, the
concept formed by their composition is also the same as either of the original
concepts.
For in compounding two concepts we form the concept of the class of
things which is composed of the individuals common to the classes
represented by the component concepts. When these component concepts
therefore agree in representing the same class the individuals of that class
stand in the place of the individuals which are common to the two classes
when the concepts are
different.
Wherefore the concept formed
by
composition is the concept of the same individuals and in no respect differs
from the concepts from which it is formed.
This law is exemplified in language. To say "white white flowers" though
pleonastic is equivalent to saying "white flowers". The office of the adjective
when applied to the expression of any class of things is not simply
attributive, it does not present to us the concept of the same class with an
attribute of quality attached to every individual of that class. To speak of
"good men" is not to speak of all men as good. The office of the adjective in
common discourse involves two elements, mental selection as well as mental
attribution. It directs us to fix the attention on those individuals of a class
and on those only to which a certain attribute is applicable. Thus the
adjective "white" as applied to the class "flowers" while it raises the concept
of whiteness directs us to fix the attention on those members of the class
"flowers" which possess that quality and the reduplicate form "white white"
applied to the same class, does but repeat the direction. (Laws of Thought,
p. 32.)*
The operation of composition is not subject to any condition analogous to
those which accompany the operations of addition and subtraction. If two
classes have no individuals in common, the composition of their concepts
produces the concept "no individuals" or "nothing". And this is in itself an
intelligible concept.
Abstraction
As abstraction is the inverse of composition and is fully [B 2.15] defined
by that relation, its laws do not as is evident from what has been said with
* On the passage referred to in the Laws of Thought the following note communicated to
me by Dr. Latham is interesting. Referring to the law exemplified in such expressions
as "good good" he observes "The practice of language gives us better instances in the
persons of verbs in those languages where there is besides the sign of the person as an
inflection the personal p~onoun itself as an adjunct.-Ego su-m, I a_m."13

80
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
reference to the inverse operation of subtraction require to be separately
determined. They do not hold in the scientific exposition of Logic the rank of
primary laws. The entire theory of the operation of abstraction will be seen to
flow from the laws of the direct operations which have already to some extent
been considered and from the general principles of reasoning to which
attention will shortly be directed.
CONDITION. In order that one concept may be abstracted from another
it is necessary that the class represented by the former concept should be
entirely comprehended in the class represented by the latter.
Thus an ostensive application of the operation of abstraction is involved
in the abstracting of the concept mountains from the concept "volcanoes"
dermed as "burning mountains" the result (or rather a special result) of this
operation being the concept "things which burn". Now all the individuals
comprised in the class "volcanoes" are comprised in the class "mountains".
And supposing even that the definition of "volcano" were not given the
possibility of abstracting from
the concept "volcanoes" the
concept
"mountains" rests upon the supposition that the concept "volcanoes" is
comprised under that of "mountains" for the object of that operation is the
discovery of the concept of a class of things from which if we select those
individuals which are mountains we shall obtain the concept volcanoes. And
this implies that under the concept mountains that of volcanoes must be
comprehended.
Law of mixed operations of Addition and Composition
From the possibility of conducting a mixed series of operations arises an
important law which is entitled to be ranked as primary. It may be thus
stated.
LAW. When any concept formed by addition is employed in the way of
composition it may either be employed as a whole or the parts which it
involves may be employed separately and the resulting concepts connected by
addition.
Thus the expression "aromatic trees and herbs" is equivalent to the
expression "aromatic trees and aromatic herbs". In the former expression the
concept "aromatic" is applied by way of composition to the whole "trees and
herbs" formed by addition of the elementary concepts "trees" "herbs". In the
latter expression the concept "aromatic" is compounded separately first with
the concept "trees" thus forming the concept "aromatic trees" secondly with
the concept "herbs" thus forming the concept "aromatic herbs" finally these
results are connected together by the operation of addition. It is evident that
the law is general and involves no limitation as to the number of the
elementary concepts connected together.

v
Analysis of Judgment
Analysis of Judgment as Exercised
within the Sphere of Formal Logic
81
Judgment has been defined as that power of the mind by which
propositions are formed. I do not purpose to enter here into an examination
of the different species of propositions but shall confine myself to a single
question viz. what is [B2.16l the nature of a proposition? Nor shall I discuss
this question any further than is necessary to determine what definition of a
proposition is singly sufficient as a basis for the theory of reasoning. At
present also it will be enough to consider that family of propositions which is
termed by logicians categorical.
Two distinct views of the nature of a proposition have been maintained.
By some a proposition is regarded as a form of predication by others as an
expression of identity.
The former of these views seems most directly applicable to those
propositions of ordinary discourse in which the term called the predicate is to
use the language of the schools particular more especially if it be expressed
by an adjective. When we say "snow-flakes are white" it seems most natural
to regard this expression as a form of predication by which we attribute to a
certain subject "snow" a certain quality perceivable directly by sensation
"whiteness". When agreeably to what has been said in the introductory
remarks on Conception we contemplate the proposition under the form
"Snow-flakes are white things" the notion of predication though not quite so
prominent as before is still perhaps more so than the notion of identity.
On the other hand the notion of identity seems most obviously to be
presented when the terms connected by the copula is or are are both
universal whether this universality is due to both terms being singular as in
the proposition "Louis Napoleon is Emperor of the French" or to both terms
having the definite article prefixed as in the proposition "the contented are
the truly rich" or lastly to the proposition itself being understood as a
definition e.g. "Triangles are plane figures bounded by three straight lines."
I have said that the above are the most direct and obvious views of the
nature of the proposition in the different cases which have been considered.
It is however possible that besides that view which is in each case the most
obvious one the other which is the less so may be really involved also. A
proposition may possibly have two aspects in the one of which it may appear
as a form of predication, in the other as an expression of identity. This
question I purpose next to consider.
It has been observed by Professor De Morgan that every proposition
which appears in the form of an identity is resolvable into two others in

82
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
which predication is involved. 14 Thus the proposition "The truly rich are the
contented" while in its plain and obvious sense it expresses the identity of
the two classes "the truly rich" and "the contented" is resolvable into the two
predications. "The truly rich are contented" and "The contented are truly
rich."
On the other hand every proposition which is expressed in the form of a
predication may be also expressed as an identity. The principle of the
"quantification of the predicate" which forms the basis of Sir W. Hamilton's
logical scheme serves to effect this reduction. The proposition "Lilies are
white" may be adequately replaced by a proposition affirming the identity of
the class "lilies" not indeed with the class "white things" but with some
indefinite and unknown portion of that class. The theory of this reduction
may be well explained in the language of the old scholastic logic. Thus
[B2.17] the proposition under consideration may be understood as implying
that lilies are a species included in the genus "white things". But "species" is
formed by the composition of genus and differentia. There exists some
characteristic property or collection of properties differentia by which lilies
are distinguished from other white things and which if known would in
conjunction with the common property of whiteness constitute the definition
of lilies. When the differentia is as we have supposed it to be in the present
case unknown its place may be occupied in language by the indefinite
pronoun some. Thus we may say "Lilies are some white things" the copula
are being here employed not in the sense of predication but of identity.
It appears then that while some propositions appear as forms of
"predication" others as expressions of "identity" either of these views of the
nature of a proposition may be adopted as the basis of a logical system. The
view which regards a proposition as an expression of identity is however the
more direct in its application inasmuch as any proposition which appears in
the form of a predication becomes by merely expressing the understood
quantification of its predicate an identity whereas identities which connect
universal terms cannot be represented by single forms of predication but
only by a combination of such forms. There exist also considerations yet
deeper than these which leave no doubt what view of the nature of a
proposition ought to be adopted here. Logic it has been said is concerned with
things not as they exist in themselves but only as they fall under the general
notion of Class. The laws of Conception which might in fact be termed the
laws of the formal development of the notion of Class have been investigated
in a previous section of this paper. Now these laws if exemplified at all in the
form of propositions are without exception exemplified in the form of
identical propositions. When in accordance with the primary laws of addition
we affirm that the concept "trees and herbs" is equivalent to the concept
"herbs and trees" we mean that those concepts though differently formed
represent and equally represent the same class of external things. If the sign
=be employed to express identity we shall have the identical proposition

v
Analysis of Reasoning
83
Herbs and trees = Trees and herbs.
And in such identical propositions as the above may all the laws of the
faculty of Conception be exhibited.
Upon the ground of analogy far more deeply founded than analogies
usually are we may therefore conclude that in the scientific development of
logic the proposition is to be regarded as an affirmation of identity not as a
mere form of predication. And this view of the Subject will be confirmed by
the results of the analysis of the operation of Reasoning to which object we
shall next proceed. [B2.18l
Analysis of Reasoning as Exercised
within the Sphere of Formal Logic
The office of Reason is to determine the inferential succession of
propositions. Moreover a proposition is in Formal Logic an affirmation of
identity; it asserts that it is to the same object-to the same individual
things-that two concepts in thought or two terms (properly limited) in
language, refer. Logical Reasoning therefore is specially concerned with the
notion of identity and it might with propriety be said to consist in the
operations which arise from the development of that notion. But as the
identity with which logical reasoning is concerned is the identity of the
things, which as represented by the terms of the proposition have become the
subjects of Conception under the general notion of Class and in subjection to
the formal laws and relations therewith connected we are ultimately
conducted to the following definition viz.: Logical reasoning is a process of
formal inference applied to propositions considered as affirmations of the
identity of the things which as conceived by us under the notion of [C42.1l
Class are expressed in the connected terms of propositions. We shall in
speaking of the connexion of the terms of propositions or of the relation
between the concepts which those terms express describe that connexion or
relation as one of equality-equality of two terms or concepts corresponding
to identity in the objects which they represent.
The elements in the above description to which it is most important to
attend and from which the laws of Reasoning as a process are derived, are
the following viz.:
1st. Reasoning (in Logic) is a process founded upon the notion of identity.
2nd. Reasoning is a formal process.
Now the fundamental law of Reasoning as developed from the notion of
identity is the following:
"Two concepts which in the sense above explained are equal to a third
concept are equal to each other."

84
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
And the rule or principle regulative of the process of Reasoning founded
upon this law is the following viz.:
Terms or concepts which are equal may be substituted the one for the
other in any process of logical inference.
As an example of the application of this prin- [C 42.2] ciple, which may be
termed the principle of substitution, suppose the two following premises
given
Similar triangles =
triangles which have their respective angles equal.
Similar triangles =
triangles which have their respective sides proportional.
Then it follows from the principle of substitution that
Triangles which have their respective angles equal =
Triangles which have their respective sides proportional.
The order of the process followed in the above example consists in
substituting for the concept "similar triangles" in the second premiss the
equal concept "triangles which have their respective angles equal" derived
from the first. It may be observed though the remark does not affect the
character of the reasoning that neither of the premises is a mere nominal
definition. There exists a distinct definition of "similar figures", which
involves consideration neither of angles nor of sides. Neither is the
reasoning, though it relates to a geometrical subject geometrical reasoning.
There are three applications of the direct law of substitution which
admit of distinct exhibition in the form [C42.3] of subsidiary or derived laws
of reasoning. They are as follows.
LAW A. If to equal concepts the same or equal concepts be added, the
resulting concepts are equal.
LAW B. If from equal concepts the same or equal concepts be subtracted,
the remaining concepts are equal.
LAW C. If equal concepts be compounded with the same or equal
concepts, the resulting concepts are equal.
In the "Laws of Thought" these laws appear as primary. I believe that if
carefully examined it will be seen that the ground of the intellectual assent
to their truth is founded in the perception that they are direct applications of
the law of substitution a perception which becomes the stronger from the
comparison of the different laws with each other.
Thus suppose it given that
"Philosophers = lovers of wisdom"
An example of Law C. would be furnished by the inference that
"Philosophers who are poets =lovers of wisdom who are poets",

v
Analysis of Reasoning
85
and it is plain at least that this may be obtained by the substitution in its
first member or subject of the term "lovers of wisdom" for the term
"philosophers" the equality of [C 42.4] those concepts being guaranteed by
the premiss.
Again, if we had the premises
"Practical men =
men who value the ideal only for the sake of the real",
"Speculative men =
men who value the real only for the sake of the ideal",
we should have as an illustration of Law A:
"Practical men and speculative men =
men who value the ideal only for the sake of the real and men who
value the real only for the sake of the ideal."
It is manifest that this is equally with the last illustration an example of
direct substitution and if we compare the two examples together it will
appear that this is the only element in which they agree. The operations by
which the first members are formed are quite distinct. The one is formed by
Composition the other by Addition. Now the nature of the operation no
further affects the reasoning than as such operation furnishes a ground for
the application of the principle of substitution. The syllogism as it perhaps
most readily presents itself to the common sense of mankind seems to rest on
a similar basis. Take for example the syllogism [C42.5]
"Men are mortal beings
Kings are men
Therefore kings are mortal beings"
Reducing the premises to the form of identities
"Men =some mortal beings
Kings =some men"
Therefore by substitution
"Kings =some some mortal beings";
that is to say, "Kings = some taken out of some mortal beings", and this is
perceived to be the equivalent to saying "Kings = some mortal beings" or
"Kings are mortal".
If we carefully examine the above process of inference we shall see that it
involves two distinct steps viz.: the act of substitution leading to the formal
conclusion "Kings = some out of some mortal beings" and the further process
dependent upon Conception by which this conclusion is brought to the form
"Kings are mortal". It is apparent even from this example that the principle
of substitution is not of itself sufficient for the conducting of an argument. It

86
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
must be employed in combination with other intellectual acts dependent
upon the faculties of Judgment and Conception and it is in such combination
that it is [C42.6l actually employed in the ordinary reasonings of mankind.
To these conditions of its application it may be added that it of necessity fails
us when as in all the more difficult forms of logical reasoning we have to call
in the aid of Abstraction. For the operation of Abstraction is as it has been
seen purely inverse and therefore dependent in its character and essentially
involves the employment of those faculties of the mind by which necessary
propositions are formed. And hence while we are able by the principle of
substitution alone to combine the premises together through operations of
Addition Subtraction and Composition we are compelled to have recourse to
those canons of abstract thought which enable us to add to the premises
whose truth is only assumed other propositions whose truth is not assumed
but necessary in other words we must adopt the analytical and not the
synthetical method before we can apply the same principle of substitution in
connexion with the operation of Abstraction. The application of the
analytical method is however so dependent upon language and its exposition
is so much facilitated by the employment of a proper system of notation that
it becomes if not necessary at least highly [C42.7l important to introduce
such a system and avail ourselves of its aid in expression before proceeding
further into the analysis of Logical Reasoning.
It is important also to present the laws of the intellectual operations not
as isolated truths but as constituent parts of a system governed by pervading
relations; and to this object the employment of an adequate system of
notation is equally requisite.
On Systems of Notation
The ground of every system of notation employed in reasoning is the
formal character of reasoning itself. If the process of inference is independent
of the particular meaning of the concepts involved and depends only upon the
general notion which those concepts manifest and thereupon only as it
furnishes the basis of intellectual operations and of formal laws it is at once
suggested to us that we express concepts not as in ordinary language by
words the special meaning of which may through association of ideas
interfere with our perception and application of the purely formal laws to
which they are subject but by symbols in the employment of which the formal
law and not the special meaning is present to the mind. It is not to be
forgotten [C42.8l by those who object to symbolical representation that the
founder of Logic set the example of their use.
The excellence of a notation consists in this that it expresses directly by
its elementary symbols the elementary concepts operations and relations of
the system of thought to which it belongs. In the system of Algebra there

v
Analysis of Reasoning
87
exists but one kind of elementary concept that of number but four operations
by which the concept of number can be modified viz. Addition Subtraction
Multiplication and Division and (in the most important applications of the
science) but one relation -
that of equality by which propositions connecting
these concepts are expressed. These elements of Conception operation and
relation are directly expressed by symbols viz. concepts of number if general
by letters if particular by the Arabic numerals, the operations of Addition
Subtraction Multiplication and Division by the respective signs + - x + and
the relation of equality by the sign =. The perfection of the language of
Algebra is due to the circumstance that it has been found possible thus to
determine beyond all question or contradiction the ultimate elements of
thought in the system to which that language is applied. For expressing
these elements by signs it follows that all their combinations [C 42.9] possible
in thought will be expressible by combinations of signs in subjection to
formal laws which represent the laws of combination of the original
elements. We are acquainted with the origin of the peculiar signs of Algebra
and know how they were evolved from common language. The form of the
sign + for instance originated in the et and the sign minus in a mark of
contraction employed in expressing the word minus in medireval latin
manuscripts. But the ideas which these signs express had been formed
previously and their truly elementary character in reference to the system of
number perceived.
The formal laws of Algebra usually relate to the permitted order of
succession of operations. We know for instance that if the number 7 be
multiplied by 8 the result is the same as if the number 8 be multiplied by 7
viz. 56; and we know that this is not due to any peculiarity in the numbers 7
and 8 but only to the fact that they are numbers. If x and y represent any two
numbers whatever and if xy represent the product obtained by multiplying
the number x by the number y we shall have as a general law
xy =yx
In like manner we have as a formal law of Addition
[C42.10]
x+y =y+x
and as a formal law of operations in which Addition and Multiplication are
mixed
x(y+z) =xy+xz
the latter expressing that if we add any two numbers y and z and multiply
the sum by a third number x the result is the same as if we first multiplied y
and z separately by x and then added the products.
To these which are properly speaking the fundamental laws of
Conception in Arithmetic we must add that great law of substitution the
basis of algebraical reasoning in virtue of which any combination of symbols

88
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
may be substituted for any other combination of symbols known to represent
the same value.
Now the elements of Logic are not less definite than those of Algebra. We
have but one kind of elementary concept viz. that of class -
but four
elementary operations by which concepts of class can be modified viz.
Addition Subtraction Composition and Abstraction but [C42.lll one
fundamental relation expressed by propositions viz. the relation of identity.
If we express these elements by symbols of conception operation and relation
corresponding to the symbols of Algebra an equally definite system if not the
same system of formal laws will govern their employment. Those laws have
been already investigated in previous sections of this paper and it only
remains to give to them their formal statement and consider them as the
systematic basis of a developed scheme of Logical Science. To this statement
we shall now proceed.
Symbolical expression of the formal laws of Logic
It is by no means essential to adopt in the expression of the forms of
Logic the symbols employed in Algebra. It is however a matter of
convenience to do so. For although the ideas embodied in the symbols of
Algebra are for the most part different from those which the same symbols
would embody if employed for the expression of propositions in Logic yet does
there exist between the two sciences such a fundamental relation (however it
may be explained) that the formal laws of the symbols are with one exception
the same in the two systems. And there exists a special Algebra (i.e. [C42.12l
a science which has to do with ideas of number but not with all ideas of
number) of which the formal laws and therefore the processes are in all
respects identical with those of Logic.
I have said that the ideas of Algebra are not for the most part the same
as those of Logic but some of them (though this is not at all important to the
general argument which rests only on the comparison of formal laws) are
apparently the same. Thus the ideas of Addition and Subtraction in the two
sciences seem to agree essentially as well as formally. And this suggests at
once the employment of the same symbols for their expression.
Let letters be used to denote classes of things as subjects of conception
and let the four elementary logical operations of Addition Subtraction
Composition and Abstraction be expressed by the same signs as the
respective arithmetical operations of Addition Subtraction Multiplication
and Division. Thus-Let x+y denote the class formed by adding the members
of the class x to those of the class y supposed distinct. E.g. if x represent
"Trees" and y "Herbs" let x+y represent "Trees [C42.13l and herbs".-Let
x-y denote the class formed by subtracting from the class x the class y
supposed to be wholly contained therein. E.g. if x represent "Men" and y

v
Analysis of Reasoning
89
"Negroes" let x-y represent "men who are not negroes".-Let xXy or xy
denote the class whose members are common to the classes x and y. Thus if x
denote "Flowers" and y "White things" let xy denote "White flowers".-Let
x~y or ~ represent that class of things from which if we select those which
belong to the class y we shall obtain the class x.-Let the symbols 1 and 0 be
respectively used to denote the Universe and Nothing. The ground of this
selection is that the symbols 0 and 1 are subjected to the same formal laws
when thus interpreted in Logic as when employed in Arithmetic. Hence the
expression I-x will denote that entire class of things which remains after
taking away from the universe the class denoted by x Le. it will denote the
class of things which are not members of the class x.-Let the placing of any
expression within brackets or under a vinculum denote that it is to be
treated according to the same laws as if it were a single [C 42.14] letter
representing a class. Thus let y(l-x) or y I - x denote the class of things
which consists of all individuals that are found in the class y but not in the
class x.-Let the sign = interposed between the expressions of two concepts
denote that these concepts are equal in the sense explained in ( ) viz. that
the classes which they image forth consists of the same collection of
individuals. Thus if x represent "Men", y "Rational beings" and z "Animals"
the equation
x =yz
will express the proposition
"Men and rational animals are identical".
It is possible to express by the above notation any categorical proposition
in the form of an equation. For to do this it is only necessary to represent the
terms of the proposition regarded as subjects of Conception by symbols
introducing if needful an indefinite class symbol and then to connect the
expressions thus formed by the sign of equality.
Thus if it were required to express the proposition "Trees are plants" we
should have representing "Trees" by x, "Plants" by y, and the indefinite
aggregate of those qualities which distinguish trees from other plants by v,
the equation [C 42.15]
x =vy
If it were required to express the proposition "Stars are celestial bodies
which either are self-luminous and do not shine by reflected light or shine by
reflected light and are not self-luminous" then representing
stars by s
celestial bodies by c
self-luminous bodies by a
bodies shining with reflected light by r
we should have the equation

90
or
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
s = c(al-r+rl-a)
s = vc(al-r+rl-a)
B
according as our proposition was intended as a definition or as a mere
description of stars. In the former case it would be implied that the class of
things called stars is identical with the class of things whose properties are
described in the second member. In the latter it would only be implied that
the class of stars is included in that class the nature of the further distinction
by which stars are recognised being left undetermined.
When the terms of propositions and the relations between those terms by
which propositions are constituted are [C42.16] expressed by symbols the
laws of the faculty of Conception by which these terms are formed become
the laws of the symbols employed and the laws of Reasoning are interpreted
into axioms.
The adequacy of this system of notation as a means of expression having
been established it remains to exhibit the primary formal laws of its symbols.
For this purpose it is only necessary to translate into its language the laws of
Conception already determined in ( ).
The formal law of Addition will be expressed by the equation
x+y =y+x
The formal laws of composition are the following
(I)
1st
2nd
xy =yx
xx =x
(II)
(III)
The formal law of mixed operations of Addition and Composition is
x(y+z) =xy + xz
(IV)
The above are the only primary laws of Conception. For the laws of
inverse are derivable from those of direct operations. The above therefore
determine the character of the system so far as the formal laws of Concep-
[C42.17] tion are concerned.
If we compare the laws with those of Algebra as formally expressed in
Jf15 we see that I II and IV viz. the law of Addition the first law of
Composition and the law of mixed operations of Addition and Composition
agree severally with the law of Addition, the law of Multiplication, and the
law of mixed operations of Addition and Multiplication in Algebra. Hence the
general rules of Algebra e.g. the law of signs in multiplication etc. remain
formally true here. The second law of Composition has however no analogue
in Algebra as the science of numbers in general. The formal difference
between Logic and Algebra consists then in this that the Concepts with
which the former science has to do are subject to a peculiar law symbolically
expressed by the equation

v
Analysis of Reasoning
xx =x
( )
91
Now there exist two numbers viz. 0 and 1 which besides satisfying the
general laws of Algebra satisfy also the above special formal law of Logic. If
then we construct an Algebra in which the only particular symbols of number
shall be 0 and 1 and in which every general symbol as x, y etc. shall be
understood to admit only of the above special determination (i.e. it being
given that x is a [C42.18J literal symbol belonging to the dual Algebra it shall
thence be understood that x means either 0 or 1 but it is undetermined
which) the formal laws of such an Algebra will be identical with those of
Logic when expressed by symbols. Thus we shall have as particular
manifestations ( )
lxl = 1
OxO = 0
no other numerical symbols than 0 and 1 obeying the same law. And hence
the processes of the dual Algebra in question (dual because recognizing no
other numbers than 0 and 1) will be formally identical with the process of
Logic expressed by symbols.
And this agreement extends not only to the formal laws of operation in
the systems compared but also to the formal conditions of interpretability of
expressions formed by those operations. That three out of the four operations
of Conception in the logical system viz. Addition Subtraction and Abstraction
are subject to such conditions has already been seen. I shall therefore shew
that these conditions are capable of formal expression and that they are
when thus expressed common to the systems of Logic and dual Algebra. The
ground of this agreement will further be shewn [C42.19J to consist in the
community of the formal laws of operation and more especially of the
distinguishing law (III). 16
In fact representing any combination of symbols by V, whether that
combination express a logical concept or a concept in dual Algebra, i.e. one of
the numbers 0 and 1, it must by what has preceded equally satisfy the law
VV = V
(1)17
First then suppose V to represent the combination x+y wherein x and y
obey the same law so that
xx =X
yy =Y
Now writing x+y for V (1) becomes
(x+y)(x+y)= X+Y
Performing the operation indicated in the first member and replacing in
the result xx by x and YY by Y we have

92
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
whence
x+xy+yx+y =x+y
xy+yx =0
an equation which in either system can only be satisfied by supposing
xy =0
(2)
since in Logic the only class, and in dual Algebra the only number, which
being added to itself produces Nothing is [C42.20] Nothing. Hence the
equation xy =0 is the condition of interpretability of the operation of adding
y to x in either system and it is a condition formally expressed.
Logically interpreted this condition demands the non-existence of the
class xy. Now to demand the non-existence of the class xy is the same as to
demand that the classes x and y shall be wholly distinct. And such is the
condition of possibility of the actual operation of Addition already
determined in ( ).
Interpreted in the system of dual Algebra the condition xy =0 demands
that the values of x and y should be so chosen that their product should
vanish. And this restricts the actual selection to the following pairs of values
viz.:
1st
2nd
3rd
x = 1
x=O
x=O
y=O
y=1
y=O
and excludes the combination x = 1 y = 1. Now if we substitute these
combinations in the expression x+y we find the three first give to that
expression the respective values 1, 1, 0, values belonging to the dual system
while the last combination gives to the expression the value 2 which is not
included in that system. The sufficiency of the [C42.21] formal condition
xy =0 for the interpretability of the expression x+y is therefore established
in both systems. And this condition is derived from the fundamental law of
Conception ( ).
If we apply the same analysis to the expression x-y formed by
Subtraction we shall arrive at the formal condition of interpretability
y(1-x) = 0
Logically interpreted this condition demands that there should exist no
individuals in the class y which are not found in the class x. Such is the
condition already assigned in ( ). Interpreted in the dual Algebra it would
permit the combinations
x=1
y=1
x=1
y=O
x=O
y=O
and exclude the combination

v
Analysis of Reasoning
93
x=O
y=1
Now the first three of the above combinations substituted in the
expression x-y give to it the respective values 0, 1, 0, which are included in
the dual system. The last combination gives the value -1 which is not
included in that sys- [C42.221 tern.
Applying the same analysis to the expression xy formed by Composition
we find that no condition of interpretability is involved.
To apply a similar principle of analysis to the expression
~ formed by
Abstraction we must observe that as Abstraction is only intelligible by
reference to Composition the expression
~ only signifies a class which by
Composition with y gives x. Let w represent such a class.
Then
x=yw
( ).
Now if we compound both members with the class (l-y) attending to the
condition y(l-y) =0 we have
x(l-y) =0
Logically interpreted this demands the non-existence of the class whose
members belong to the class x and not to the class y. And this agrees with the
condition assigned in ( ). Interpreted in dual Algebra it permits the
combinations
x=1
x=O
x=O
and excludes the combination
y=1
y=1
y=O
x=1
y=O
[C42.23l
Now the substitution of the three former combinations in the expression
~ gives results which belong or may belong to the dual algebra viz. 1,0, §the
last of these results admitting of either of the values 1 and O. The
substitution however of the final combination x =1, y =0 in the same
expression leads to a result which as representing infinity is not included in
the dual Algebra.
The deduction of all three conditions is however more readily and in the
last case more directly performed by the process of development hereafter to
be described a process essentially founded on that peculiar law of thought
which forms the basis of the previous deductions.
The general conclusions to which these investigations lead may now be
collected into the following summary.
Logical propositions being expressed by a system of notation in which 1st
the Universe is represented by the symbol 1 and Nothing by the symbol 0
2ndly Classes of things by letters 3rdly The elementary operations of
Conception viz. Addition Subtraction Composition and Abstraction by the

94
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
corresponding signs + - x + 4thly the relation of objective identity by the
symbol =. Then will both the formal laws of thought and operation and the
formal conditions of interpretability in that system agree with the
corresponding laws and conditions of a dual Algebra recognising no other
special symbols of number than 1 and O. [C42.24(+25)]18
It appears then that there exists a perfect formal identity between Logic
represented by symbols in the scheme above explained and the dual Algebra
whose nature and character have been described. Upon this identity the
methods developed in the Laws of Thought are founded. I have not however
in that treatise so fully considered the grounds of the relation upon which its
methods rest as I have done in the previous sections of this paper. The
identity of the formal laws of operation was demonstrated but not the fact
that the formal conditions of interpretability are the same also and that
these conditions are a necessary consequence of the formal laws. And in
accordance with that first philosophy of reasoning of which all symbolical
methods are but special applications I conceive that the proof of the formal
identity of the conditions of intelligibility in the two systems was not
required. It suffices that the laws of operation are the same and that the
results to which we are led by the methods of the dual Algebra are
interpretable in Logic. Still I apprehend that the identity of the systems as
respects not only the formal laws of operation but also the formal conditions
of interpretability is a fact of great moment and significance and that it
would be [C42.26] unphilosophical to regard it as a merely accidental
coincidence. It has unquestionably a deep and real foundation in the
constitution of the human mind.
Two questions of great importance here present themselves.
First. Is it necessary to the mathematical development of Logic that we
should take into account its formal relation to the dual Algebra?
To this I reply that it is certainly not necessary. We might for instance
instead of representing Universe by 1 and Nothing by 0 have employed other
symbols e.g. we might have represented Universe by u and Nothing by n.
Only had we done this the symbols u and n would have required in virtue of
the formal laws of Conception to be used according to the same rules as the
symbols 1 and 0 in the dual Algebra.
Secondly. What then is the advantage of employing the dual Algebra?
The advantage I conceive to be that when we have established by a just
analysis of the intellectual operations our right to the employment of a
system whose laws are in every respect coincident with those of Logic but
whose ideas are [C42.27] more simple we are led by easier steps of
suggestion to the constructive development of the science. I say a system
whose ideas are more simple because it is I think more readily perceived that
x x1 = x when x represents a number, 1 unity and the symbol x the operation
of multiplication than when x represents a class 1 the Universe and the sign
x the operation of Composition. Once however that the method is fully

v
Analysis of Reasoning
95
developed it is of no importance whether we consider its processes as founded
immediately upon the laws of thought in Logic or only mediately thereupon
through the intervention of the dual Algebra.
The most remarkable difference between Logic and dual Algebra a
difference however which is material and not formal is that their spheres of
interpretation are not merely different but not even connected by a perfect
correspondence and analogy. In the dual Algebra any general symbol x
admits only of the special and definite meanings 0 and 1 but in Logic such
general symbols admit of other special and definite interpretations than
Nothing and Universe even of any class interpretation whatever i.e. of any
meaning which can be expressed in language by a general name. The symbol
x may be determined to mean Nothing or Universe but it may also be
de- [C42.28] termined to mean "men" "golden mountains" "Utopia". But
under all its diversities of meaning it remains subject to a common system of
formal laws and these alone affect the processes of inference.
Analysis of Reasoning resumed
The distinction of reasoning as synthetical and analytical has been
already noticed. As the synthetical form consists in the direct application of
the laws of thought with or without the aid of a symbolical language to the
premises and as those laws have already been investigated there is little
more to be said upon the subject. It remains then to explain more fully the
nature of the analytical method of reasoning and to shew how it is developed
by means of symbolical forms.
It must be remarked then that this method always has reference to a
proposed end. It begins with some such question as the following. What
unknown concept do we seek explicitly to determine and by means of what
other
concepts
is its
explicit determination sought?
I say explicit
determination because it is the office of a conclusion not to present to us new
truth but only to bring into an explicit form and statement some portion of
that truth which was implicitly involved in the premises. And having
determined what kind of conclusion is sought we proceed 2ndly [C42.29] to
express the most general form which that conclusion in accordance with the
necessary laws of Judgment and in perfect independence of the particular
information conveyed in the premises must have. This being done we proceed
3rdly to determine by means of the premises whatever is arbitrary in the
general form so far as such determination is possible. It is in the last step
chiefly that the principle of substitution is employed.
The two orders of procedure which have been described viz. the
synthetical and the analytical are clearly inverse to each other and they rest
upon fundamentally different but perfectly consistent views of the nature of
a conclusion. For we may regard a conclusion either 1st as a consequence

96
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
following directly from the premises or 2ndly as a condition necessary in
order that the premises may be thought as true. There is no difference in
point of validity between the methods. In comparing them we should say that
the method of synthesis is the more simple in theory that it is necessarily
ostensive not demanding even a recognition of the formal character of the
processes of inference - to counterbalance all which advantages it must be
added that it is necessarily limited in application. The method of analysis on
the other hand rests upon a deeper basis of theory, it regards the processes of
[C42.30]
inference essentially formal,
it is perfectly general in its
application.
What now is the most general problem which Formal Logic can propose?
In considering this question I shall confine myself to the class of propositions
termed categorical. It will suffice to do this because the theory of
hypothetical propositions is formally identical with that of categorical
propositions. With this restriction then the premises of any train of
argument consist of propositions each of which expresses a relation between
two concepts. Each again of the two concepts thus connected is either an
elementary concept expressed by a single name or description or it is formed
by the combination of elementary concepts according to the laws of the
faculty of Conception already investigated. Ultimately therefore we may say
that the premises of an argument consist of propositions expressing relations
among elementary concepts.
The conclusion which we seek must also be a proposition and express a
relation connecting all or some of the elementary concepts involved in the
premises. If it involve only some of them the others must have been
eliminated. And hence an essential part of a general method in Logic must be
a process of elimination i.e. a process by which we may get rid of those
concepts which we do not wish to retain in the [C42.31] conclusion and which
we may consider as only deserving of consideration in so far as they help to
establish relations among the other concepts.
Again it may be required to determine the conclusion either 1st as a
direct expression of existence or non-existence or 2ndly as an expression of
the relation in which a given concept whether elementary or formed by a
combination stands to the other concepts retained. For example if the
premises expressed certain relations between the concepts "coals" "minerals"
and any other concepts and if it were required to determine the explicit
relation thereby established between coal and minerals a definite process of
inference might lead to that conclusion in the form,
"Coals that are not minerals do not exist"
and another process of inference or the same carried still farther might lead
to an equivalent conclusion in the form
"Coals are minerals"

v
Analysis of Reasoning
97
and this latter might be arrived at as an answer to the question "How far is
it possible to define the object coals by means of the concept minerals" Of
these forms of the conclusion the former is simply an expression of
non-existence the latter is an expression of the relation in which a given
concept stands to another concept. [C42.32]
The general problem of Formal Logic in reference at least to categorical
propositions is therefore the following.
Given any set of propositions expressing logical relations among
concepts required to express by a single proposition the whole of the relation
connecting either 1st all of these concepts or 2ndly any of them chosen at
liberty. Required moreover to express such relation either 1st, as an
expression of existence or non-existence or 2ndly as an expression of the
relation in which some given subject formed by the elementary concepts
stands to the other concepts.
This problem under its most general form, the symbolical calculus
enables us to solve. The formal laws whose naked expression has been given
in the previous section furnish us with the requisite methods. For the
fundamental processes which these methods involve viz. Development
Elimination and Reduction I must refer to the Laws of Thought. But I will
say a few words here on the philosophy of the most important of these
processes viz. that of Development more especially as it is in this process
that the analytical element of reasoning finds expression.
Resuming the example just considered in which from supposed premises
it was required to express "coals" in terms of "minerals" we may remark that
it is possible antecedently to [C42.33] any knowledge of the meaning of the
terms or to any information conveyed in the premises to posit the necessary
proposition
"Coals are either minerals or not-minerals"
If there were another term required to be taken into account e.g.
"vegetable origin" we might quite as independently form the necessary
proposition
"Coals are
either minerals of vegetable origin
or not-minerals of vegetable origin
or minerals not of vegetable origin
or not-minerals not of vegetable origin."
The only effect of a knowledge of the premises would be to enable us to
limit in some more definite manner these necessary propositions. They
might for example enable us to reject in the first form of conclusion the
alternative "not minerals" and to affirm "Coals are minerals". They might
possibly enable us to say "Coals are all minerals". And in like manner the
four alternatives involved in the second form of the conclusion might
severally be affected or placed under different categories of thought by

98
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
means of the premises. All such modifications presuppose the existence of
necessary and a priori forms ofJudgment. [C42.34]
He who in ordinary reasoning adopts this mode reasons analytically. He
begins with a necessary proposition and imposes upon it special limitations
so as to make it accord with the premises.
Now the method of development furnished by the symbolical calculus is
in reality but the same process presented in a purely scientific form and in
immediate connexion with a dependence upon the laws of thought. It
virtually begins with presenting the conclusion in the form of a necessary
proposition but it derives that necessary proposition from the fundamental
law of thought expressed by the equation
x(1-x) =0
It proceeds by a general method to determine what I have called above
the categories or general relations under which the several terms or
elements involved in the necessary proposition must be contemplated by the
mind in accordance with the premises. This determination proceeds
essentially upon the principle that Logic is formal in its character - that
those relations do not depend upon the meaning or nature of the concepts
involved in the premises but only upon the relation in which they stand. I
will endeavour to illus- [C42.35] trate these positions by one or two simple
examples first giving the symbolical solution according to the method of dual
Algebra in the Laws of Thought and then interpreting the several steps of
the solution.
Suppose that from the proposition "Men = rational animals" it were
required to find explicitly a definition of "rational beings" in terms of "men"
and "animals".
If we represent the concept "men" by x "rational beings" by y and
"animals" by z we have the equation,
Hence
x =yz
y=~
(1)
(2)
(3)
and developing the second member
y =1zx+Oz(1-x)+A(1-z)x+§(1-z)(1-x)
The interpretation of which is the following:
1st Rational beings consist of all animals that are men, no animals
that are not men and an indefinite remainder (some none or all) of
beings that are neither animals nor men.
2ndly Men that are not animals do not exist.
I will first make a few observations upon the symbolical equations (1) (2)
(3) in order.

v
Analysis of Reasoning
99
In (1) which is the symbolical expression of the [C42.36l premiss the
concept y whose explicit definition is sought appears in composition with z.
From this connexion it is freed by the inverse operation of Abstraction. The
equation (2) expresses this fact and shews that it is by the abstraction of the
concept z from the concept x that the definition of y must be obtained.
Equation (3) exhibits the result of the abstraction as obtained by the process
of development that process depending not upon the meaning of the symbols
z, x, but only upon their formal laws. We may distinguish in the resulting
expression for y two classes of elements, viz.: 1st the terms zx, z(l-x), (l-z)x,
(l-z)(I-x) 2ndly the coefficients 1, 0, A, gwith which those terms are
affected. The former class are quite independent of the manner in which z
and x enter into the original equation (1). The explicit definition of the logical
concept y in terms of the logical concepts x and z, whatever the given relation
among those concepts may be, must in its ultimate state of resolution involve
those elements not because the concepts x y z are logical but in virtue of the
law of thought x(1-x) =0. 19 The second class of elements viz. the coefficients
are however dependent upon the premiss. They shew under what logical
categories the several terms of the neces- [C42.37l sary proposition must be
thought in connexion with the premises. Let us consider these coefficients
separately.
The coefficient 1 attached to the concept zx implies that the whole of the
class represented by that concept is signified (Laws of Thought p. 92).
The coefficient 0 attached to the concept z(l-x) indicates that none of the
individuals included under that concept are signified.
The coefficient Aattached to the concept (1-z)x indicates not only that no
part of the class represented by that concept is included but that the
existence of such a class is forbidden by the premises.
The coefficient gattached to the concept (1-z)(I-x) implies that an
indefinite portion of the class represented by that concept is signified.
If we endeavour to interpret the coefficients by independent concepts we
shall have
1 =Universe or Things existent*
o = Nothing or Things non-existent
A=Things impossible
g= Things indefinite
* Had the principle of analogical interpretation been admissible we should probably
have been led to represent the concept Universe by the arithmetical symbol for infinity
and not by the symbol for unity. Formal law is indeed the only element of analogy
which it is permitted to recognise in the determination of the [illegible] of symbols.2o

100
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
Respecting the ground of the two last interpretations let it be observed
that A would represent a class of things such [C42.38l that if we seek by
Composition the class common to that class and to Nothing we shall obtain
the class All-things ( ) now no such class exists or is conceivable. Retaining
the language which is grounded upon the notion of Class we must interpret
the coefficient Aby Things impossible. Again the expression §represents a
class of things such that if we compound it with Nothing we obtain Nothing.
But this condition is answered by all concepts whatever. Hence § must be
interpreted as things indefinite or unlimited.
Considered then in the concrete the four coefficients of the development
admit of the interpretation Universe Nothing Things impossible Things
indefinite. Considered with reference to the abstract notions which they
express we have the categories 1st Existence or Totality 2nd Non-Existence
or Nothingness, 3rd Impossibility, 4th Indefiniteness. It is a remarkable
circumstance that however numerous the terms of a conclusion those terms
appear under no other relations or categories than the above. The categories
do not however necessarily all present themselves in every conclusion nor in
fact is there any other general observation to be noted than that the above
are all which [C42.39l do appear. We may therefore with propriety term
them logical categories. A similar system with corresponding interpretations
results from the application of the method of development to hypothetical
propositions.*
I will endeavour to illustrate the above process, and subsequently that of
elimination, without the introduction of mathematical forms. In both these
processes much use is made of the operation of Composition. It is to be
remembered that the Composition of two concepts means the forming of the
concept of a class of things consisting of the individuals which are common to
the classes represented by the concepts compounded and hence "Universe"
being the concept of the class which contains all existing things "Nothing" of
the class no things, that
Universe in composition with any concept =that concept
[C42.40l
Nothing in Composition with any concept = Nothing
Any concept with itself = the same concept
And in particular
* I have retained in the present paper the familiar division of propositions into
categorical and hypothetical a division which belongs rather to the form of expression
than to the matter of propositions. The true ground of distinction which however is in
its practical results nearly coincident with the above will be found in the Laws of
Thought Chpt. XI.

v
Analysis of Reasoning
Universe in Composition with Universe =Universe
Universe with Nothing =Nothing
Nothing with Nothing = Nothing
Now in the example above considered the premiss is
"Men = rational animals"
101
and it is required to determine "rational beings" by means of the concepts
"Men" "Animals".
Supposing ourselves ignorant both of the premiss and of the meaning of
the terms "Men", "Animals" we may at once by the law of necessary
Judgment say
Rational Beings =
Men animals in composition with
some unknown concept A,
Men not animals in composition with
some unknown concept B,
Animals not men in composition with
some unknown concept C
and not animals not men in composition with
some unknown concept D.
The premiss presents to us "rational beings" simply as a class which by
composition with "animals" gives "men". And hence by the principle of
substitution [C42.41]
II
That class which by composition with
animals gives men =
Men animals in composition with
some unknown concept A,
Men not animals in composition with
some unknown concept B,
animals not men in composition with
some unknown concept C,
and not animals not men in composition with
some unknown concept D.
And the principle upon which the categories are to be determined is that
we may in the above proposition replace the special terms "men" "animals"
by the concepts "Universe" "Nothing". The proposition II then becomes.
III
That class which by composition with
Universe gives Universe =
Universe in composition with the concept A
all the terms following this becoming Nothing.
Now Universe is the only concept which by composition with Universe
gives Universe. And Universe in composition with the concept A simply gives

102
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
the concept A. Hence the concept A is determined as Universe, so that
referring to the necessary proposition I we see that Rational beings will
include all men-animals.
To determine the concept B replace Men by Universe animals by
Nothing whence not men by Nothing and not animals by universe. We find
from I [C42.42]
That class which by Composition with
Nothing gives Universe =
Universe in composition with the concept B.
Now that there should exist any class which by composition with
Nothing should give Universe is impossible. The concept B therefore must
represent Things impossible. Hence the concept men not animals appears in
the conclusion under the category of impossibility.
To determine the concept C let "men" be replaced by Nothing "animals"
by Universe. We find from I
That class which by composition with
Universe gives 0 =
Universe in composition with the concept C.
But the class which by composition with Universe gives Nothing is
Nothing. Hence the concept C is Nothing. Whence animals not men appear in
the conclusion under the category of non-existence.
Lastly to find the concept C let "men" and animals each be replaced by
Nothing. We have from I
That class which by composition with Nothing
gives Nothing =
Universe in composition with the concept D.
Now any class in composition with Nothing gives Nothing. Hence the
concept D is any class whatever. The class of not-men not-animals appears
then in the conclu- [C 42.43] sion under the category of indefiniteness.
Collecting these results together we have
Rational beings =
All men-animals,
no animals not-men
an indefinite remainder (some none or all)
not-animals not men;
the existence of men-not-animals being at the same time declared impossible
in virtue of the premises.
Cumbrous as this method will doubtless [appear] it may serve to explain
the nature of a logical conclusion as formed by the limitations of a necessary
proposition, and also to shew in what way the two limiting concepts of
Nothing and Universe may be employed to effect the necessary reduction.

v
Analysis of Reasoning
103
But this employment would scarcely occur to any mind unacquainted with
the researches upon which the method is founded nor can it be employed
with even tolerable convenience except in connexion with a symbolical
calculus.
Much more remarkable is the method of elimination. It reduces to a
single rule or principle the elimination of any concept from any proposition
however complex or from any system of propositions and the rule though
perfectly general is such that it would seem in the highest degree improbable
that it should have been discovered without an expli- [C42.44] cit study of
the formal laws upon which it is founded. I will state the rule as applicable to
single propositions and briefly illustrate it by an example.
The law is the following If any proposition be reduced to a form in which
it expresses the non-existence of a class, the elimination of any concept
involved in the expression of that class will be effected by substituting for
that concept in the given expression the limiting concepts "Universe"
"Nothing" successively compounding the expressions thus obtained and
affirming by a proposition that the class so defined is non-existent.
Let us apply the rule without intervention of mathematics to the
proposition "Men =rational beings that are animals" and suppose it required
to eliminate the concept rational beings. We have
Men except rational beings that are animals do not exist,
in which form it expresses the non-existence of a class. In that class
substituting for "rational beings" "Universe" we obtain "Men except
animals", substituting for "rational beings" "Nothing" we obtain "Men"
compounding these results we have the expression "Men except men that are
animals" or [C42.45] "Men that are not animals" and lastly affirming by a
proposition the non-existence of the class so defined
"Men that are not animals do not exist"
a proposition in which the concept "rational" no longer appears. The method
of development applied to this result would bring it to the form
"Men are animals"
Lastly I will apply this rule in combination with reduction to the
premises of the syllogism considered viz.:
Men are mortal
Kings are men
These may be reduced to propositions expressive of non-existence in the
form
Men not-mortal exist not
Kings not-men exist not

104
On the Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic
B
And hence we have the single proposition
Men not mortal and kings not men exist not.
I stop to remark that this proposition is really and truly a single
proposition. We can form the concept of a single group or collection of
individuals composed of two parts viz. "Kings not men" and "Men not mortal"
these parts being from the very form of expression mutually exclusive and
therefore admitting of addition. And of this collective group [C42.46] thus
formed we can affirm non-existence. It is in the oneness of this affirmation
that the singleness of the proposition consists. The reduction of complex
systems of propositions to single propositions constitutes one of the three
great processes of the calculus of Logic - the converse resolution of single
propositions into systems of propositions being a particular application of the
method of development.
In the class whose non-existence is declared let us substitute for "men"
the concepts "Universe" "Nothing" in succession, the results are "things not
mortal" "Kings". Hence, compounding these and affirming by a proposition
the non-existence of the resulting class, "Kings not mortal exist not" a
proposition which development would reduce to the form "Kings are mortal".
It will be noted that in the above applications reductions of various kinds
are employed of which no account has been given e.g. the reduction of the
proposition "Men are mortal", to the form, "Men not mortal exist not". In the
symbolical methods no such adventitious [aid] is required or admitted all
transformations whatever being resolved into applications of the three
general methods of Development Elimination and Reduction the basis of
which consists so entirely in [C42.47] the formal laws of thought that these
methods are the same without any difference in the dual Algebra whose
formal identity with Logic has been demonstrated. [C42.48]

Chapter VI
[Preparatory NotesJ
---------[Between 1854 and 1856]---------
Of the nature and scope of Logic as
considered a Science
It is a very imperfect definition of Logic to say that it is the Art of
Reasoning or that it is the Science or even that it is the Science and Art of
reasoning. It is a juster and more complete description of it to say that it is
the Science of Thought. For it is impossible to give any satisfactory account
of the process of Reasoning without first analysing other processes of
Thought, Conception, and Judgment. Nor does it suffice merely to recognize
the existence of such processes and to describe their objects. We must also
investigate their laws. Except upon the ground of such investigation any
attempt to analyse the process of Reasoning must fail. It must sink into little
more than a mere classification of the forms of inference.
We cannot divide the domain of Thought into its several constituent
provinces and establish a perfect mastery over anyone of them without
taking possession of the others also.
The true definition of Logic as I conceive is the following. Logic is the
Science of Thought as exercised upon things and as expressed in Language.
[A92.11]l
Logic is the Science of the Laws of Thought as consisting of the
operations of Conception Judgment and Reasoning. 2
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

106
[Preparatory Notes]
Definitions of Conception, Judgment
and Reasoning
[Conception]
B
Conception is that power by which we mentally picture or represent
things to ourselves.3
The origin of the materials upon which conception operates is
experience.
Experience is either by means of the senses or by means of internal
consciousness, the former the channels by which our knowledge of the
qualities of matter in all its modifications is derived the latter the medium by
which we are made acquainted with our own moral nature - with the idea of
beauty with the notions of power, of causation etc. Locke, Language.
Resemblance between our conceptions and the things for which they
stand [is] not necessary for reasoning. In the latter process conceptions
degenerate by abstraction into mere signs.
But as signs they are still subject to laws.
A sign is therefore a conception of which that portion derived from the
senses or experience is as it were suspended, and the formal laws remain.
The formation of signs is therefore gradual, it begins with experience it
is completed by the power of abstraction by which we can fix upon those
qualities which are common to many [A92.1] individuals, partly by that
power of substitution or representation by which we can make one thing
stand for another with which it has been associated and indifferently for any
one of a series of others with each of which it has been associated.
Hence signs are representative in form. Their connection with the thing
signified is by the law of association but not as founded in resemblance.
Hence they are arbitrary in form.
For the purpose of reasoning their laws must be understood, and their
interpretation must be known.
To what extent can the content of a sign be suspended? For this All
imaginations of qualities, impressions etc. physical or moral may be
suspended - but the distinction between the signs of different things must be
maintained.

VI
[Conception]
107
Analysis of conceptions 4
1st. Pictorial or representative element derived from imagination.
2nd. Formal character or relation to law.
The former not necessary for the purpose of reasoning but capable of
suspension. Important for judgment.
One reason not why it is not necessary but why it cannot be employed is
the imperfection of the senses, hence of our perceptions - hence of our
conceptions viewed as belonging to the imagination. [A92.2]
Different Theories of Abstraction.
1st. That we form a general notion not accurately representing any
particular individual.
2nd Berkeley's theory that we form the conception of an individual and
make this stand for the genus.
Both these theories contain an element of truth. The true doctrine is to
be found in a consideration of the imperfection and vagueness of all sensual
images whether as immediately given in perception or as reproduced by
imagination. All that is needful is that they should serve the office of signs,
should suffice
to denote what we
mean.
Particular measures [are]
unimportant.
General Question: How are the laws of thought to be determined?
Particular Question. How are they to be determined with relation to the
particular faculty of conception.
1. By considering the different operations involved in conception - 2ndly.
By enquiring under what conditions these operations are possible.
Operations of Conception
The operations involved in conception are the following:
Direct
Inverse
Addition
Subtraction or Removal
Combination
Decomposition
The operation of addition and its inverse is the basis of extension.
Combination and its inverse - of comprehension. [A92.3]
Symbols must be employed both for conceptions and the operations by
which conceptions are modified - also for the forms of judgments.
The laws of the operations will determine the laws of the symbols.

108
[Preparatory Notes]
Judgment
The element of judgment is the proposition.
Two theories of the nature of judgment.
B
1st. That of predication or inclusion.
2nd. That of identity.
The latter involves the doctrine of the quantification of the predicate.
Extent of this quantification determined by the laws of conception. It
must not exceed the bounds of Logic.
Hence numerically definite propositions are excluded.
We have: 1st. the Universal 2ndly the indefinite (v) 3rdly O. The latter
excluded.
In pure Logic All men are sinners means All men that exist in the
universe of discourse are sinners. A connection is established between
categoricals and hypotheticals.
From the principle of the expression of identity - the distinction of
quantity -
and the introduction of privative concepts all the forms of
judgments are determined a priori.
Origin of quantification in composition with the concepts Universe,
Nothing and the concept Indefinite with the undefined and the limits of the
defined. [A92.4]
Classification of these Forms
Objection respecting the negative (that it constitutes a denial). Solution
of the difficulty by means of hypothetical propositions.
Necessary judgments derived from the
laws of thought (trifling
propositions).
Kant's distinction of analytical and synthetical judgment rather
necessary and contingent or necessary and empirical.
Reasoning
Primary division into synthetical and analytical.
Synthetical recognizes direct operations only.

VI
Reasoning
109
Its fundamental laws are 1st. The law of substitution. 2nd. Like
operations performed on like subjects produce like effects.
The law of substitution is the principle of identity continued.
The law of operations is analogous to the law of causation.
Analytical reasoning has for its object the expression of a conception in
terms of given elements by means of other conceptions with which it is
implicitly connected by means of the [A92.5] premises the discovery of the
manner in which the form of a concept whose matter is given is effected by
given premises.
It seeks to determine a notion 1st By those general principles
contradiction and excluded middle which prescribe to a certain extent
beforehand the forms of all conceptions. 2ndly. by imposing thereupon the
further limitations involved in the premises.
Thus Analysis proposes to itself a given end.
Further it is by Analysis that we must proceed when the inverse
operations of Conception are involved.
The peculiar principle thus introduced is that where like operations have
produced like results the subject upon which those operations have been
performed must be included in the most general determination of the
subject, upon which the other operation has been performed.
Or the two laws may be thus stated. Where operations are definite like
operations performed upon like subjects produce like results.
Where operations are indefinite like operations performed upon like
subjects produce results whose range of possibility is the same.
This principle has also a metaphysical analogue referring not to the
calculation of effects but to the research of causes or of antecedent states e.g.
where two like causes of change have produced like results we may conclude
not that the antecedent state of things upon which the one cause operated
was [A92.6] the same as that upon which the other cause operated - but that
it must have been equivalent to some one of the possible states of things out
of which the other cause might have elicited the result observed.

110
[Preparatory Notes]
[Further Considerations]5
B
The question now arises, how is it possible to determine scientifically the
result of an inverse operation. In other words How shall we determine the
most general expression of the subject upon which the performance of a given
direct operation shall produce a given definite result.
The answer to this question is contained in the statement of another
general principle governing the connection of Thought with Language viz.
the processes of Reasoning depend only on the formal laws and are
independent of the interpretation of the symbols employed.
Antecedently to the publication of the Laws of Thought no solution of
this question had been attempted nor had the question itself been distinctly
conceived or entertained.
The solution given in the Laws of Thought is a complete one, but seems
to introduce an extra logical element, viz. the analogy which exists between
the formal Laws of Logic and the formal laws of a particular species of
Arithmetic.
But it is one thing to give interpretation to a principle or rule within the
bounds of pure Logic and another [A92.7] thing to be able to demonstrate its
truth upon purely logical grounds. 6
It is not likely that the purely logical law here to be developed by
interpretation from a law founded upon the relations of Logic and Arithmetic
would have been suggested by purely logical considerations.
In an attempt to determine a priori the cause and development of a
science we are very apt to suppose that it must be kept pure from all
admixture of elements from without. And yet instances are continually
arising which teach us that there is a vital connection among the different
sciences.
Statement of this analogy and of the calculus founded thereupon.
Can the processes be explained and interpreted without introducing the
arithmetical notions? It can.

VI
[Further Considerations)
111
The two limits of conception are Universe and Nothing.
Each of these concepts is subject to the formal laws of concepts in general
and to peculiar laws dependent upon its own interpretation.
But the laws which are common to the two concepts are the laws of all
concepts whatever. This is the first property to be noted.
Again each of these concepts by virtue of its peculiar formal laws when
entering into composition with other concepts is merely determinative of
quantity. Second Property. [A92.8]
The principle of this employment in analysis is the following: If any
proposition is equally true when for a given concept entering into its
expression we substitute Universe and Nothing it is true universally.
Or this We may conduct all formal processes of reasoning on the
supposition that concepts admit of no other interpretations than Universe
and Nothing.
An illustration
do.
from development.
from elimination.
Origin of the four categories of Judgment existence, non-existence,
indeterminateness, inconceivability.
Objection that we do not actually reason thus.
Reply It is a mistake to suppose that the actual performances of our
nature in any case fully answer to its faculties and capacities.
We are in all things constituted with reference to an ideal standard.
2nd objection. The concept Universe limits the individuals comprised
under it by no quality but that of existence. Now we cannot conceive of
existence merely apart from qualities.
Reply. Here as in perhaps all purely scientific inquiries we have to do
with limits. We cannot abstract every quality and contemplate pure
existence - but this is the limit to which abstraction tends - and it is in
accordance with the philosophy of geometry etc. that we make the limit the
subject [A92.9] of our formal investigations.
Universe and Nothing regulative concepts.
Deep in the ground of all our reasoning about particular things there is a
reference to the universal. We may not be conscious of it but it is not the less
a part of the very constitution of the mind. [A92.1O]

Part C
"The Philosophy of
Logic" - A Sequel to
"The Laws of Thought"

Chapter VII
General Summary
----------- [Late r t ha n 18541-----------
Theory of Formal Logic
A. The power of conceiving any collection of things possessing some
common attribute as constituting a class being pre-supposed there are two
distinct ways in which simple conceptions thus furnished may by the mind's
own activity be made complex. 1st. By aggregating the members. 2ndly. By
combining the qualities of different classes.
B. The mind can proceed by courses respectively inverse to the above so
that there are in the whole four kinds of operations.
C. Thus - 1st - Given a conception x and another conception y we can
form a new conception z by aggregating y to x so that x+y =z. Inversely,
given a conception z and a conception y, we can propose the question what is
that conception x with which if we aggregate y we shall obtain the conception
z. 2ndly. Given a conception x and another y, we can combine these into z so
that xy =z. Inversely given y and z we can inquire what is that conception x
which if y be combined with it will produce z.
D. The primary operations are those of aggregation and combination.
And it may be questioned whether these are not the only operations
connecting simple and complex conception. In their direct performance we
pass from a subject (simple) conception to a resultant (complex) conception
and we so pass by means of another conception which we either aggregate or
combine with the given simple conception. In the inverse [C59.1l procedure
we have to seek what is the subject conception with which such a proposed
aggregation or combination must be effected in order to produce a given
complex conception as the result, so that the operation is the same whether
we proceed in the one direction or in the other, only in the one case we ask
what is the result in the other what is the subject.
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

VII
Theory of Formal Logic
113
E. Even in the case of segregation which seems at first sight to be
independently possible it would seem that the direct operation of
aggregation is presupposed.
From the conception "human race", by
segregation of "females" we arrive at that of males, but it may be doubted
whether the very possibility of this does not rest upon antecedent perception
that human race is a whole formed by the aggregation of the parts "males",
"females".
F. And whether this be so or not the two operations above defined as
inverse are fully determined by the inverse definition i.e. It is sufficient to
determine the result of the segregation of a part from a whole to say what is
that part with which if the given part be aggregated the given whole will be
obtained.
G. The operations of aggregation and combination are subject to formal
laws which find
one expression in the known
logical principles of
contradiction and excluded middle.
G'. If we express conceptions by letters, aggregation by + the symbol of
arithmetical
addition,
combination by juxtaposition
of letters
like
arithmetical multiplication then the laws of the two direct operations of
aggregation and combination are formally the same as the laws of addition
and multiplication in an arithmetic of 0 and 1. [C59.2]
H. Hence by F, the laws of the inverse processes if expressed by the same
notion - ... as in the arithmetic of 0 and 1 will be subject to the same formal
laws.
I. Again propositions as implied by the very meaning of the copula is are
expressions of the identity of the things denoted by the subject with the
things denoted by the predicate - each term under the implied limitations as
to quantity.
J. And if this identity be expressed by the arithmetical symbol = axioms
will exist which will lead to formal processes in equations identical with
those which exist in the arithmetic of 0 and 1.
J'. From G and J flows the symbolic method developed in the Laws of
Thought.
K. But now arise these questions: 1st. Can that symbolic method be
established independently of the formal analogy above noticed and without
transgressing the boundaries of pure logic. 2ndly. If they can, what is the
logical doctrine or theory upon which it rests, 3rdly. Is there an essential
ground of the formal analogy noticed?
With these may be associated another question viz. What is the general
result of the method?
These questions will now be considered.
L. The laws of the mental operation of conception as expressed by a
general symbol x are the same as the laws of a general symbol x denoting
either 0 or 1 in Arithmetic (G). And the laws of the particular symbol 0
denoting Nothing and of the particular symbol 1 denoting Universe are the

114
General Summary
B
same as the laws of the particular symbols 0 and 1 respectively in that
Arithmetic. Hence the laws of the literal symbol x in Logic are the same as
the laws which are common to the two [C59.3] symbols 0 and 1 in Logic. Or
to quit symbolic language The formal laws of the terms or marks by which we
express our general conceptions of things are identical with the formal laws
which are common to the terms or marks by which we express the particular
conceptions of Nothing and Universe.
M. Now conceptions may according to the familiar language of logicians
be contemplated either by extension or by intension. As adopting this
distinction that which characterises white things is whiteness red things
redness and so on so that which might be said to characterise Universe
contemplated as a class is existence and that which characterizes Nothing is
non-existence. Thus if we asked what is the whole of that collection of things
of which existence alone is predicated and required we should [say] it is the
Universe for that is by definition the aggregate of existing things. If we ask
what is that collection of things of which non-existence is predicated or
demanded we should say There is not such connection of things - it is
Nothing.
N. Hence the formal laws of things as defined intensively by the
possession of quality are the same as the formal laws of things considered
merely under the qualitative notions of existence and non-existence.
This conclusion may be independently confirmed.
O. It will at once be admitted that reasoning is so far formal that its
processes do not depend upon the particular meaning of the class terms
employed. We employ the same forms whether we were reasoning white
things or black things or things of any colour or quality whatever and hence
we may at once infer that we might make abstraction of all such particular
[C59.4] manifestations and ascend to that which is left behind - viz. mere
existence or non-existence. These are the only abstract ideas. The necessity
of taking account of non-existence as well as of existence if not a first sight
evident becomes so on reflection. For the things mentioned in the premises of
an argument may from the very connection thereby established among them
be some of them or some combination non-existent.
P. From the formal laws of conception flow the so-called principles of
contradiction and excluded middle. In virtue of these we may say of any
existing class of things that it either 1st possesses any assumed arbitrary
quality or 2nd does not possess that quality - that if two arbitrary qualities
are assumed the proposed class possesses either 1st possesses both or 2ndly
possesses the first and not the second or 3rdly possesses the second and not
the first or 4thly possesses neither and so on. Such is the origin of what a
large portion of what are called necessary judgments viz. of those which
enable us to predicate the possible alternatives under which any class of
things whatever may be spoken of with reference to any quality or qualities
whatsoever.

VII
Theory of Formal Logic
115
Q. The general form under which the solution of logical problems is given
in the Laws of Thought shews that every conclusion consists of a necessary
judgment of the above description (and thus far independent of the premises)
made to a certain extent determinate by means of the premises - the
determination consisting in placing each term of the alternatives in the
predicate under some one of the four following categories viz. [1st.]
universality, indicating that the whole of the [C 59.5] individuals expressed
by terms are included in the subject 2ndly. negation indicating that none of
those individuals are included in the subject 3rdly. potentiality indicating
that some, all or none of those individuals are contained in the subject 4thly.
impossibility indicating that the class of things denoted by the term exists
nowhere either in the subject or out of it.
R. The categories originate from the two fundamental conceptions of
existence and non-existence and the operations by which conceptions are
combined.
S.
The ultimate theory of reasoning in reference to categorical
propositions may then be summed up as follows. By an intellectual operation
we ascend from the presentations of the senses to the conceptions of things
under the relations of genus and species which are expressed by the general
terms of language. These conceptions we have the power of combining by
certain definite operations subject to definite laws, so as to form new
conceptions. These conceptions we have also the power of connecting in
thought under the relations expressed by propositions. Such relations are
either necessary i. e. founded in the very laws of thought or empirical. When
any empirical propositions are given the object of reasoning is to deduce from
them other propositions connecting the same conceptions or some of those
conceptions and the object of a theory of reasoning is to shew 1st. how this is
done 2ndly. what is the general character of the result. The answer to the
first question is that to ascertain very limited extent we can do so by direct
processes consisting in the application of such axioms as "Things identical
with the same [C59.5a] thing are identical with each other", If to equal
things equal things are added or if from equal things equal things are taken
or if of equal things [equal things] are predicated, the resulting things are
equal - but the only general method consists in this viz. that the conclusion
is expressed first in the form of a necessary proposition in virtue of those
formal laws of thought which constitute the basis of the logical principles of
contradiction and excluded middle and then the several alternatives in the
predicate term determined under the four categories above described by
virtue of the principle that every conception involved in the premises is the
conception of a class of things which is either existent or non-existent and
that the formal laws of such conception are exactly fulfilled by causing it [to]
merge in succession into the two elementary conceptions of existence and
non-existence.

116
General Summary
B
T. Reverting to K it must now be considered whether there is any
essential ground of the formal analogy between the conceptions of
non-existence and existence in Logic and of 0 and 1 in Arithmetic.
The answer is that the idea of unity seems inseparable from that of a
class of things contemplated as existing. From the conception of any class of
things let us abstract all that is distinctive in point of quality without at the
same time ceasing to regard it as a class and let us examine what ideas
remain and what is their logical import.
1st. There is the metaphysical notion of substance - but that does not at
all affect our logical processes. Some reject it wholly and say that we have
nothing to do but with qualities, others retain it but as a mere substratum -
even as the canvas of the painter according to its design at least supports
[C59.6] the colours which he lays on but does not affect the laws of their
harmonious blending. 2ndly. There may be the idea of multitude in reference
to the component individuals of the class - but the formal reasonings of logic
do not in [any] way depend upon the number [00 the individuals contained in
the class. 3rdly. There is the idea that the class of things is one class - one as
an object of thought. And this idea seems to be indispensable. We have said
however that the connection of terms implied by the premises may indicate
that some of the things are non-existent. Thus the ideas of existence and
non-existence must both be retained - as essential even in purely logical
considerations.
As a proposition is in its essence something which is true or false so a
class of things is in its essence something which is existent or non-existent.
U. The idea or conception of Class is anterior to that of Number. The
latter presupposes the former. If we contemplate a number of things as
selected from different classes they still come under the one highest class of
things and this is what the number has reference to when no other
specification is given. [C59.7]

Chapter VIII
[Preface]
----------[Proba bly 1857)-----------
The present work is intended as a sequel to a former publication of the
author's entitled An investigation of the laws of thought upon which are
founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities.* Upon the
nature of the relation in which it stands to that work and upon the object
which it is designed to accomplish it may be desirable to say a few words.
In
every
developed
science
two
objects,
both
of which
are
of
indispensable necessity, may be distinguished viz.: 1st the investigation of
its ultimate irresolvable elements and of its primary laws 2ndly the actual
construction of the science upon the basis which that investigation furnishes.
In the science of Logic the immediate subject of analysis is a certain
series of intellectual operations not absolutely simple in character. It is
requisite that we should determine what are the ultimate elementary
operations out of which all complex operations are formed and what are the
laws [to] which those elementary operations are subject. The investigation
occupies the first place in the treatise on the Laws of Thought. Among the
various criticisms which have been passed upon that work I have not met
with any attempt to prove that the results of this investigation are
erroneous. [W3.1)
But in the construction of Logic as a Science and as an Art upon the basis
thus obtained (as a science in that it consists of general theories developed
out of the primary laws above described an Art in that it applies those
theorems to practice) algebraical forms and processes are employed. To
many this has been a source of difficulty. Their employment is not however
arbitrary. It rests upon the ground of an analogy proved to exist between the
operations of thought in Logic and its operation within a particular sphere of
* Mr. M. thinks that this makes it a little too dependent on the former work.'
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

120
[Preface]
c
the science of number. This analogy consists neither in likeness of the
operations themselves nor in likeness of the subjects upon which they are
performed, but as every strict and proper analogy does -
in likeness of
relations. Agreement in formal laws is the only ground upon which any
connection of method between Logic and the science of number is possible.
And this agreement does not as a matter of fact exist between Logic and the
science of number in general but only between Logic and a very peculiar
branch of the science of number - an Algebra of the most special character
yet in whose theorems the highest generalizations of Logic are embodied.
Here a question of great interest presents itself. Is the analogy which has
been referred to above as connecting the intellectual operations in the two
distinct spheres of Logic and of the special Algebra under consideration
essential to the full development of the former science? I have certainly never
regarded it as such, freely as I have employed it for the discovery of methods.
And yet throughout the whole domain of truth natural and moral how often
does light stream from one department upon another. How little is there of
real isolation and independence. Assuming however that [W3.2] this analogy
is not essential to the object in view an evident consequence must follow. It
must be possible to interpret within the purely logical sphere and by purely
logical ideas and conceptions all the processes methods and results to which
that analogy has led. Now such an interpretation is the object of the present
work. I seek to bring into light and prominence the philosophical elements
which in my former exposition were too much hidden beneath the veil of a
symbolical notation. I think that the conclusion which these supplementary
inquiries will tend to establish will be that the science of Logic even in its
strictest acceptation is not founded upon any single truth but upon a
harmonious and wonderfully connected system of truths. I think it will also
appear that the different metaphysical principles which have been invested
by different schools of logicians with distinct and exclusive predominance
present themselves in that system under a new aspect and relation some of
them among its primary truths but possessing only a co-ordinate authority
others among its ulterior and derived consequences.
In the opening chapter of this work I have endeavoured to give a brief
sketch or review of some of the most important questions which at present
divide logicians and of the opinions which have prevailed respecting them.
Such a review appears to me to be an almost necessary preliminary to the
inquiries which will follow. If in its execution something of a controversial
aspect should present itself I trust that this will not be deemed its most
prominent feature.
I wrote the former book for mathematicians. The subject is of wide
interest. This is intended for the general public. Mathematics will not appear
except in the notes. [W3.3f

Chapter IX
Table of Contents
-----------[ La te r t han 1854)-----------
Chapter I: Of the ordinary Logic
Analysis of the Proposition (terms, copula). Conception. Terms thought
of without limitation the whole or under limitation part. Principle of
contradiction. Conversion of propositions. Reasoning, the dictum, the
supplementary dicta of Lambert etc. The question as to the ultimate nature
of the proposition whether an equation or not - also as to the ultimate
principles of reasoning - whether it is the dictum or the completed dicta or
the principles of identity contradiction excluded middle Sufficient reason.
Design of the Laws of Thought. Contemporaneously with the development of
the ordinary Logic there has been a development of mathematical science.
This is reasoning exercised upon a particular subject - and the inquiry arose
whether the analysis of its methods may not suggest methods more complete
than those in existence before - Design of the present work, to pursue this
investigation into its philosophical consequences, Le. to inquire what light
the processes of the laws of thought throw upon the philosophy of Logic -
what interpretation they admit within the sphere of pure Logic.
Proposition the expression of a judgment connecting the terms by the
copula.*
These two laws govern all the moods of Categorical Syllogism, including
under them as subordinate rules the "dictum de omni et nullo" - as well as
the distinct axioms, which have been framed by different logicians as rules of
the second and [C24.1] third figures. lb. p. 206.
* The principle of identity is immediately applicable to affirmative moods in any figure
and the Principle of Contradiction to negatives. Mansel p. 205-6.1
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

122
Table of Contents
Chapter II: Of the operations of thought in
relation to the science of number
c
Direct operations relating to number in general x+y =Y+X, xy = yx,
x(y+z) = xy+xz.
Inverse operations their nature - subtraction - division. Foundation of
their laws.
Operations relating to particular number. General principle. The
limitation of the subject increases the number of the laws. Laws of 0, l.
Methods founded thereon.
Laws relating to equations.
Elimination.
Chapter III: Of the Laws of Thought in Logic
Laws of Conception generally the same as of a system involving the
symbols 0,1, - of Universe 1, of Nothing O.
Regarding propositions as equations the laws of direct inference are the
- [sic] and therefore of inverse. Examples from laws of Thought.
Chapter IV: Interpretation of Methods
Distinction of Synthesis and Analysis both exemplified [C 24.2] above.
Laws of Conceptions include the principle of contradiction with others - e.g.
the indifference of order of certain operations etc. Laws of Judgment and of
reasoning best considered together. - Those which belong to synthesis not
readily expressible in common language - and not peculiarly interesting
from their appearance as mere truisms. Those which relate to analysis [are]
more important. Analysis first presents the subject under the form of a
necessary proposition whose form is determined by the laws of thought by
the principles of contradiction and excluded middle. These are properly the
laws of a priori judgments independently of the nature of the premises.
Secondly it shews that in the limitation of this proposition so as to produce
the conclusion from given premises no more of the essence of the conception
involved in these premises is employed than is involved in the primary
conceptions of existence and non-existence. These are the parent 2 categories.
From these are derived the categories expressed by 1, 0, 8, 1.
Thus a conclusion is an a priori judgment expresse8 by the laws of
contradiction and excluded middle and then limited by the four categories -
the process of limitation depending upon our contemplating each element of
the original premises under the two prime categories of existence and
non-existence. [C24.3]

Chapter X
The Philosophy of
Reasoning
------------[ Later th an 1854]------------
I have undertaken the present work in the hope of supplying a defect felt
by many who have engaged in the study of that peculiar development of the
Science of Logic which is contained in my treatise on the Laws of Thought.
Persons unacquainted or but partially acquainted with mathematics
have complained of the difficulty which they experience in endeavouring to
form any intelligible notion of the object of the treatise and of the nature of
its methods. Mathematicians while admitting without any exception that I
am aware of the validity of its processes have expressed a not unreasonable
desire to know something more of their philosophy. I have felt this desire
myself and the present work is the product of those researches in which it
leads me to engage. Possibly some may think that this is equivalent to a
confession of error or of change of view. The former it is not. The latter it only
is in so far as growth and development imply change. There are few
instances if any in which the philosophy of a science has been fully matured
by abstract thinking a priori and its laws and processes and special
conclusions afterwards deduced in the order of a descending sequence. Nor
perhaps are the examples many in which the converse order of ascent has
been rigidly maintained from particular facts to general laws and from
general laws to that higher philosophy which assigns to the different
sciences their relative places and pronounces upon their nature and
estimates their validity. Far more usually the methods of induction and
deduction of experiment and hypothesis are mingled together or rather
succeed each other in a species of continued alternation, fact correcting
theory and theory guiding those inductions from fact from which it is itself to
receive enlargement and accession. Such at least was the course of those
investigations by which the system of Logic presented in the Laws of
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

124
The Philosophy of Reasoning
c
Thought attained its actual form. And it is only a continuation of the same
procedure to endeavour to arrive at a point from which the philosophy of the
system shall appear at once more completely and more simply to view.
[A91.1]
In one important respect this work will differ from its predecessor. It will
be free from mathematical symbols a few illustrative notes excepted. For the
peculiar objects which it contemplates the language of symbols is scarcely if
at all needed. There are it is conceived persons, and private correspondence
has acquainted me with some, who are interested to know all that can be
known of the intellectual constitution and who yet may be unwilling or
unable to pursue trains of reasoning conducted by symbols in which the laws
of that constitution are if we may use such an expression embodied. Skill in
the
processes of art
or science
applied
is
one
thing.
A thorough
comprehension of the grounds upon which those processes rest is another.
Among the questions of speculative interest which belong to these
enquiries, the following occupy an important place. What is the nature of
that constitution by which men reason? What are its members, parts and
faculties? Is language an essential element? Does reasoning consist in an
application of a priori truths or is it a process conducted in obedience to
laws? If the latter, what are those laws how do we arrive at the knowledge of
them what is the nature of their dominion [and] in what relation do they
stand to the aforesaid a priori or necessary truths? Is mathematical
reasoning peculiar, or is it only a special application of the ordinary rules of
Logic? What is the nature of induction and the grounds of its validity? Does
it arrive at convictions partaking of the nature of certitude or does it still and
always remain in the realm of probability? These are among the questions
which would be most likely to suggest themselves to the student some of
them at the very threshold of the investigation some at subsequent [A91.2]
stages of his progress in it. And there exist many others of scarcely less
weight and moment to which it is not necessary here to direct attention.
The difficulty of so presenting the subject of a work like the present to
the notice of the reader that it shall not deter by its novelty and technicality
nor disappoint by a shallow and imperfect treatment of the subject is not
slight. The mode in which I propose to meet it is the following.
I shall endeavour to present in a plain and simple exposition those first
elements of the Science of Logic which consist in the definition of its subject
matter, the explanation of its terms and the statement of its more obvious
principles. And this portion of the work I shall aim so to write that it may
serve as a brief and popular exposition of the science of Logic. I shall then go
on to the enquiries which formed the more special business of this treatise
and of which the design and object have been already explained. It might
seem so much has been written on what are termed the elements of Logic
that the former portion of this task was superfluous. Yet no treatise that has
yet appeared has presented those elements in a manner accordant with the
views which I have been led to form of the philosophy of the science of Logic

x
The Philosophy of Reasoning
125
- none therefore in agreement with what I conceive to be the truth. I will
point out only one or two particulars in which the existing treatment of the
elements seems to me erroneous or defective.
Logicians recognise the tripartite division of the intellectual powers so
far as their examination falls under the province of Logic into Conception,
Judgment and Reasoning. And they admit in words at least that the exercise
of the faculty [A91.3] of Judgment involves that of Conception and the
exercise of Reasoning involves that of Judgment and therefore that of
Conception also. It would seem then that the analysis of the faculty of
Conception must be essential to the understanding of the operations of the
higher faculties of Judgment and Reasoning. And yet this analysis is almost
entirely omitted in the ordinary treatise on Logic. Sir W. Hamilton in a
review of Whately's Logic 1 first pointed out this defect.
And recent treatises as compared with their predecessors certainly
indicate a growing attention to the subject. But I do not know where to point
to even a complete statement of the elementary operations involved in
Conception still less to an analysis of the laws of that faculty. An enquiry
into the nature of reasoning involves an enquiry into the nature of the
processes of Conception and of Judgment but it by no means follows that the
latter enquiry is only interesting and valuable from its relation to the former.
[A91.4]
It is undoubtedly true that a strong distaste for all studies which are
thought to be of a metaphysical nature characterizes many of the most
energetic minds amongst us. But I cannot think that this is due to any
deliberate and settled conviction that the human mind, laying aside all
question of material profit, is not as worthy an object of speculation as the
material universe. I think it is rather to be attributed to a doubt whether we
possess any powers of introspection at all corresponding to those by which we
look abroad, whether the subject is within our grasp, whether a veil, dark
and impenetrable, does not shroud from our vision all that we should most
desire to know, and leave us only a possession of truisms. 2
The mysterious realms of thought if they are not wholly shrouded from
view is only so far revealed as to become the object of controversies without
profit and without [end].
An inherent vitality must belong to a study which against the force of
such presumptions still commands even if only in the hearts of a few a
genuine interest. The source of that vitality is I think to be found in the
human relation. [A91.5]

Part D
Miscellaneous Matters,
Letters and Fragments

Chapter XI
Logic
---------[Later than 1855, maybe 1860]---------
There is a more general and there is a less general sense in which the
term Logic is employed.
The more general definition of the term is implied in its derivation. As
the word Myo<; 1 signifies not only the inward thought but also its outward
form or manifestation so by the term Logic in its primary and most general
sense we understand the Philosophy of the Laws of Thought as expressed.
Now the expression of Thought here implied is the office of signs or
symbols of which the words of common speech are the most familiar
examples. And of all systems of signs this indeed is the most important. Still
it has been found a matter not merely of convenience but of necessity to
employ other systems of signs in particular departments of thought.
Number, magnitude and their relations, the so-called affections of space the
ultimate forces and elements of the material universe so far as they are at
present known to us, have been represented and the thought of which they
are the objects expressed by signs.
In this its highest conception therefore Logic might be said to be the
Philosophy of all thought which is expressible by signs whatever the object of
that thought, whatever the nature of those signs may be. Nor is this
conception either vague or unreal. There is a philosophy of signs which
governs and explains all their particular uses and applications, - which is
equally manifested in the forms of ordinary speech and in the symbolical
language of mathematics. The perfect idea of Logic is not that of a mere
system of rules but of a philosophy from which as from a common stem all
sciences whose method is deductive are developed and with which they all
stand in vital connection.
But though such a philosophy exists and though it is important that it
should be recognized not only as existing but as constituting the ultimate
aim of all inquiry into the constitution of our intellectual faculties, it is not
this which constitutes the meaning of the term Logic according to ordinary
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

XI
Logic
127
usage. For [this] purpose a far less comprehensive definition must be
employed. Logic according to this definition is the science of the Laws of
Thought as expressed in the use of the general terms of Language. Let us
endeavour to explain this view.
In contemplating a group of objects we are perhaps impressed with the
fact of their likeness to each other. We notice the several qualities in which
that likeness consists, we combine them mentally in some general
conception, we express that conception by a name. The things which that
name represents separated in thought from all other things in the Universe
constitute a class. Perhaps we compare this class with other classes, the
notions of which have been formed by a similar process of thought. We thus
become conscious of class relations. We see that one class is contained in
another as a part in a whole, -
a species in a genus. Hence general
propositions by which such relations are expressed. Hence [C57.1] reasoning
by which from propositions thus formed, other propositions are deduced as
conclusions. As the ground of all this procedure is the possibility of our
forming the conception of Class the Logic which determines the forms and
laws of such procedure, may be said to be the scientific development of the
notion of a class.
Now a very important question here presents itself. It is maintained by
some and perhaps by the majority of the professed logicians that the Logic of
Class implicitly contains all Logic whatever. All reasoning for instance it is
said is ultimately reducible to that act of the mind by which we apply a
general truth to particular instances. According to this view the perception of
the relation of genus and species forms the very foundation of reasoning.
Others depreciate the importance of this relation either by denying that it is
essential in any case or by affirming that it is only one of many relations
which are concerned in the different processes of inference.
To illustrate these different views let us take the following example from
elementary geometry viz.:
The line A is equal to the line C
and the line B is equal to the line C
therefore the lines A and B are equal.
Logicians of the Aristotelian school contend that the completed form of
this reasoning would be
Things equal to the same thing are equal to each other.
But the lines A and B are things equal to the same thing.
Therefore A and B are equal to each other.
And the reasoning itself is said to consist in the particular application of
a general truth. On the other side it is maintained that from the perceived
equality of A and B to C the inference of the mutual equality of A and B is

128
Logic
c
drawn directly without ascending to any more general proposition whatever.
It is said that the axiom
Things equal to the same thing are equal to each other
adds nothing to the reasoning inasmuch as we could not perceive the truth
involved in the general axiom unless we could perceive it in the particular
instance. And some have hence proceeded to contend that all reasoning is
hence of particulars.
Without entering further in this place into the different arguments
which have been brought forward on the subject, I will briefly state my own
views.
I think indeed that the Conception of Class is antecedent in the order of
thought to all other scientific conceptions.
For instance it is prior to that conception of Number which is the
foundation of the Science of Algebra. We cannot represent things under the
conception of Number without first supposing them to possess that degree of
likeness which permits us to regard them as units capable of repetition. But
while this conception of likeness is thus involved in the very genesis of other
scientific conceptions it appears to me that there exist other elements also
upon which the procedure of thought may in a more direct manner depend.
For instance in the example above given even when placed in the syllogistic
form we see that the conception of equality has quite as much to do with the
reasoning as the conception of the relation of [C 57.2] genus and species or of
general and particular. In the very statement of the axiom which forms the
major premiss the mind proceeds according to a line of rational suggestion
derived from the conception of equality. For to pronounce as a necessary
truth that Things equal to the same thing are equal to each other is really to
say Things equal to the same thing are therefore equal to each other.
In fact [in] the full and unelliptical statement of the reasoning as given
above there are in reality two distinct lines of thought, one founded upon the
conception of equality and exemplified in the major premiss the other
founded upon the idea of the relation of genus and species and applying the
conclusion established in that premiss to the particular case under
consideration.
It seems to me therefore that the opinion that the mind can proceed
along other lines of suggestion than that by which we descend from the
general to the particular is not at all invalidated by the fact if such it be that
we can throw every demonstration into a syllogistic form because in so doing
we may only be throwing back into a series of major premises the elementary
steps of suggestion and inference upon which the really essential part of the
reasoning depends.
But while we contend for the truth that there are other conceptions and
other lines of mental suggestion than those which are taken account of in the
Logic of Class, it is not to be forgotten that the conception of class really

XI
Nature and Office of Signs
129
occupies a position of priority in the intellectual order. That we should be
able to throw all reasoning or at least a very large portion of it into syllogistic
forms is at least a very remarkable circumstance. These considerations give
to the Logic of Class in itself a high importance. Though it is only a
particular Logic it is yet the most important of all the forms in which that
higher and more comprehensive Logic, the idea of which has already been
explained (article 1) 2 admits of being developed.
And now we are able to explain with some degree of distinctness the
object of this work. It is to develop the narrower Logic of Class but with
constant reference to that higher Logic above referred to, the philosophy of
thought as expressed by signs, to which it is subordinate.
If it should seem to anyone that the preferable course would have been
to investigate first and independently the principles of that higher Logic it
may be observed that it is from its very nature incapable of being developed
a priori. For the most part we are only able to arrive at a knowledge of the
universal by means of that of the individual and the particular. By studying
particular manifestations of thought we ascend to its general laws and this
we do not so much by comparing particular forms and instances and
selecting the truth which is common to them all as by some deeper faculty of
insight enabling us when contemplating some general truth manifested
under particular forms or conditions to perceive how far such forms or
conditions are necessary and how far they are accidental. Thus the study of
the intellectual procedure in a particular province of Thought may lead us to
some degree of acquaintance with its general philosophy. And it is only by
the study of these special and external manifestations that it is possible for
us to arrive at any adequate knowledge of that Philosophy in itself. [C 57.3]
Again though it may not be asserted that the entire philosophy of the use
of signs can be illustrated in connection with that form of the Science of Logic
which consists in the development of the notion of Class, it may be affirmed
that there is no other particular science which would answer the purpose of
illustration equally well. No other science brings us so directly face to face
with some of the deepest questions which are involved in the connection
between Thought and Language.
With a view to the succeeding inquiries we proceed in the next place to
offer some observations upon the nature and office of signs.
Nature and Office of Signs
1st. In the foregoing sections signs have been described [C 57.3a] as
serving for the representation of things and for the expression of thought.

130
Logic
c
There is a more strict propriety in this language than at first sight
appears. For 1st. Language is thought uttered. In giving a name to any class
of things we first distinguish those things in thought from all others, and the
distinction present in our thought when the name is given is that which we
seek to fix in the name itself. 2ndly. Thought, taking its rise in those
impressions which, through the constitution of our perceiving faculties,
external things produce upon us, advances by the operation of our other
faculties of comparison and abstraction to these general conceptions of which
signs are the immediate utterance. Here the order of procedure is manifest.
Things first presented to us in perception are in a certain sense reproduced
and presented to us a second time in the substituted forms of language.
2ndly. It follows hence that signs serve also as instruments of thought.
For it has been seen that signs are representatives of things. They first
express our conceptions of things, and then by a process of substitution
founded in association stand for these things. Again they stand for things
contemplated not as individuals, but as falling under the general conception
of class or kind i.e. they stand for things under those relations [of] our power
of conceiving which makes deductive inference possible.
Let us consider the following example of reasoning, viz.:
All men are mortal.
Caius is a man.
Therefore Caius is mortal.
This argument is called a syllogism. It consists, as all syllogisms do, of:
1st. two propositions called the premises in which two terms called extremes
are severally compared with another term called from its being thus the
common medium of comparison, a middle term, 2ndly. a final proposition
called the conclusion in which the two extremes are compared together
directly. In the above example the middle term is man, the extremes Caius,
mortal. Now it will be observed that the argument is valid in form
independently of the particular meaning we attach to its terms. We must
indeed understand the word men to represent some class of beings, and we
must in some equally general way interpret or conceive the possibility of
interpreting the other terms employed, but it is not necessary in order to
pronounce the reasoning valid that we should realize in thought either the
image of a man or the idea of mortality. The sign itself takes the place of
image or idea.
But the mode in which signs serve as instruments of thought will be
more fully considered in the following section.
3rdly. Signs are arbitrary as concerns their outward form, fixed as
concerns their interpretation and their laws.
That signs are arbitrary as to their outward form, is evident from the
diversity of languages, the same thing being represented in one language by
one combination of letters or sounds and in another language by another.

XI
Nature and Office of Signs
131
That they are fixed as concerns their interpretation is a truth which is
familiarly expressed in the rule that the meaning of a word or any other sign
must not be ambiguous. The sign is arbitrary only in the [C57.4] sense of
being conventional. Whatever meaning is once given to it, must continue to
be associated with it, if language is to be definite as a medium of
communication or exact as an instrument of thought.
Again signs are fixed as concerns their laws. For when interpretation of
a sign has been fixed, the use of the sign as manifested in the nature of the
combinations with other signs into which it is capable of entering is fixed
also. It is to be remembered that all intelligible language is organic in its
structure and owes its significance not simply to the meanings of the terms
employed, but to their combinations. Now it is the general rules of such
combinations, - the general rules determining the variety of forms under
which such combinations are intelligible which constitute the laws of signs.
And because language is as has been said an organic structure these laws are
fixed.
4thly. The laws of signs are a visible expression of the formal laws of
thought.
As signs are expressions of thought the laws to which they are subject
are expressions of laws of thought, and they are in a peculiar sense
expressions of its formal laws because they determine the variety of forms
which the expression of the same thought may assume. If we regard thought
as consisting of certain intellectual operations, it may with the greatest
propriety be said that the laws of its signs express not the conditions under
which these operations are possible, but the forms which when possible their
expression assumes.
For instance the conception of any collection of things as a whole is
formed by a particular operation of thought from the conceptions of the parts
which comprise that whole. From the distinct conceptions expressed by the
terms animals, vegetables, minerals, we can construct that conception of a
whole which is expressed by the words "animals and vegetables and
minerals". The operation by which the distinct conceptions are in this way
combined has its appropriate sign - the conjunction and. Now this operation
is subject to a certain manifest law. In the conception of a whole as such the
order in which the component parts are contemplated is indifferent. The
same whole is expressed by the terms Animals, and vegetables, and minerals
and by the terms Vegetables, and minerals, and animals. Hence we are led to
the corresponding but derived law of the sign, and, viz. that the order of the
terms which it connects is indifferent, and therefore that the terms
themselves may be transposed. And this law determines the possible variety
of forms under which the conceptions of a whole as composed ofparts may be
expressed.
In this as in other cases we observe both a law and a condition. The
condition under which the operations of aggregation above described is

132
Logic
c
possible, is that the parts to be conjoined be distinct, or, as we shall in future
say, mutually exclusive; the law of the operation when possible is that the
order of the connected terms is indifferent. While the condition relates to the
possibility of the operation, the law determines the possible variety in the
forms of its expression.
The intellectual operations with which Logic in the narrower sense of
Art ( ) is concerned, are usually described as Conception, Judgment, and
Reasoning. As to their offices it may be said [C57.5] that by Conception we
apprehend things in their different class relations, by Judgment we form
propositions, by Reasoning we infer consequences. All these operations are
subject to laws admitting of an outward development or manifestation in the
laws of signs. As respects the collective results of this system of laws it may
be said that the forms under which our conceptions, our judgments, our
conclusions are expressible become determinate either absolutely or under
variations which are themselves determinate.
Thus from the syllogism of Art () it may be seen that there is a
connection between the validity of an argument and the form of its
expression. If for the sake of generality we present that argument in the
generalized form:
1st. Premiss
2nd. Premiss
Conclusion
All Ys are Xs
All Zs are Ys
Therefore All Zs are Xs
we see that the argument is valid in form whatever classes of things we
represent by the letters Xs Ys Zs. From two premises of the forms above
exemplified we can always draw a conclusion of the form also exemplified.
Now this connection between the form of the conclusion and the forms of the
premises in valid reasoning indicates that signs are not to be· employed in an
arbitrary manner, but in combinations which are so far at least definite that
the nature of the connection in the premises predetermines that in the
conclusion.
Methods in Logic
It has been said in the foregoing section that in virtue of the laws of
thought as expressed in signs, the forms under which our conceptions,
judgments, and conclusions are expressible become in a more or less absolute
sense determinate. As a particular illustration of the truth, it is shewn that
there is a connection between the validity of that species of argument called
the syllogism [and] the form of its expression.

XI
The Aristotelian Logic
133
Now it is the object of Method in Logic to determine in a precise manner
and for our practical guidance what the formal conditions of validity of
inference and generally of correctness in the operations of thought are.
Accordingly the methods which have been proposed in the Science of Logic
e.g. the Aristotelian method, the method of Lambert and of Sir W. Hamilton
and the mathematical methods of Leibnitz, Drobisch, De Morgan etc. differ:
1st. as to what they assume the primary laws of thought to be; 2ndly. as to
the nature of the rules, which upon their assumed basis of law they furnish
for our practical direction; 3rdly. as to the extent of those rules. Under the
last head of difference would fall such questions as the following viz. whether
the rules in question apply to all the processes of thought or only to that of
reasoning, whether in their application to reasoning they take account of all
the forms of inference or only of the syllogistic form etc.
H is necessary that some account should be given of the characteristics of
these various methods in order that the precise nature of the method of this
work may be understood. But it may here suffice to speak of these with more
particular reference to the operations of reasoning.
The Aristotelian Logic
As an exposition of reasoning the Aristotelian Logic may be [C57.6J said
to consist of a collection of valid forms of syllogism arranged in a mnemonic
scheme and as concerns their ground or origin referred more or less directly
to a certain fundamental principle, known in the schools as the dictum de
omni et nullo viz.:
Whatever is affirmed or denied universally of any class of things Ys,
in which a certain other class of things Zs is included, may be
affirmed or denied in like manner of the class Zs.
or in briefer terms:
Whatever is affirmed or denied of a genus may be affirmed or denied
of any included species.
As concerns this principle a little attention will perhaps shew that it
contains a condensed statement of the office and relation of the different
parts of a syllogism.
We might give to it the more explicit form,
Whatever in the first premiss is affirmed or denied universally of any
class of things Ys, in which by the second premiss a certain class of
things Zs is included; may in the conclusion be affirmed or denied in
like manner of that included class Zs.

134
Logic
c
Thus in the example of Art ( ) it is in the first premiss affirmed of All Ys
that they are Xs. By the second premiss all Zs are included under the class
Ys. The conclusion affirms of all Zs that they are Xs.
In the syllogism,
Therefore
No Ys are Xs
All Zs are Ys
No Zs are Xs
ConcI[usion]:
ConcI[usion]:
Conclusion:
what is denied in the first premiss of the genus Ys, in which by the second
premiss the species Zs is included, is in the conclusion denied of the
species Zs.
There are forms of syllogism to which the dictum de omni et nullo does
not directly apply.
Logicians take account of three and some contend for four distinct forms,
technically called "figures" of Syllogism, dependent upon the relative
positions of the terms. In the scheme which recognizes four figures these are
distinguished as follows. Designating that premiss which contains the
predicate of the conclusion as the major, and that which contains the subject
of the conclusion as the minor, then,
In syllogisms of the first figure the middle term is the subject of the
major, and the predicate of the minor premiss. This is exemplified in Art. ( )
In syllogisms of the second figure the middle term is made the predicate
of both premises. Example:
All Xs are Ys.
Some Zs are not Ys.
Some Ys are not Xs.
In syllogisms of the third figure, the middle term is made the subject of
both premises. Example:
All Ys are Xs.
All Ys are Zs.
Some Zs are Xs.
In syllogisms of the fourth figure, the middle term is the predicate of the
major premiss and the subject of the minor premiss. Example:
All Xs are Ys.
All Ys are Zs.
Some Zs are Xs.
Now it is only to syllogisms of the first figure that the dictum applies
directly. To reduce the other figures of syllogism under its dominion it is
necessary either to convert one of [C 57.7] the premises i.e. to alter its form in
some legitimate way, but so that the subject and predicate shall change

XI
The Aristotelian Logic
135
Therefore
place, or to call in the aid of some other principle such as the reductio ad
absurdum.
For instance if in the above example of the syllogism of the third figure
we convert the minor premiss into the implied though less general
proposition, Some Zs are Ys we have by the application of the dictum:
All Ys are Xs.
Some Zs are Ys.
Some Zs are Xs.
In the same way if in the example of the syllogism of the second figure
we convert the major premiss into the implied and equivalent proposition All
things which are not Ys are not Xs, we have by the direct application of the
dictum:
Therefore
All things which are not Ys are not Xs.
Some Zs are not Ys.
Some Zs are not Xs.
Or by a reductio ad absurdum in the following manner. If the conclusion
Some Zs are not Xs be false its contradictory All Zs are Xs must be true.
Substitute this for the minor premiss and we have by the application of this
dictum:
Therefore
All Xs are Ys.
All Zs are Xs.
All Zs are Ys.
But this contradicts the given minor premiss. Whence the supposition
that the conclusion Some Zs are not Xs is false leading to a contradiction of
one of the data it follows that that conclusion is true.
Beside the dictum de omni et nullo the Aristotelian theory recognizes
also a number of derived conditions of validity in the syllogism e.g. that from
negative premises nothing can be inferred and it supplies, though this is a
later growth, a mnemonic classification of the valid forms of syllogism
designed to enable the student to dispense with the application of the dictum
or of any other principle.
We have remarked that the dictum de omni et nullo is directly applicable
to syllogisms of the first figure only. Lambert and others have endeavoured
to supply the defect by the invention of supplementary dicta applicable
directly to the other figures so as to render any process of reduction
unnecessary. Thus syllogisms of the second figure may be considered as
expressions of the principle Two classes of things (subjects) which differ as to
the possession of a certain mark or quality (predicate) are distinct.
All such dicta it is obvious agree in being like that of Aristotle only
condensed forms of syllogism.

136
Logic
c
The merits and the defects of the Aristotelian theory are both due to the
same cause. We must regard it less as a Science than as an Art - and to a
great degree as a mnemonic Art. It is rather a Natural History of the forms
in which human thought has been actually developed than an inquiry into
the possible - the universal - forms in which thought admits of being
developed in virtue of the constitution of the human mind. [C57.8] But this
very limitation gives to it within the proper range of its application a
character of directness which no mere perfect system can possess. We might
perhaps adopt a mechanical analogy and say that in the ages of its early
culture human thought wore for itself certain tracks or grooves in which
though not constrained by law it became dispersed by habit and association
to run, and that the genius of Aristotle first sought to map out those tracks
and to determine their plan. The modern extensions of the theory of the
syllogism gain their generality by the introduction of forms which though
legitimate in themselves have none of the sanction of ancient use.
Sir W. Hamilton's Theory of Syllogism
It is the express postulate of Sir W. Hamilton, as it is the implied
postulate of every professed extension of the theory of syllogism, that we be
permitted to state explicitly what is thought implicitly. Logic, says Sir W.
Hamilton, must be an unexclusive reflex of thought (Discussions p. 640*).3
Our concern, it is thus affirmed, is not merely with the forms which
syllogism has tended to assume through the actual structure of language or
in which it has been fixed by the authority of Aristotle and of the schools, but
with all the forms which it can assume as an expression of the mental act
which consists in deducing a relation between two conceptions (extremes)
from two given relations in which they stand to a third conception (middle
term).
For instance in that act of Judgment which is expressed by the
proposition
All Xs are Ys
we contemplate the class Xs as included in the class Ys. But [it] is clearly a
possible act of Judgment to contemplate two classes as co-extensive and so to
construct in thought the proposition
All Xs are All Ys.
We in effect do this when we realize by a single act of thought the
identity of equilateral and equiangular triangles.
Now the Aristotelian Logic does not admit in syllogism any such
proposition as the last.

XI
Hamilton's Theory of Syllogism
137
In affirmative propositions while it permits the subject to be either
universal or particular it always supposes the predicate term particular, its
two forms of affirmative propositions being
All Xs are (some) Ys.
Some Xs are (some) Ys.
Here then, Sir W. Hamilton steps in and claims that the same extension
be permitted to the predicate term as to the subject. To the two last forms of
affirmative propositions he would add the following:
All Xs are All Ys.
Some Xs are All Ys.
The principle asserted is known in recent controversial writings as the
principle of the thorough quantification of the predicate!
It is a consequence of this extension to the predicate of a proposition of
the same variations of degree with respect to quantity as belong to the
subject that the distinction between the two terms becomes one of position
merely. Accordingly a proposition becomes in the language of Sir W.
Hamilton "an equation between its subject and predicate." All that is
characteristic in his system may be regarded as following from this
fundamental view of the import of a proposition.
In applying this view to the theory of Syllogism Sir W. Hamilton [C57.9]
divides Syllogisms into two classes: 1st. those which involve in their
premises a proposition both terms of which are taken universally as All Xs
are All Ys, 2ndly. Those of which the premises consist of propositions each of
which is particular in one of its terms at least. For each of these classes of
propositions he assigns a distinct canon of inference. To the first class he
assigns the canon. Inasfar as two notions either both agree or the one
agreeing the other does not, with a common third notion; in so far these
notions do or do not agree with each other. To the second class of Syllogisms
he assigns the Canon. "What worst relation of subject and predicate subsists
between either of two terms and a common third term with which one at
least is positively related; that relation subsists between the two terms
themselves." In this scheme of comparison of relation as explained under the
sanction of Sir W. Hamilton by his pupil Mr. Spencer Baynes, a negative
quality is a worse relation than a positive, and a particular quantity a worse
relation than a universal.*
Sir W. Hamilton represents the acknowledged laws of the several figures
of syllogism, such as the dictum de omni et nullo for syllogisms of the first
figure as evolved out of the second of the above general canons.
* New analytic of logical forms, p. 74.4

138
Logic
c
He has further devised a peculiar notation for the expression of
Syllogisms and more especially for the purpose of presenting the procedure
of thought indifferently in either of two forms which in common language
might from the nature of their expression be termed the concrete and the
abstract, but which Logicians term Extension and Intension. In the mode of
extension it might be said that the class "men" form a part of the class
"mortal beings". In the mode of intension it might be said that "mortality is
an attribute of humanity", and it is seen that the order of the terms is
inverted. Now any system of notation which expresses terms by letters and
at the same time explicitly assigns to those terms their implicit quantity
enables us to read propositions either backward or forward and therefore by
substituting the abstract for the concrete and making a corresponding
change in the meaning of the copula to read it in intension as well as in
extension.
The Theory of Professor De Morgan
Professor De Morgan accepts with Sir W. Hamilton the principle that
Logic is the inclusive reflex of thought but he differs from him as to the
nature of the elementary propositions which constitute syllogism - and
hence as to the theory of its form.
In his system SirW. Hamilton's first species of Syllogisms characterized
by the presence of at least one proposition with both its terms universal finds
no place. Regarding propositions of this class as compound he resolves All Xs
are All Ys into the two component propositions
All Xs are Ys
All Ys are Xs,
either of which singly is admissible in syllogism. Thus far the system of
Professor De Morgan may be said to differ from that of Sir W. Hamilton by
way of defect. [C57.101
But it also differs by way of excess. Professor De Morgan admits and Sir
W. Hamilton does not admit what Logicians term "privative conceptions" as
the terms of syllogism proper.
To explain this distinction it must be observed that from the conception
of any class of things constituted as such by the possession of a given
common attribute, we can by a possible act of thought pass to the conception
of the class which is characterized by the absence of that property. Thus from
the conception of things animate we pass to that of things inanimate. The
relation between these conceptions is expressed by saying that the one is
positive the other privative, the general formula being Xs positive - not-Xs
privative. It may be added that this operation has always reference to some
implied sphere, or to use the language of Professor De Morgan, Universe of

XI
The Theory of Professor De Morgan
139
thought. In Chemistry we distinguish the metallic and the non-metallic, the
Universe of thought being "elementary substances." When the universe of
thought is not thus limited, it must be understood to comprehend all
existence.
Professor De Morgan thus admits in syllogism such premises of the
forms
All not-Xs are Ys
Some not-Xs are Ys
No not-Xs are Ys
Some not-Xs are not Ys
Premises in which Xs are the direct subject of thought. It need scarcely be
remarked that if in both premises not Xs are spoken of we might regard that
conception as positive, or rather the destructive of positive and privative
would not necessarily arise. But Professor De Morgan, in admitting Xs and
not-Xs together, admits conceptions which are essentially privative.
Professor De Morgan also gives a symbolical expression to syllogism
which differs from that of Sir W. Hamilton in one very important respect. It
is so contrived that by cancelling the symbols which belong to the middle
term and applying a certain rule of interpretation that relation between the
extremes which constitutes the conclusion [is] presented. It is therefore
designed to be and it is an instrument as well as a form of expression. But
this advantage is purchased at the grave sacrifice of a want of uniformity in
the interpretation of the symbols, and I believe it will in examination be
found that its essence as a method consists not in its symbols as signs of
thought, but in its accompanying rules, viz. the rule determining to what
premises it may be applied, and the rule of interpretation referred to above.
Mr. Morgan adopts the following notation.s
1st. Let x mean not-X.
2nd. Let X totally spoken of be X) or (X, partially spoken of be )X or X( 6
3rdly. Let a negative proposition be denoted by one dot an affirmative by
two or none?
Thus
All Xs are Ys
would be expressed
No Xs are Ys
All not-Xs are Ys
Some not-Xs are Ys
by X»Y or y»x
by
X).(Y
by x»Y
byxOY
and so on.s
In syllogism it is assumed that the premises are not both particular and
that the terms of particular premises are both universal. The premises are
then connected together by placing the middle term between the extremes
and giving it on each side that mark of quantity by which it is connected with
the corresponding extreme. [C57.11]

140
Thus the premises
All Ys are Xs
All Zs are Ys
are expressed in the form
X«Y«Z
Logic
c
if we cancel the middle term and its marks of quantity we have X«Z, i.e. All
Zs are Xs, a cancel conclusion. 9
Now Mr. De Morgan makes this rule general by introducing the
conventions that X)(Y shall represent, not as in accordance with the previous
notation we should suppose All Xs are all Ys, but some things are neither Xs
nor Ys that X(·)Y shall represent, not as we shall suppose some Xs are not
some Ys but everything is either some X or some Y. lO
Thus the symbols are interpreted by a rule determining the dependence
of the extremes in the conclusion upon the extremes in the premises, not the
rule deduced from the interpretation of the symbols. 11
It will be observed that the differences which present themselves in
comparing the Aristotelian theory of syllogisms with the two above noticed
arise in part from definition. Now definitions which are not very important
in themselves may become important from their connection. Thus under the
hypothesis that syllogism is the universal type of inference any differences in
our view of what syllogism is assumes a degree of apparent consequence
which they could not possess under a different hypothesis. It is a doctrine of
the Aristotelian logic that there is no inference from two negative premises
and this has almost become proverbial in the form of negatives prove
nothing. Take however the premises:
Some Ys are not Xs
No Zs are Ys
and though neither the Aristotelian forms nor these of Sir W. Hamilton
recognize any inference as possible, we may; there is a conclusion legitimate
in thought viz.:
Some things which are not Zs are not Xs
a conclusion however involving in its expression a privative term, we find
here the error of a too narrow definition. 12
It may be said that not only a Logic which shuts out such conclusions
cannot be the unexclusive reflex of thought but that in so far as it is supposed
to be such it must lead to a contracted and therefore erroneous view of the
functions and the province of reason itself.
Observations of a similar character might be made upon some portions of
the system of Professor De Morgan, upon his exclusions of propositions
where terms are both universal upon his limitation of the import of names.

XI
Of the mtimate Laws of Thought
141
All restrictions of this kind are a practical contradiction of the postulate that
we are permitted to state explicitly what we think implicitly for in the
syllogism of pure thought we can make direct use of propositions which are
universal in both their terms, we can employ names without any other
restriction than that they are names, we can and do make use of privative
conceptions. If it be said that it is only under such restrictions that we can
reduce the conditions of inference to general [rules], like those of Sir W.
Hamilton or symbolical rules of the same nature as that of Professor De
Morgan, it must be replied that this very need of restrictions not founded in
the nature and the possibilities of thought is a sufficient proof that the
methods which [C 57.12] have been employed are defective in their very
foundation. Their differences are such as to throw doubt upon the very
question. Is there any universal type of inference?
Of the Ultimate Laws of Thought
The name of Sir W. Hamilton is connected with other and perhaps more
important views on the science of Logic than those which have been detailed
above. His earlier writings on the subject contain an explicit statement of
views which those who in recent years have sought rather to deepen the
foundations than to enlarge the boundaries of Logic have accepted.
These views may be thus stated:
1st. That it is neither solely nor principally the object of Logic to
investigate the Laws of Reasoning, that it is concerned and equally
concerned with thought in all its processes.
2ndly. That the ultimate laws of thought are the three following,
viz.-1st. The principle of identity as expressed by the formula Every X is
X.-2ndly. The principle of contradiction, viz. It is impossible to contemplate
any object of thought as possessing and not possessing one attribute at the
same time. Its formula is No Y is a not-Y.-3rdly. The principle of excluded
middle, viz. Of every object of thought we may predicate either any proposed
attribute or its opposite, there being no middle course. Its formula is Every X
is either Y or not-Yo
And these it is affirmed are the ultimate laws of all thought. Let us for a
moment consider their real nature.
It is evident that they have no worth as expression of material truth, for
it adds nothing to our knowledge of things to be informed that every man is a
man and that every tree is a pine or not a pine. Their real office is to
determine the forms of necessary propositions i.e. the forms of propositions
which are true because of their form, not because of the nature of the
material conceptions which they connect. And it is important to observe that

142
Logic
c
they do this however many or few be the conceptions which they connect. For
instance if we form the three conceptions expressed by the words wood hard
white we may by the formula of excluded middle construct the proposition.
Wood is either hard or white,
or hard and not white,
or white and not hard,
or neither hard nor white.
In doing this we might begin with the proposition
Wood is either hard or not hard
and then resolve by the same formula the conception of things hard into
those of things hard that are white and things hard that are not white, and
the conception of things not hard in the same way.
But though the above principles determine the forms of necessary
propositions it has never yet been shewn how they determine the forms of
dependent propositions such as all propositions expressive of logical
inference are. The conclusion of a syllogism is true, if true at all, in
consequence of the assumed truth of the premises, not in virtue of its mere
form. [C57.13]
Whether the dictum de omni et nullo is the true, the only principle of
syllogistic reasoning or not, it at least appears that it is a principle of
reasoning, that it contains an element of formal truth different in kind from
the elements which are contained in the principles of identity, contradiction
and excluded middle. The logician who maintains that all reasoning is an
application of the former, and they who hold that all thought including
reasoning, is governed by the latter differ irreconcilably. And yet there are
some who profess to hold both doctrines.
In the principles of identity, contradiction and excluded middle, some are
of opinion that another principle ought to be added, the principle that
nothing exists in thought as in the world without a determining reason -
that every conclusion must rest on sufficient grounds. But this is a material
not a formal principle and has nothing whatever to do with the question,
what are the forms of propositions? What are the rules of inference?
Perhaps this survey may be thought to warrant the conclusion that a
theory of the intellectual processes might [have] to recognize laws of
reasoning as well as laws of conception, and of judgment - that it should
equally determine the forms of propositions which are necessary in
themselves, and
the forms of propositions which are
necessary as
consequences of propositions which have gone before.
The object of all science is indeed the search of unity - but it is the unity
which consists not in giving to anyone portion of truth a predominance to
which it has no claim not in making different portions of truth appear less

XI
Of the Method of This Work
143
different than they are, but in that connection which truths really different
may possess, as parts ofa system. The unity of science is an organic unity.
Of the Method of This Work
The unprogressive character of this science of Logic has been its most
frequent and most just reproach. And the question naturally arises is this
character fixed in the nature of the science itself or does it arise from its
method?
Perhaps there might be some ground for saying that it is fixed in the
making of the science itself - that the relations of class as such, the laws
which govern the use of general names independently of the particular
meaning of those names constitute too narrow a field of enquiry to permit of
such being added to that knowledge of them which we owe to Aristotle.
But the history of another science which equally deals with abstract
conceptions expressed by science must throw no doubt upon such a
conclusion. The Science of Number is not occupied about conceptions which
would be generally considered wider or more universal than those of Logic.
And yet it has been and is to this day an eminently progressive branch of
human knowledge. It has in its wondrous course made known to us the laws
of the Universe, it is in its actual state the greatest of all the intellectual
monuments of time.
Now we propose here to enquire what the method of this science of
Number has been, and hence so far as the light of analogy may serve for our
guidance to determine what the methods of that other science which is
occupied about the [C 57.14] relations of Class ought to be. And the ground
upon which we propose to do this is that both sciences are subordinate to that
higher Logic which has been defined as the philosophy of the Laws of
Thought as expressed by science; that either may therefore serve to illustrate
its principles.
It is important that this should be understood. Logicians have with
something like indignation protested against the supposition that any light
can be thrown upon the principles of Logic by those of Algebra. To attempt
this they say, is to set aside the true relations of the sciences, to subordinate
the general to the particular. Now if in the narrower sense of Art ( ) Logic be
defined as the science of relation of Class, it is not true that it stands to
Algebra or the general science of Number in the relation of the general to the
particular, because the conceptions with which the two sciences are
conversant are different in kind. But if Logic be defined in the higher sense of
Art ( ) as the science of the relations of all thought expressible by the signs,
then though it be indeed true that the laws of such a science are not

144
Logic
c
subordinate to or dependent upon those of any particular science, yet our
knowledge of its laws must depend upon our knowledge of the particular
sciences in which these laws are manifested. The order of the relation or as it
has been termed the Hierarchy of truth is one, and the order by which we
arrive at the knowledge of them is another.
The Method of Algebra
The method of Algebra involves the following elements:
A. A recognition of the fundamental operations to which the conception
of number is subject.
Of these, two are direct viz. addition, multiplication and two respectively
inverse to these viz. subtraction, division.
There are indeed other operations formed by combinations of these or in
some other way dependent upon these, but these alone are primary.
B. A recognition of the relations to which the conception of Number [is
subject] and more particularly of the relation of equality.
C. A recognition of the laws which determine the equivalent forms of
expression arising from the performance of the operation referred to in A, -
equivalent in the sense that the results which they express fall necessarily
under the relation of equality B.
And here we must distinguish between those elements of form which are
arbitrary and those which are not arbitrary.
The arbitrary elements are the signs by which we express the operations
themselves. We express numbers by letters, the operation of addition by +,
the operation of multiplication by x or by the juxtaposition without
connecting signs of the letters by which the numbers are expressed, equality
by = and so on.
All this is arbitrary. Numbers might be represented by any other system
of marks. The operation of addition might be represented in the same way as
that of multiplication now is and vice versa. And this freedom is due not to
any peculiarity of the science of Algebra, but to that general principle of the
[C57.15] use of signs which has been studied in Art. ( ), viz. that signs are
arbitrary as to their outward form.
The elements which are not arbitrary are those which do not depend
upon the individual form or structure of the signs employed but upon the
laws of their combination.
For instance whatever numbers are expressed by the letters x and y we
have
x+y =y+x
The law of thought here expressed is the following, viz. the order in
which we think of the component members which by addition make up a sum
is indifferent. Now this is a law which is independent of any conventions as

XI
The Method of Algebra
145
to the mode of expressing the component numbers themselves or the
connecting operation of addition - but when the mode has been arbitrarily
fixed the law of thought becomes a law of expression and determines the
variety of equivalent possible forms. If we choose to express the addition of
two numbers by the juxtaposition of their singles the law would assume the
following expression, viz.:
xy =yx
But it is easy to see that it is the same essential law which is manifested
in both.
D. A recognition of the axioms founded in the relation of equality.
There are such principles as the following viz.:
If equals be added to equals the whole are equals.
If equals be subtracted from equals the remainder is equal.If equals
be multiplied by equals the products are equal.
There is an important distinction between these axiomatic laws and the
formal laws referred to in C. The latter expresses the forms of what may be
termed necessary equivalents the former of a dependent or inferred
equivalence.
The equality expressed by
x+y =y+x
depends not for its truth and validity upon what particular numbers are
expressed by x and y, but when from the given equations
we infer the equation
x=y
w =z
x+w =y+z
we arrive at a result which is not true because x, w, y and z are numbers, but
because they are numbers connected by given prior relations.
Upon this basis of the expression of numbers, of the operations to which
the numbers are subject and of the relations in which they stand by signs
and upon the determination of the laws of these signs the method of Algebra
is founded. Now there is nothing in the general character of that method
which in a peculiar sense restricts its application to the Science of Number.
Wherever we have to do with the analysis of expressed Thought our object
should be first to determine the primary intellectual operations of which it
consists secondly to investigate the fundamental laws of these operations
thirdly to give formal expression to both in the sign by which the Thought is
expressed, and the laws by which the signs are governed.
The procedure of the particular Science of Algebra serves to illustrate
these principles which in reality belong to Logic itself in the higher sense of

146
Logic
c
that term explained in Art. 1. [C57.16] and hence flows into all its particular
manifestations.
The Science of Algebra involves also in some of its processes another
principle distinct from those above explained but deserving particular
attention.
The formal laws of science are determined from the nature of the
operations which those signs represent. Those operations are conceived in
thought as capable of being realised in the world of things. Thus the addition
of two numbers is an abstract representation of the collection of two groups
of numerable things into a single group and this is an operation which can
always be conceived possible whatever the number of the things in either
group may be.
Hence the formal law of the operation of addition expressed by
x+y =y+x
imposes no restriction upon the numbers represented by x and y. But the
operation of subtraction denoted by the sign - does presuppose the condition
that when a number x is to [be] diminished by another number y, x should be
greater than y. The equation
x+z-y =x-y+z
is perfectly intelligible and necessarily true when x, y, z denote numbers of
which x is greater than y and we can realize it or conceive it to be realized in
the world of things in a variety of ways. But are we permitted to employ the
above equation as if it were true i.e. to substitute one of the forms connected
by the sign = for the other without such implied condition connecting 13 the
numbers x and y?
Now the method of Algebra assumes that we may do this - that in the
procedure of the intellect the formal law is independent of the conditions of
restrictions imposed upon its material realization. All experience shews that
this may be safely done once that the data of the process of reasoning within
the province of Algebra are expressed by its symbols, and the formal laws
become everything. The result is always found to be the same as if the
conditions of material realization had been attended to throughout. Now it is
a very important question of general Logic perhaps the deepest question of
all Logic whether this procedure is founded in the very constitution of the
intellect or to speak more precisely in that part of the intellectual
constitution in virtue of which we reason by the use of signs.
I will at once say that I think that it is thus founded, and I do this rather
upon the ground of a large induction upon the actual processes of
mathematics than of that of the perception of the truth as axiomatic. But
quitting this somewhat conjectural reason I briefly state to what extent I
think the principle may be adopted in general Logic without assuming any
position which would not be recognized generally as true.

XI
The Method of Algebra
147
It will then be admitted that it suffices in expressing processes of
thought to attend only to the formal laws of its symbols provided that in so
doing we never transgress the conditions under which the formal laws were
themselves determined. The procedure indeed is formal but each step of it is
only representative of an external reality - each step we might conceive to be
realized in the world of things. The thought and reasoning of common life are
of this kind. We do not always think that which our words express but it is
always assumed that our words express something which is capable of being
thought. [C57.17] If we employ only the association of words we do so with
the understanding that such an association represents a conceivable
association in the world of experience.
It is evidently possible that in the world of experience there may exist
different systems of things corresponding to which there may exist in the
world of thought different corresponding systems of conceptions and ideas.
And considering two such systems it is possible that the formal laws may be
the same while the conditions of their realization in the world of experience
may be different. Let us endeavour before proceeding further to exemplify
this remark.
It has been seen that when we form the conception of simple number the
possible operations of thought in dealing with this conception are limited by
conditions. The operation of subtracting one number from another is possible
only on the supposition that the number to be subtracted is the smaller. But
when we think of number not simply but associated with the idea of linear
extension in space the condition above referred to ceases to be necessary. If
we represent by +x +y etc. distances measured along a line in one direction
from a given point and by -x -y distances measured from the opposite
direction from the same point then x - y becomes interpretable whatever may
be the absolute magnitudes of x and y.
At the same time all the formal laws of signs are the same in the one
system as in the other - in the system of simple number as in that of
numbers affected with another attribute derived from our acquaintance with
space and direction. There are indeed other affections of Number besides this
one which would equally serve the same purpose of illustration but all
suppose equally an extension of our powers of conception through the means
of larger experience without affecting the formal laws of thinking which
govern thought as exercised in the domain of that lesser experience which
presents Number only in its simple and unaffected essence.
Now let us consider the above case in connection with the principle
already affirmed that "it suffices in expressing processes of thought to attend
to the formal laws of its symbols provided that in so doing we transgress not
the conditions under which the formal laws were themselves determined."
Manifestly it follows that in our reasonings about simple number we may
proceed with the same freedom as if we were reasoning about number under

148
Logic
c
affections which do not affect its formal laws but enlarge the conditions
under which our processes founded upon these laws admit of interpretation.
And generally if any system of symbols subject to formal laws express
thought under conditions of interpretation which are not essential to all
thought obeying the same formal laws the conditions of interpretation do not
impose any necessary restriction upon the processes which the formal laws
sanction.
In all this we have but an exemplification of one great proof viz. that the
intellectual procedure as governed by formal laws and the power of
conception whether as limited by its own constitution or by the constitution
of the world of experience are to a certain extent independent of each other.
As to the nature of this independence all our actual knowledge tends to the
conclusion that though the intellectual procedure is governed by formal laws
for our knowledge of which we are [C57.181 indebted to our powers of
conception it is not subject to the limitations and restrictions to which the
latter are subject.
As a memorable example of this we are undoubtedly able to express in
symbolical forms the solutions of many of the dynamical problems of a
universe not restricted by the condition that space exists in three dimensions
only - and therefore to us inconceivable.
But the extent to which we design to carry this principle here is simply to
the assertion that conditions of interpretation which in the world of
experience are not necessarily associated with the particular scheme of
formal laws ought not to restrict the formal procedure of thought.
One observation yet remains. There are perhaps no cases in which that
freedom from dependence upon conditions of interpretation which the above
principle claims is really necessary as a condition of arriving at results of
thought. It may be regarded as certain that all legitimate consequences of
reason may be obtained by procedure of thought which while governed by
formal laws never transgresses any actual conditions of interpretation. The
freedom claimed is therefore valuable partly for the practical convenience
which it secures, partly and perhaps chiefly because it practically illustrates
a great mental law.
Method of This Work
The method above described will be employed in the development of the
Logic of Class in the present work with such differences as arise from the
difference of the subjects, differences which do not affect the essential
character of the method. It may be proper to state beforehand the principal
steps of the application.
1st. We shall investigate the formal laws of the operation involved in
conception.

XI
Method of This Work
149
2ndly. We shall investigate the formal laws arising from the relation
which connects the terms of propositions.
3rdly. Upon these two sets of formal laws the procedure of the science
will be founded.
And now as concerns the mode in which the knowledge of the formal
laws above mentioned enables us to accomplish this end partly this consists
in the direct application of the individual laws themselves - partly in the
application of a certain fundamental truth or principle in Logic which the
laws themselves considered not individually but collectively and as a system
make known to us. On the nature of this truth and the nature of its evidence
I will say a few words.
It is fully recognized that the formal procedure of reasoning and it might
be added of thought generally does not depend upon the distinctive meaning
of the class terms employed. An argument the conclusion of which expressed
some inferred property of "red things" would be equally valid if the word
"blue" were substituted throughout for "red" or even if for "red things" we
resubstituted oxen. Of course such change might make the premises false,
but it would not therefore render the argument invalid. The conclusion
would still be a rigid consequence of the premises supposed true. Now if the
correctness of reason do not depend upon the distinctive meaning [C57.19] of
such terms as "red", "blue", "men", "animal" etc. the question arises does it in
any way depend upon their meaning? The study of the formal laws of
conception leads to a remarkable answer to this question. It shews that the
formal laws of all conceptions which admit of expression in the general terms
of language are precisely those which are common to the conceptions of
existence and non-existence. This is the general truth above referred to. The
entire procedure of the Logic of Class is thus made to depend either upon the
direct application of the formal laws themselves or upon reduction of all
conceptions expressed by the general term of language to their fundamental
elements, the conceptions of existence and non-existence, which are the
ground of these laws. Of these methods the former is synthetical the latter
analytical. Both will be sufficiently illustrated in future chapters of this
work.
It may be noticed that the principles of identity, contradiction and
excluded middle which in the view of Sir W. Hamilton are the sole
fundamental
laws
of Thought have their formal representatives or
equivalents in the laws above referred to; but of the system of those laws
they constitute only a part. Not only are other laws involved in that system
essentially, but the very constitution in virtue of which it is a system must be
regarded as essential also.

150
Logic
Results of This Method
c
Of the ulterior conclusions of the above method I shall here notice only
the one which I deem the most important viz. the answer which it gives to
the old question What is the general type of inference?
Before explaining what this answer is, it will be necessary to enter into
one or two preliminary details.
Every process of reasoning consists in deducing a legitimate conclusion
from given premises. In the Logic of Class which alone we are here
considering each premiss is a proposition connecting terms by means of the
copula is or are and these terms are either simple or complex - in the latter
case being formed by that mental process, by which different conceptions are
combined together into a single conception. Thus the premises consist of
expressed logical relations among conceptions and any legitimate conclusion
will express a deduced relation among those conceptions or among some of
those conceptions. In the case of the syllogism for instance we have two
premises expressing relations between three conceptions two only of which
are retained in the conclusion, the remaining one (middle term) having been
got rid of or to speak technically eliminated. The most general idea of Logical
inference here suggested is that of the process of thought enabling us to
eliminate from any given system of premises however complicated and
however numerous any of the conceptions they may involve and to express
the whole of the logical relation connecting the remaining conceptions
according to any legitimate order.
Now the formal laws of thought and chiefly those called the principles of
contradiction and excluded middle enable us to form a necessary proposition
connecting any proposed conceptions whatever in perfect independence of
any relation established between them by premises. Taking for instance
[C57.20] the two conceptions "men" "rational beings" we may at once say:
Men are either rational or not rational,
meaning thereby that every individual man belongs necessarily to one or the
other of two alternative classes composing the predicate term. If we
introduce another conception animal we have the necessary proposition:
(A)
Men are
either rational animals
or rational not animal
or not rational but animal
or not rational not animal
expressing that every individual man belongs of necessity to some one of the
four alternative classes forming the predicate term. If we introduce another
conception we should be able to construct a necessary proposition involving

XI
Results of This Method
151
eight alternative classes in its predicate term and so on. Speaking generally
we see that these necessary propositions consist of a subject term which is
perfectly arbitrary expressing any conception whatever, simple or complex, a
predicate term expressing the possible alternatives which can be formed
from any other conceptions and a connecting term of relation referring each
individual in the subject to some one or other of the alternatives involved in
the predicate. We notice further that while the class which constitutes the
subject of the proposition is, in respect of quantity spoken of universally, the
several alternative classes which comprise the predicate terms, are spoken of
indefinitely. While in the proposition (A) every man is referred to some one of
the classes composing the predicate, it is left wholly undetermined whether
any of the individuals in one of these classes e.g. the class "rational animals"
is included in the class men. We shall express this by saying that the class
which forms the subject is in the category of the universal and each of the
alternative classes forming the predicate in the category of the indefinite.
Now the consequences to which the method of this work leads with
reference to the question of the universal type of logical inference is the
following, viz.:
1st. A logical conclusion is always in the form of a necessary proposition
modified by means of the premises.
2nd. The nature of the modification is the following viz. the alternatives
which in the predicate term of the unmodified necessary proposition are all
in the one category of the indefinite are each determined under one of four
categories viz. the universal, the non-existent, the indefinite, the impossible.
When anyone of these classes is in the category of the universal it is
implied that every individual contained in that class is contained in the class
represented by the subject terms when in the category of the non-existent
that none of its members are contained in the subject term; when in the
category of the indefinite that each member mayor may not be contained in
the subject class; when in the category of the impossible that the class does
not exist at all.
3rdly. Such determinations of the alternative classes of the predicate
term under the four categories above explained are quite independent of
each other. Any alternative class may be determined under any category
quite irrespectively of the categories under which the other alternative
classes are determined. [C57.211
It will be observed that, as the subject term of the conclusion and the
elementary conceptions from which the alternatives in its predicate term are
formed may be chosen arbitrarily, we may have a considerable diversity as to
the forms of the conclusion deducible from given premises.
To illustrate this doctrine I propose to examine a few of the conclusions
deducible from the premises of an ordinary syllogism in Barbara.

152
The given premises being
All Ys are Xs
All Zs are Ys
we have first the conclusion
All Zs are Xs.
Logic
c
Now this is no other than the necessary proposition
All Zs are either Xs or not Xs
modified by placing the not Xs under the category non-existent. Again we can
obtain a conclusion in which the middle term is presented [as] subject, while
the alternative classes formed from the two extremes and placed under
proper categories constitute the predicate term. Irrespectively of the
premises we should have the necessary proposition
All Ys
are Xs which are Zs
or Xs which are not Zs
or not Xs which are Zs
or not Xs which are not Zs.
Now the conclusion sanctioned by the premises is found by modifying the
above in the following way viz. by placing the first alternative class in the
predicate under the category of the universal the second under that of the
indefinite the third under that of the impossible the fourth under that of the
non-existent, the conclusion may be resolved into that of the following, viz.:
1st. The Ys consist of All Xs that are Zs and an indefinite remainder
(some, more or all) of Xs that are not Zs.
2ndly. There exists no class of things formed by Zs that are not Xs. It will
be observed that the second of these results is equivalent to the ordinary
conclusion of the syllogism.
It may perhaps be objected to the above theory that it presents the
conclusion of a process of logical inference in a form which does not admit of
direct expression in a single proposition of common language. In the example
last given the presentation of the class of Zs that are not Xs under the
category of the impossible necessitates the employment of a distinct
proposition of common language for its expression: further it may be said
that the form in which such proposition assumes the declaration of the
non-existence of the class of Zs that are not Xs is one which common
language scarcely sanctions - the more obvious form of expression being that
all Zs are Xs.
I will meet the last objection first by observing that the form in which we
choose that any conclusion should be presented is simply a matter of choice.
Assuming the proposition The Zs which are not Xs do not exist we can at once
by an application of the method reduce this to the form All Zs are Xs or to

XI
Results of This Method
153
various other forms. But what is important to be noticed is that all forms
which are legitimate in themselves whether sanctioned by the customs of
ordinary language or not are in reality derivable from necessary propositions
by that peculiar [C 57.22] genesis by means of the categories which have been
above explained. And this leads us in answer to the previous objection to
remark that the necessity for the employment of more than one proposition
of common language for the expression of some of the conclusions of the
method proves not the abnormal character of that method but the defective
constitution of ordinary language. I do not use this term defective in any
injurious sense of comparison but solely to point out that common language
does not contain those elements and those combinations which are necessary
to express directly the limitations to which necessary propositions become
subject in virtue of premises. There is nothing in the essential constitution of
language to necessitate this restriction and practically, as I have already
intimated, it is not injurious, but it exists.
I will close this chapter by briefly summing up the conclusions which
have been arrived at.
First the intellectual procedure so far as it depends upon the conception
of Class, is determined partly by formal laws of thought partly by the
relation which all class conceptions whatever bear to the conceptions of
existence and non-existence.
Secondly. The principles of identity, contradiction and excluded middle
have their representatives among the formal laws above referred to.
Thirdly every conclusion established by reasoning founded upon the
conception of class, is in the form of a necessary proposition modified by
means of the four categories described above as the universal, the indefinite,
the non-existent, the impossible - the nature of this modification depending
upon the premises. In other words the effect of premises is only to change the
categories of some necessary proposition connecting the terms of the
conclusion.
These results relate to thought as occupied about things but there is also
a theory or doctrine of thought as exercised upon propositions - just as in the
common logic we have the distinction between the logic of categoricals and
that of hypotheticals. In all formal respects however, these theories are the
same. Only it is to be observed that the science of the forms of thought as
exercised about propositions, the fundamental conceptions of truth and
falsehood take the place of the fundamental conceptions of existence and
non-existence in the science of thought as exercised by things. From the
difference of the fundamental conceptions which constitute the ground of
formal law, arises a corresponding difference in the derived portions of the
science e.g. as to the constitution and ... 14 [C57.23]

Chapter XII
On Belief in Its Relation
to the Understanding
------------ [Date un kn ow n)------------
As it is impossible for us to define the elementary sensations and
emotions of the mind, it is equally impossible for us to define its elementary
acts and operations. And as all the knowledge that we can express of the
former is confined to their relations, so likewise is our knowledge of the
latter. We may indeed feel what it is to will, to believe, to admire, but we
cannot in language describe this consciousness. We can only state the
general laws and relations to which those several acts and emotions of the
mind are subject with reference to themselves individually and with
reference to each other.
Accordingly what I propose in this essay is not to investigate the nature
of that mental act which we designate belief, but to state some of its general
relations. More particularly I design to consider the relations of belief to the
understanding.
Every act of belief has reference to a proposition as its subject. We
cannot believe without believing a proposition. That proposition is a
statement, either true or false; an assertion that something exists or that
some things which exist have a certain relation to each other, or lastly that
some other propositions have a certain dependence upon each other. It either
simply asserts the existence of an object, or it asserts a relation existing
among objects, or it asserts a relation or dependence among other
propositions. There is no other way in which a proposition can have meaning.
It will suffice on the present occasion that we consider the second kind of
proposition above described, viz. that which asserts the existence of a
relation among objects. This is the more usual kind of proposition and all the
remarks which are made with respect to it will, with slight modification, be
applicable to the two other kinds of propositions referred to.
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

158
On Belief in its Relation to the Understanding
D
With respect to this kind of proposition, it may then easily be shewn,
that whatever may be the nature of the relation which it asserts the
proposition may always be reduced to a form in which it shall express the
connection of two terms by the copula is or are or by some other tense of the
substantive verb to be. Thus by the proposition Caesar conquered Gaul, we
mean Caesar was the conqueror of Gaul. By the proposition no men are
perfect, we mean All men are not perfect, Le. imperfect and so on in other and
more complex cases.
Now as we always know what is signified by the substantive verb which
forms the copula, it follows that our under- [E3.1] standing of a proposition
will depend upon our understanding of the terms of that proposition, or, to
speak more definitely, that the sense in which we understand a proposition
will depend upon the sense in which we understand the terms of that
proposition.
For example, a child who has been instructed in that conception of God
which is founded upon his attributes of power and of goodness is informed
that God is a spirit. If the meaning of the term spirit has never been
explained, the following will be something like the state of the child's mind
with reference to the proposition in question. The child will believe that God
exists and will have a distinct though necessarily inadequate conception of
his attributes of goodness and power; he will believe that there exists also a
something to which the name "spirit" is given and will believe that God is
that something, or that God partakes of the qualities of that something. It
may be said that in this case the proposition is to the mind of that child little
if anything more than a verbal proposition. If more than such it is because
the child believes that there exists a something of which the name is "spirit".
Probably he will endeavour to form a material conception of that something,
will invest it with form and personality and will make of it a picture in the
imagination. But with this part of the mental process which may be
supposed to be performed we are not here concerned. We confine ourselves to
what may lawfully be collected from the proposition itself. As the manner in
which the proposition is understood depends upon the manner in which its
terms are understood, so the manner in which it is believed depends upon
the manner in which it is understood. And hence, by obvious inference, the
manner in which a proposition is believed depends upon the manner in
which its terms are understood. In other words the state of the mind with
respect to the belief of a proposition depends upon the state of the mind with
reference to its understanding of the terms of that proposition.
If on the other hand the child has been instructed to form a conception
whether correct or not of the meaning of "spirit", the proposition will no
longer be to his mind a merely verbal one. He will form distinct ideas of the
objects to which the terms of the proposition refer. He will attribute to those
objects reality and will perceive the existence of a relation between them. To

XII
On Belief in Its Relation to the Understanding
159
the mind thus prepared to apprehend it, the proposition may be said to be
real.
As we then distinguish propositions into real and verbal according as we
understand the meaning of their terms or do not, let us distinguish belief
into real and verbal according to the nature of the proposition upon which it
is exercised. We may then lay down the following principles.
1. That we really understand a proposition when we are able to form a
clear conception of the meaning of its terms.
2. That when we cannot form a clear conception of the meaning of the
terms of a proposition it expresses to us a verbal relation.
3. That we can only believe a proposition in the sense in which we
understand it and therefore can only be said to have a real belief of
propositions which we really understand.
Of course when we speak of understanding a term we do not [E 3.2] mean
thereby a knowledge of all the properties and qualities of the object which
that term represents. It is sufficient that we know some one quality or
property which may serve as a mark or note whereby the object is mentally
distinguished.
Granting these positions let us consider how they will affect the
commonly received doctrine that We can only believe that which we
understand.
It will be evident that the state of the mind cannot be such with
reference to a proposition which we do not understand as with respect to one
that we do understand. And it will appear from what has preceded that we
cannot have a real belief of such a proposition in the sense in which real belief
has above been explained. The manner and the degree in which such a
proposition can be believed may be thus stated. We can believe that the
terms which we do not understand express realities of some kind, we can
believe that among those realities there exists that substantive relation
which the proposition asserts by its copula is or are. I conceive therefore that
it cannot with truth be said that we can have no sort of belief of a proposition
which we do not understand. Our belief may amount to little more than a
belief in a relation of words; but, so far as it goes, it may be a genuine act of
the mind not distinguishable so far as the mental act of believing (apart from
its subject) is concerned from any other act or belief.
In all true Science however, and therefore in Theology so far as it
partakes of the character of a Science, it may without fear be affirmed that
no merely verbal propositions, and therefore no merely verbal beliefs, can
hold a place. Whatever submission of the understanding God may require of
us he does not require that we should believe in the truth of propositions
which we do not understand. Not even in that modified sense in which, as
above said, the belief of such propositions is alone possible. It cannot
however be denied that Churches have required this; that they have not
seldom attributed a special merit to an unintelligent belief. Partly this has

160
On Belief in its Relation to the Understanding
D
originated in a confusion between verbal belief and real belief - between the
believing that certain words express a true proposition and the believing the
fact which that proposition asserts. But it has still more originated in an
unfounded notion that between Faith and Reason there is an irreconcilable
opposition, and that every victory obtained over the latter redounds to the
honour of the former. - It would also appear from what has been said that
the distinction which has been maintained by some acute writers between
unintelligible propositions and propositions concerning unintelligible
subjects is unreal. In fact as a proposition merely connects terms by the
copular relation is, are etc., it can only become unintelligible through its
terms becoming so. If either of those terms be to us a mere unmeaning name,
if it express a
something of which we
know no single quality or
distinguishing mark, the proposition will be to us unintelligible, or, at the
most, intelligible only in that sense which has been explained in the previous
illustration. I see no other way in which a proposition can become
unintelligible. It may be false or even necessarily false, a case which we shall
proceed to consider presently, but so long as we can form any clear
conception however imperfect, of what the terms mean we cannot say that
we are ignorant of what is asserted and therefore cannot pronounce the
proposition [E 3.3] unintelligible.
But it is not alone sufficient that the propositions of Science and of
theology should be real and intelligible, it is necessary also that they should
be neither self-contradictory nor contradictory of each other. They must
individually be self-consistent and in their collective regard be the members
of a consistent scheme. I apprehend that the consistency of any scheme of
propositions consists in its being accordant with the laws of thought, or as it
is sometimes said, with the laws of right reason. For in all cultivated and
disciplined minds there is an agreement as to what constitutes freedom from
contradiction and what does not; as to what constitutes correct inference and
what does not - in short as to what is to be understood by logical consistency.
It is perfectly true that we often in our unreason violate this principle, but
we are nevertheless so formed that we can, by due care and attention,
perceive when it is violated, and when it is regarded. And the more careful
and exact our mental discipline has been, the more do we feel the shock
which its violation occasions.
That it is possible for us to believe self-contradictory propositions will be
made manifest by a very slight consideration. We do not in fact always
exercise that degree of attention which is requisite in order to enable us to
perceive that they are contradictory. The proposition, two and five are eight,
is a self-contradictory proposition. It is a proposition of which the falsity may
be perceived when the terms which it involves are understood. But it is also
possible that those terms may be understood, and yet, through defect of
attention, or of some other power, it may not be seen that the proposition is
false. We need not however have recourse to the dominion of number for

XII
On Belief in Its Relation to the Understanding
161
illustrations of the principle which is here contended for. Many propositions
in which number does not enter may be seen from their implicit
contradiction of some plain axiomatic truth to be necessarily false. And it
must be remarked that every axiomatic truth is but a manifestation of some
internal law of thought. Thus from their inconsistency with laws of thought,
propositions may be seen to be false which nevertheless, that contradiction
were not seen, might have been believed to be true. Now what is meant in the
principle
above
asserted
is
that
no
proposition
of this
kind,
no
self-contradictory proposition, can hold a rightful place in the domain of
Science or of Scientific Theology.
It is also asserted in the principle above referred to that no mutually
contradictory propositions can together hold a place in any scheme of
scientific thought. It would be unnecessary to dwell upon positions so obvious
were it not that the error which is indicated is both possible and frequent.
Nothing is in fact more common than for men either not to reason or to
reason falsely. And in either of their cases, they are liable to the danger of
believing, at the same time, propositions which are logically incompatible. It
is perfectly possible notwithstanding all this, that their understanding of the
import of either proposition may be complete and satisfactory. It may be the
connection only which they fail to perceive.
The conditions then to which the individual propositions which are
involved in any system of Scientific truth are necessarily subject are briefly
the
following.
They
must
be real
and intelligible- they
must
be
self-consistent -
they [E 3.4] must be mutually consistent.
That it should be possible for men to believe self-contradictory and
mutually contradictory propositions is a remarkable circumstance. That men
should in any case be able to reason falsely is remarkable. What makes it
chiefly so is that the true laws of thought, i.e. the laws of correct inference
are not less rigid, not less exact, than are the laws which govern the physical
universe. In one respect they indeed closely resemble the latter; they are in
their ultimate form and essence mathematical. There is no example of
argument or of demonstration, so complex in its form, or so remote from
whatever is physical or material in its object that it cannot be conducted by a
mathematical process and exhibited in a mathematical form. The common
notions of mankind however associate that which is mathematical with a
certain mechanical necessity. Where then shall we seek for the solution of
that apparent contradiction? How is it that while the laws of correct thought
resemble in their subjection to mathematical rules the laws of external
nature -
the former are perpetually being broken, the latter never. I
apprehend that but one answer can be given to this question. It is that in the
contrast here presented we behold one phase of the characteristic
phenomenon of human liberty; viz. that phase which it exhibits in its
relation to the intellect; just as in the moral liberty of man we survey the
same phenomenon in its relation to the affections and the will. [E3.5]

Chapter XIII
The Philosophical Idea
of Freedom
------------[Possibly 1850]------------
Infinite evolution
*The more complex any system is, the more difficult is it to determine its
motion under external influences.
The motion of an atom simply expresses the nature of the forces to which
it is subject.
It would be most of all difficult to determine the motion of a system
which should contain secret springs or sources of power apt to come into
operation under the influence of particular causes, yet until this influence is
exercised giving us notice of their existence.
If in such a machine the springs were infinite it would be impossible
absolutely to predict its movements at a given epoch; yet we should know
that they were partly the result of external causes partly of its own internal
and infinite nature. Human freedom may be something of this kind. It may
be the actual development of our intellectual and moral nature, may be the
unfolding of a system in which the divine wisdom has implanted infinite
[B 77.1] faculties capacities emotions and seems destined to influence them
but not to overbear them, not to produce the same result as if they were not.
And together with the infinite faculties capacities emotions, there may
be a design in the very constitution of the system, a pervading reference to
some end; in the intellect truth, in the moral part of our nature virtue in the
* [Headnote] Particular remarks on this freedom. Such a freedom if it be granted,
analogous to but not identical with is resulting from the freedom of the will.
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

XIII
Infinite evolution
163
sensitive happiness, giving to the actual constitution and circumstance of
our nature a certain teleological character.
But whether this be so or not the fact of the existence of mathematical
laws in the human intellect, the fact that they are not necessarily obeyed,
that their dominion in truth and not in necessity is established and if the
analogy of our mental state remains unbroken the same existence of law
invested with the same character of rightful but not necessary dominion
must fully be admitted as our moral constitution.
If there are conclusions of science they ought to affect human conduct.
Yet the prevalent feeling among intellectual men of the world seems to be
that there are no characteristics of immutable laws apart from the [B 77.2]
acknowledged realm of necessity.
If it were as firmly believed that truth in the intellect that justice and
mercy in the life form as real a part of the design and constitution of our
nature as the law of gravitation does of the material universe we should
think that some influence would be produced by such a conviction.
The above in two chapters: 1st Philosophical 2ndly Historical.
Philosophical: 1st Resume of the laws. 2nd nature and character of the
laws, 3rd Relation of the mind to them.
Historical
1st cosmoprea1 of the forms of thought: unity, duality.
Both Anselmian theory and
2nd Modern views as to the extent in which the constitution of the mind
influences the forms of philosophical speculation. Question of general ideas.
[B 77.3]

Chapter XIV
Note [to Aristotle]
-----------[Date unknown)-----------
The whole connected passage Metaphysics Bk 3 1 Sec. 3,4 is as follows.
3. We must moreover say whether the enquiry concerning the
so-called axioms in mathematics and the enquiry concerning Being,
belong to one or to different sciences. It is manifest that the
speculation concerning these things belongs to one science, - and
that the science of the philosopher. For these things relate to all
existences and not to any genus of things separately from others and
all make use of this principle that whatever exists may be considered
in respect of existence and that each genus of things partakes of
being. And of this principle they make use so far as is convenient for
them to do - and that is so far as the genus concerning which they
make their demonstrations offers occasion. Wherefore as it is
manifest that the properties of pure being belong to all things (for
this is common to them all) so the speculation of him who would
recognize being as being must take account of these. Wherefore none
of those who view things only in part as the geometer and the
arithmetician
undertakes
to
say
anything
respecting
these
(properties of pure being) as to whether they are true or false. Some
of the physical philosophers however perhaps do this. For they alone
supposed themselves to extend their views to all nature and to Being.
Since however there is a higher than the physical philosopher (for
physical nature is but a genus of Being) so there is an enquiry 2 which
has reference to the Universal and to the speculative consideration
concerning the Primary Existence. There is indeed a physical
wisdom but it is not the first wisdom.3 As to what some say
concerning truth and the manner of receiving its evidence they speak
[B 164.1] falsely through ignorance of analytical principles. For they
ought to approach this inquiry having a previous knowledge of those
principles and not as learners. That it is the business of the
philosopher and of him who would speculate concerning the origin of
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

XIV
Note [to Aristotle]
165
all being, also to examine carefully the principles of reasoning is
manifest. It becometh him who would have some assured knowledge
of any genus of things to be able to assert what are the most certain
principles of that matter as also him who would have an assured
knowledge of existences as existences to be able to say what are the
most certain principles of all things. And this man is the philosopher.
But that is the most certain principle of all (principles) concerning
which it is impossible to be deceived. For it is necessary that such a
principle should be the most able to command assent (for all are
liable to be deceived about things which do not command assent) and
free from hypothesis. For whatsoever principle it is necessary that he
should hold who would understand existences that principle cannot
be an hypothesis. And whatsoever it is necessary that he should have
knowledge of who would have knowledge of anything it is certain
that in the possession of that principle he must approach the inquiry.
And that a principle possessing these characteristics is the most
certain of all is manifest. What it is after these things we (now) say.
It is impossible that the same property should both belong and not
belong to the same thing at the same time. Whatsoever other things
we would further define let us define them by referring them to
logical oppositions (i.e. to the possessing or not possessing of given
qualities].4 But this is the most certain of all principles. For it
involves the aforesaid defmition by opposition. For it is impossible
for any [B 164.2] one to suppose the same thing to be and not to be as
some think that Heraclities asserts. For it is not necessary to
suppose whatever anyone says.
For if it is not possible that contrary qualities should belong to the
same thing (and let us in this proposition effect the accustomed
analysis by opposition) and if an opinion is contrary to the opinion
which contradicts it, it is manifestly impossible that the same person
should (suppose] that to be and not to be are the same. For he who
should be deceived concerning this would hold contrary opinions.
Wherefore all who demonstrate refer their demonstration to this
ultimate opinion (axiom). For by nature it is the principle or
foundation of all other axioms.
4. Some however ignorantly think that they can demonstrate this
axiom for it is ignorance not to know of what things we may seek a
demonstration and of what things we may not. And it is impossible
that there should be a demonstration of all things without exception,
for the chain of demonstration would extend back without limit so
that there could not thus be a demonstration.
From this passage it appears not only that the axiomatic truth which we
have deduced as an interpretation of the fundamental law of thought
x(l-x) = 0

166
Note [to Aristotlel
D
was recognized by Aristotle as the first and chief of axioms, but that it was
also seen by him to involve the true principle of logical analysis by
dichotomy, i.e. by referring to every subject the possession of one or the other
member of each pair of contrary qualities. Of each subject we may thus say
either that it is white or that it is not white either that it is man [B 164.3] or
that it is not man and so on indefinitely. We see also that Aristotle fully
recognized the necessity of some undemonstrable axioms like the above as
foundation of all reasoning, a view to which his writings in almost every part
bear full testimony.
The result which the researches in our text would seem to sanction is
that all true axioms whatever are but the necessary interpretation of the
laws of the human mind - not truths innately stamped upon the mind
without reference to its constitution, but immediate results of the conditions
under which its operations are performed. This is in itself a reasonable view.
Nothing is more likely than that the mind should be subjected to some
conditions and that these should determine the existence of some necessary
relations among its conceptions. There must however be a great difference
between a science constructed upon axioms and a science built upon the
primary laws of thinking. The former must require the direct application of
the axiom in every step of the process of reasoning the latter will embody its
laws if we may [be] permitted the expression, in general methods and thus
become as universal in its actual processes as in the laws upon which they
are based. [B 164.4]

Chapter XV
Philosophy of
Mathematics
----------[Probably after 1855)----------
The questions concerning the nature and philosophy of mathematics and
which are familiar to all acquainted with the history of speculative opinion,
form, it is probable, but a small part of those which have at different times
occurred to earnest students without perhaps ever passing out of the silent
region of thought into the outward world of controversy. The common notion
of mathematics that it consists of a few clear sharp axioms, capable of being
applied in infmitely various combinations and involving in the application no
higher intellectual difficulty than that of arranging the order of those
combinations with a view to particular ends, was never quite true and is now
very widely removed from truth. Beside the metaphysical questions which
form a dark background to the whole subject and which seem to have chiefly
attracted the attention of those who have surveyed it from without there are
others relating to the logic and philosophy of mathematical processes of
which only those who study it from within can feel the difficulty and
importance. Of the questions which have been most prominent whether from
their intrinsic interest or from accidential association some have so changed
with the progress of human thought as either to have lost all significance or
to seem to us but as examples of that power of anticipation which gifted
minds sometimes possess. The reality of a connection between Number and
the constitution of the Universe is now among the most established truths -
but we can never think of that connection in the almost material form in
which it was [B123.11 thought of by the followers of Pythagoras. Other
questions there are scarcely less ancient, the form and statement of which
have undergone but little change. Such are those which relate to the nature
of the objects about which Geometry is concerned and the source of that
peculiar certainty which belongs to its primary truths - a certainty which we
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

168
Philosophy of Mathematics
D
endeavour to describe when we term those truths necessary. These are
questions of which the present interest differs but little from that with which
we study the old discussions of them in Plato and Aristotle. It is a
metaphysical interest which seems quite independent of the state of progress
of mathematical science in the world. Again there are questions which
directly depend upon that state. Every great advance in mathematics has
either raised or revived such questions. For instance the discussions about
ratio and proportion which occupy so large a part of Barrow's Mathematical
Lectures 1 and of which the place they occupy there is only an index of that
which they occupied in the thoughts and writings of others in his day may
perhaps be considered as occasioned by that partial unsettling of old notions
which accompanied the rise of Modern Algebra. The rise of the Differential
Calculus was followed by controversies which still retain some of their old
interest. Nor indeed in one sense can that interest ever pass away. He who
would intelligently use that great instrument must if he do not historically
follow the controversy yet work out its legitimate issues for himself. Perhaps
this is the case with respect to all really great questions which have ever
been subjects of controversy. Perhaps we can never fully enter into their
results without in some degree going over the old ground [B 123.2] ourselves
- though the position into which by the progress of time and knowledge we
have been brought may by relieving us from the burden of old prejudices
make easy that task which was once so hard. Modern times also have
brought their own difficulties in connection with the study of mathematics
the most important of which seem to be connected more or less directly with
the great question of the connection of Thought and especially of Thought as
occupied in Reasoning with Language. Particular applications of this
question are met with in the various discussions which have arisen
respecting the use of "imaginary quantities", the validity of the methods
called symbolical and kindred subjects.
It must at first sight appear remarkable that in the realm of
mathematics controversies some of which have been perpetuated from age to
age should continue to exist. And perhaps it does thus appear strange
because of the contrast which they present with the great external facts of
the history of the Science, its career of majestic conquest, the consent
invariable and universal which its conclusions have claimed and have
received. Nor can the question fail to suggest itself: Must this contrast exist
always? Is it in the nature of things that while the history of Mathematics is
in one sense that of an unbroken career of discovery it is in another sense a
history of perpetual doubt and conflict? Now it does not seem clear that any
general answer can be given to this question. The points about which
controversy has arisen are as it has been seen of such different kinds that a
probable opinion of its issue in one class of cases would throw little or no
light upon the others. We must consider the [B123.3] different classes
separately. This is indeed a considerable part of the design of the present

xv
Philosophy of Mathematics
169
work - but there are some considerations on the different parts of the subject
which may with propriety be stated here.
1st. A careful study of some of the more prominent of the views which
have been held of the philosophy of mathematics will probably favour the
conclusion that some of those which appear to be in more direct antagonism
are not so much erroneous as partial - that they need only to be completed
each by the truths in which it is defective in order to come into mutual
agreement. All theories are attempts to realize a speculative unity and
among the possibilities of failure this must be reckoned, viz., that they may
aim at a unity which is too narrow. It has appeared to me for instance that
this is the case in some of the more important theories which have prevailed
as to the nature of Geometry. Each of them contains some partial truth
which through a too eager desire for unity has been magnified into undue
proportions, and made to stand for the whole. One writer would build
Geometry entirely upon definitions, another upon axioms, another upon
Postulates. Again with relation to the Logic of Geometry, one writer regards
it as an application of syllogism a series of steps of deduction each of which
consists in inferring the particular from the general, a second maintains that
all its steps are from the particular to the particular, a third arriving at a
more absolute unity can see in the entire science nothing more than an
application of the dictum that whatever is is (principle of identity). These
latter differences of opinion have it is true not originated in speculations
about Geometry but they quite as much belong to the general question of the
Nature of Geometry as do the more peculiar inquiries respecting [B 123.4]
the place and office of the Definition the Axiom and the Postulate. In all
these views there seems to me to be a measure of truth - though in some of
them the truth which is retained is but small in comparison with that which
is excluded. But whatever scattered truths they may contain no theory can
claim acceptance which does not assign to those truths their several places
and proportions. The unity after which we are bound to aspire is not that
which consists in putting a part for the whole but that which determines and
prescribes all the relations of parts.
2ndly. Some of the questions which have been most controverted are as
has already been stated of a metaphysical nature - and the solutions which
they receive in the individual mind will usually differ according to its
particular leaning or bias in questions of philosophy. Thus according to the
degree of relative importance which is assigned to the sensational or to the
ideal elements of knowledge it is probable that the judgment will be
determined with reference to some of the questions above noticed e.g. the
nature of the objects about which Geometry is concerned and the ground of
that peculiar certainty which attaches to its conclusions. We might predicate
beforehand that upon such subjects the views of Plato would have but little
affinity with those of Hobbes. Now it may be asked what if such be the case
is the use of discussion [of] such particular questions at all seeing that the

170
Philosophy of Mathematics
D
answers to them are necessarily implicated in more general views. To this I
would reply that if on the one hand our judgment on particular questions in
the philosophy of mathematics is likely to be influenced by the general
tendencies of the school of philosophy to which we may belong, on the other
hand
there
is
no
particular
class
of questions
[B 123.5] which if
independently studied is so likely to modify or even to determine our general
views as this. It is possible that the whole of a man's general views of
philosophy or at least of that part of philosophy which relates to the theory of
knowledge may be but the consistent development of principles which he has
derived from reflection upon the grounds and the processes of mathematics.
Certainly there is no other class of subjects to which the great masters of
philosophy have so often appealed - none from which they have derived
illustration so apt and clear and exact.
These metaphysical difficulties have as might be expected no effect upon
the progress of mathematics as a science. Whatever view we may take of the
nature and ground of the certainty of the primary truths of Geometry that
certainty admits of no question. The object of disputation indeed is not to
establish but to explain a fact. It does not cease on this account to be
important that this fact should be explained and whether it be important or
not we are so constituted that we can scarcely help endeavouring to construct
some kind of theory for its explanation.
3rdly. There are however differences of opinion; and where absolute
differences of opinion do not arise there are often uncertainty, looseness of
comprehension and want of clear definite thought among even the most
advanced students of mathematics upon questions which cannot strictly be
termed metaphysical and which do in a very important degree affect the
progress of the science. This seems to be especially the case with respect to
that entire class of questions already referred to which clusters about the
great subject of the [B 123.6] dependence of reasoning upon language.
Perplexities of this kind must have been of early origin in all those parts of
mathematics, including common Algebra, which are known under the name
of Analysis, and they still form a very considerable part of the difficulty
which belongs to the higher parts of the Science. Questions respecting the
kind of interpretation which must be given to a formula, and limits within
which such interpretation is valid - the conditions under which methods and
processes may be lawfully applied, are of very frequent occurrence - And it is
not likely that so long as mathematics is a progressive science such questions
will ever cease to present themselves. Till those limits are reached which
either the nature of mathematical truth or the nature of the human faculties
imposes an end of controversy is not to be looked for.
At the same time there seems to be no reason to think that the number
of really great principles which is or can be involved as matter of controversy
affecting the actual progress of mathematics can ever be considerable. The
probability seems to be that it is and always must be very small. Nor again

xv
Chapter II: On Geometry
171
does experience shew that controversy can settle for any great length of time
upon any question of the absolute truth or falsehood of principles. Perhaps
all really important principles are so far axiomatic in their character that
there exist particular cases in which they are seen with something like the
self-evidence of axioms. The reason why it is possible for them to be again
and again the subjects of debate if not in a public manner yet in the
individual mind, is that no particular cases can exhaust their meaning, no
finite form [B123.7] of words can give to them adequate expression. We do
not indeed find it difficult to give to them an expression adequate for the
particular stages of progress and attainment, but new cases arise for which
the ground of enquiry must be gone over afresh. It may be that when this has
been done we find that the principle involved is essentially the same as that
with which we were acquainted before. But our acquaintance with it is no
longer the same. If we still retain the old formula for its expression we attach
to the terms of that formula a wider and a deeper meaning. The kind of
change which takes place in the mind of one who is continually advancing in
real mathematical knowledge is not so much that he is continually acquiring
new principles, as that he is continually growing up if I may use the
expression into fuller comprehension of the meaning of the old. The larger
questions which meet us seem to admit only of what may be termed a
progressive solution.
The considerations which have been stated will indicate with sufficient
clearness the general design of the present treatise. It is proposed to examine
in succession some of the most important classes of questions relating to the
Philosophy of Mathematics beginning with Geometry and ending with those
methods and processes of the higher Analysis which are the least dependent
upon any visible representations.
Chapter II: On Geometry
In the present chapter it is proposed to describe with brief comment
some of the more obvious characteristics of Geometry as a science. We choose
as the more immediate [B 123.8] subject of examination the first six books of
the elements of Euclid. In other chapters we shall enter more fully into some
of the questions which will be suggested in this.
As presented by Euclid Plane Geometry is a system of reasoning, and of
truths deduced by reasoning, about figures described upon a plane surface
the elementary parts of each construction being straight lines or circles. The
figures are presented visibly as the direct objects of reasoning; their
elementary parts as well as the more important construction formed by their
combination are defined, the conditions under which the constructions are

172
Philosophy of Mathematics
D
made are stated in Postulates, and the elementary general truths of which
the reasoning is an application are expressed in Axioms. In these particulars,
- the visible representation, the clear definition, the constant reference to
postulates and to axioms, the peculiar value of Geometry as a discipline has
always been felt to consist.
We shall first speak of the definitions.
The main purpose of a definition is not description but distinction. The
thing to be defined must be distinguished from all other things - and for this
end the distinguishing property is described. It is possible that there may
exist more than one property or set of properties that would suffice for
distinction. In this case that one is chosen which is thought to be either most
simple or most fundamental, or which for particular reasons is thought most
deserving of attention. The name triangle implies that the figure denoted
has three angles - and this with the implied condition that the sides are
rectilineal would form a definition. But it is simpler and at the same time
more fundamental to define the figure as [B 123.9] bounded by three straight
lines - because the notion of a straight line is prior to that of a rectilineal
angle. Again there is a quadrilateral figure which might be defined either as
having its opposite sides parallel or as having its opposite sides equal, Euclid
takes the former definition simply and calls the figure parallelogram but he
also takes the latter and distinguishing the cases in which the sides are
equal from that in which they are unequal calls the figure in the one case a
Rhombus in the other a Rhomboid. In these added definitions the object is
not so much distinction as the directing of the attention to a particular
property rather than to another as a ground of deduction.
We see in this example that definitions are in some measure arbitrary.
And as there is perhaps no question of more fundamental importance than to
determine to what extent they are arbitrary I purpose to say a few words on
this point here. The whole question will again and again recur.
Definitions are certainly arbitrary to this extent viz. that among possible
constructions we may select those which we please as the objects of
definition. A triangle is a possible construction and it has been rightly chosen
as an object of definition. Among triangles the equilateral the isosceles and
the scalene have been selected as objects of more particular definition - so
have the species of triangles called right angled, acute angled and oblique
angled. In the one case attention is directed to distinctions dependent on the
relations of sides; in the other to distinctions dependent upon the magnitude
of angles. This process of particular definition might be carried on a great
deal further - and each step [BI23.1O] would be arbitrary so far as it
involved an act of choice directing us to particular points of construction and
not to others but not beyond this. The far more important question What
constructions are possible involves nothing arbitrary. In every definition
there is something which is not founded upon hypothesis.

xv
Chapter II: On Geometry
173
For instance, the definitions of the different rectilineal figures rest all
upon the common grounds of the postulate that it is possible to draw a
straight line from anyone point of a plane to any other point of the same
plane and upon the axiom that two straight lines cannot, but that more than
two straight lines can, inclose a space. Euclid does not express the positive
portion of this axiom but it is implied in his statement of the negative one.
The definition of parallel lines involves without doubt the unexpressed
postulate that it is possible for two straight lines to exist which if continued
indefinitely would never meet. Our conceptions of geometrical figures are not
arbitrary - and though we speak and truly, of the infinite variety of
constructions, yet is that variety but the combination of elements which are
in themselves determinate in nature and relation.
What has now been said will be sufficient to shew us the erroneous
character of that view which represents geometry as entirely founded on
definitions - and its theorems as merely the consequences of particular
hypotheses. It is forgotten that though in the expression of geometrical
propositions we often employ the language of hypothesis e.g. If a figure be
constructed under such condition it will possess such and such properties;
yet the conditions themselves have a real foundation in the [B 123.11] nature
of things i.e. either in the absolute nature of space itself or in the relations by
which space and its affections become objects of human thought. When the
demonstrative character of Geometry is said to rest solely upon the fact that
it deals with hypotheses we are in danger of supposing that it is a matter of
human and of arbitrary creation and of putting out of sight the very fact
which it is sought to explain.
We are thus led to the threshold of the important question of the reality
of the objects about which Geometry is concerned. It is no uncommon view
which represents Geometry not only as founded upon hypotheses but upon
hypotheses which are nowhere in the world actually realised. The perfect
straight line or circle it is said has no existence and cannot even be
conceived.
To this it has been well replied that assuming the external reality or to
use a term familiar to metaphysicians the objectivity of space, geometrical
figures exist in space even as they are defined. To adopt the striking
language of Mr. Hallam, every geometrical figure "exists in the infinite
round about us as the statue exists in the block". "No one can doubt," he
continues, "if he turns his mind to the subject, that every point of space is
equidistant, in all directions, from certain other points. Draw a line through
all these and you have the circumference of a circle (sphere); but the circle
itself and its circumference exist before the latter is delineated. Thus the
orbit of a planet is not a regular geometrical figure, because certain forces
disturb it. But the disturbance means only a deviation from a line which
exists really in space, and which the planet would actually describe, if there

174
Philosophy of Mathematics
D
were nothing in the universe but itself and the centre of attraction.,,2
[B123.12]
In these observations I fully concur. Granting the existence of space the
figures of geometry exist. The degree of perfection in which we can realise
them does not affect their existence nor, if we consider the matter carefully,
does it affect our conviction of their existence. If in comparing two attempted
constructions of the same figure e.g. the circle we can upon the testimony of
the senses affirm that the one is more perfect than the other it can only be
because the ideally perfect figure exists not merely as a conception in our
minds but as a reality in space -
a reality approachable though not
attainable. The language ordinarily employed on this subject would seem to
recognise the existence of imperfect figures in space but not of perfect
figures. Now it is well to observe that the difficulty arising from the
imperfection of the senses affects the one just as much as the other. That
difficulty does not consist in a simple inability to construct the perfect figures
of geometry, but in an inability either perfectly to reproduce or perfectly to
imagine any figure whatever. I here use the word imagine to express that
power of the mind by which we picture to ourselves a thing or try to think of
it as it would appear. Now this power is in its very nature imperfect and
limited - imperfect because it aims at most but to reproduce the impressions
of our imperfect senses - finite and limited because subject to conditions to
which that higher power of the understanding by which we apprehend
relations is not subject. For instance judging from personal experience I
should say that we are not able to imagine length absolutely without
breadth, and so to picture to ourselves the perfect line of Euclid. We
approach it when [B 123.13] we think of the edge or boundary of a surface -
but here it is still associated with the idea of breadth. But though we cannot
imagine pure length, we can both conceive its existence in the infinite round
about us and can understand its relations. Now it is this understanding of its
relations or to speak more precisely of the fundamental relations involved in
the definition of the straight line which constitutes the scientific conception.
The material form, the mental image, are important only as they suggest
those relations.
These considerations lead us to apprehend the twofold truth that while
the perfect figures of Geometry have a real existence in space they are to
imaginations striving to realise them as they are but the limits of an
indefinite process of abstraction. There is no contradiction here. Our power
to imagine or to construct is not only no measure of what is possible in the
nature of things but what is more remarkable it is no measure of our power
to apprehend relations. And I think it deserving of notice that the inability of
the senses and of the power of imagination to represent to us the objects of
Geometry as they really are carries with it in some degree its own correction.
That imperfection of faculty which prevents us from reaching the limit
renders us at the same time insensible to the degree of our shortcomings.

xv
Chapter II: On Geometry
175
The constructions which satisfy us now might, were the faculties by which
we estimate measure and number and direction developed to a higher degree
of precision, cease to convey to us any distinct ideas.
There are certain definitions in the text of Euclid which must be
considered as unsatisfactory, either from their indefinite character or from
their not containing all that is really [B 123.14] involved in the conception to
be defined and needing directly or indirectly a supplementary addition. Of
this kind is the definition A straight line is that which lies evenly between its
extreme points.* The idea conveyed is that of similarity and uniformity not
only of the different parts of the line to each other but of the uniformity of
each part of the line with respect to the different sides on which it can be
contemplated. To make the definition formally complete something would be
required equivalent to the condition that the line may be regarded as an axis
- that two of its points being fixed it may be supposed to revolve without
changing its actual position in space. No doubt any such definition as this
really involves the Geometry not of the plane merely - but of space in its
three dimensions - but unless the plane be defined before the straight line,
which Euclid does not do, any definition of the latter must involve the
consideration of space generally - and the seeming escape from this in
Euclid's definition is only due to its vagueness. Actually his definition is
completed so as to become susceptible of scientific application in the axiom
that two straight lines cannot enclose a space.
I am indeed disposed to think that the Natural History of Thought in the
subject of Geometry is something of this kind. We begin with that crude
conception of Space which is perhaps best expressed in English by the word
"room" - we advance by the teaching of the senses and the action of the
abstracting mind upon the teaching to those popular and as yet unscientific
conceptions which are implied by the words as surface, line, point, figure etc.;
and their more obvious relations - [B 123.15] we subsequently are taught to
give to those conceptions scientific form and to employ them in deductive
reasoning. Now what is the mode of this transition? It is obvious that it
partly depends upon that power of abstraction by which we can separate the
different elements of thought which are involved in the more immediate
images of the senses and intellectually contemplate them apart. I do not
mean by this that we have the power to perfectly picture to ourselves by any
effort of thought a line according to its formal definition as length absolutely
without breadth - but we have the power to approach that conception even
as a mental image, to contemplate it as a limit to which the power [of]
imagination can indefinitely approximate - and still more to affirm those
propositions which in the limit are absolutely true and which in the world of
matter approach the more nearly to realisation as the limit itself is the more

176
Philosophy of Mathematics
D
nearly approached. On the nature of this conception and on the reality of its
object we shall speak more fully hereafter. As another example, we learn
from experience to distinguish between form and position. We see the same
object change its position without altering its form. It may be true that we
cannot picture or image to ourselves form without position. But that the
elements are distinct, that relations dependent upon form remain unaltered
by mere change of position, is a truth which is felt and acted upon before it is
contemplated as truth. Now this truth takes its true scientific place in
Geometry in certain principles admitting of precise definition and
application e.g. the principle of superposition affirming that figures which by
a supposed change of place can be made to coincide are equal. [B 123.16] It is
true that this principle is not in so many words affirmed by Euclid; but it is
the real ground upon which he makes use of his eighth axiom viz.:
Magnitudes which coincide with one another, that is which exactly fill the
same space are equal to one another.* Gradually therefore the popular and
somewhat ... 4 conceptions which we derive from experience are purified from
foreign admixture and are seen in their true measures of independence or
relation.
Perhaps the most natural development of the conceptions of the plane
and the straight line would be the following viz.: [1st.] To define the plane as
the surface which lies c~ '1aou 5 between the two portions of space which it
separates i.e. so that the one portion might be made by change of position to
coincide with the other, the plane reversed occupying the same position as
before. 2nd. To define the straight line as the line on a plane which lies c~
'{aou between the two portions of the plane which it separates. I think this
mode of consideration would express most directly the ordinary and popular
conceptions of the plane and straight line - of which symmetry on opposite
sides certainly forms a part.
But whatever modes of representation we adopt the general principles
on which the definitions of Geometry rest remain the same. They are
expressions in a form adapted to scientific use of the fundamental
conceptions of space and of its affections which we arrive at by the
abstracting power of the mind operating on the experience afforded by the
senses, and which though involved in ever changing products of experience
are themselves not arbitrary or subject to change.
We have next to speak of the Axioms and the Postulates. [B 123.17] In
the ordinary translations of the Elements of Euclid the postulates are only
three in number, viz

xv
Chapter II: On Geometry
177
1. Let it be granted that a straight line may be drawn from anyone
point of space to any other point.
2. And that a terminated straight line may be produced to any length
in a straight line.
3. And that a circle may be described from any centre and at any
distance from (with any radius about) that centre.
But in the Greek text of Peyrard/ under the same head of Postulates
(AiT~lJoTo)8occur also the three following
4. And that all right angles are equal to one another.
5. And that if a straight line meet two other straight lines so as to
make the two interior angles on the same side of it taken together
less than two right angles these straight lines being continually
produced shall meet on that side on which are the angles which are
less than two right angles.
6. And that two straight lines cannot enclose a space.
The last three, it is well known, occur in the ordinary translations among
the axioms. But a little attention will shew that the place which they there
hold is peculiar. They are in a special manner geometrical axioms. The others
with the single exception of the axiom "Magnitudes which coincide with one
another are equal to one another" are not in any peculiar sense geometrical.
The truths that the whole is greater than its part that the doubles of equals
are equal etc. apply to the conceptions of geometry only because and in so far
as these conceptions fall under the more general conception of quantity. They
have nothing to do with figure or position. The very term "common notions"
(KOIVOI evvolol)9 by which they [BI23.18] are designated indicates that they
are not confined to Geometry alone. And they are ordinarily recognized as
the axioms which are common to Algebra and to Geometry.
We see then that while the view generally held at the present time of the
distinction between Postulates and Axioms is that the former relates to the
possibility of a construction the latter to the necessity of a truth, the former
presenting the same analogue to a Problem which the latter does to a
Theorem, Euclid's view of the distinction was of a totally different kind. The
axioms were according to him the fundamental truths or notions which flow
from the very conception of magnitude - truths which are equally valid
whether applied to that discrete form of magnitude which we term Number,
or to the continuous magnitude with which we are concerned in Geometry.
The
Postulates
have
reference
to
those
more
special though still
fundamental truths which are involved in the conceptions of space and
figure. It makes no difference according to his view whether the latter are
presented in the form of demanding our assent to a truth or demanding our
admission of the possibility of a construction. The admission of the

178
Philosophy of Mathematics
D
possibility of a construction is as much a development of our conceptions of
Space and Figure as is the admission of a necessary truth about Space or
Figure. It would be easy to convert the one class of Postulates into the other.
Every geometrical truth implies a construction in which it is set forth and
manifested; every geometrical construction is founded upon a truth.
This distinction so fully recognized by Euclid and in later times so much
lost sight of is one of great importance. If we would understand the true
nature of geometry we must [B 123.19] distinguish between the different
kinds of principles which form its basis - we must endeavour to assign to
each class its proper functions.
In the formal development of the Science of Geometry the Axioms
usually constitute the major or universal propositions of Syllogisms - the
minor or particular propositions of which express the particular conditions of
the given construction. And those postulates which are not presented in the
forms of propositions but which demand our assent to the possibility of
certain general constructions may be considered as the suppressed major
premises of syllogisms, the conclusions of which affirm the possibility of the
actual construction of the problem or demonstration in question. In this way
it becomes possible to present the entire procedure of the Science in the
forms of consecutive Syllogisms. And the system of Geometry in actual use
are so far constructed upon this type that their successive steps are
syllogisms either in form or intention - the chief departure from the
scholastic forms being that the enthymeme and the so-called rhetorical
syllogism in which the minor premiss precedes the major, take the place of
the regular Aristotelian figures. It has perhaps from this circumstance come
to be considered that the reasonings of Geometry are in their own nature
syllogistic - that Geometry is no more than an application to the particular
matter about which it is conversant of the Logic of the Schools.
Now it is not my intention to enter in the present chapter upon the
consideration of this question. The discussions of the foregoing sections have
however to a certain extent prepared the way for its consideration. They
have shewn us [B 123.20] by actual analysis that there can at most be but
three distinct classes of principles involved in the scientific foundation of
Geometry as a Science viz.: 1st. The principles of common Logic (I use this
term not with special reference to the scholastic forms of the Science but with
reference to its object or matter - the relations of genus and species, of
general and particular); 2ndly. Principles depending upon the conception of
magnitude. 3rdly. Principles depending upon the conception of Space and the
subordinate conception of Figure. This classification is an exhaustive one.
Whether or not we can reduce these to mutual dependence, or can establish
the superior importance of one class over the others, we at least do not need
to enquire for more. [B123.21]

Chapter XVI
[Various fragments,
apparently late]
-----------[ La te r th an 1855]-----------
[Fragment 1]
There is perhaps no property of the human mind which is so wonderful
as its power of introspection. That it should be capable of sustaining the dual
relation of subject and object, that it should be able to investigate its own
constitution to engage its faculties in the study of themselves is a fact which
if we apprehend it at all we cannot apprehend without admiration. I speak
here in a more especial manner of the mind in its intellectual capacity in its
faculties of thought and reasoning as distinguished from those which are
concerned with emotion and will. And within the compass thus marked out
how many questions of deep interest present themselves. Is it for example
possible to establish anything like unanimity of sentiment in a field of
enquiry which while it lies open to every man's personal observation has
above all others been fruitful in controversy? Is it possible to arrive at a just
estimate of truths which Aristotle regarded as the foundation of philosophy
and which Locke pronounced to be "trifling", which the pro- [All(b)/l] found
mind of Leibnitz would within the province of Logic at least have raised to
their ancient repute and which the clearest and most popular of modern
expositors of the Science seems equally disposed to ignore? And if these
things are possible what finally is the nature of that system of laws the
knowledge of which must appear as at once a revelation of consciousness and
a reward of careful and philosophical enquiry? These are questions which I
propose to endeavour to answer in the present essay. The grounds of much of
what I shall have to say are already before the world in a special treatise on
the laws of Thought. But other results which I shall have occasion to present
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

180
[Various fragments, apparently late]
D
are founded upon more recent investigations and it is in the connexion of the
whole that the grounds of the argument which I seek to develop chiefly rest.
[B7/2]
[Fragment 2]
Digression on the Nature of Algebra
In the system of ordinary Algebra we employ letters or figures to
represent numbers and by connecting symbols or by relative position we
express the operations and relations to which numbers are subject. Thus if x
and y represent any two numbers whatever x +y will express their sum, xy
their product, x-y the remainder obtained by subtracting the number y from
the number x and so on. In like manner x =y will express that those numbers
stand to each other in a relation of equality. It is to be noted that while the
numerical symbols of Arithmetic as 1, 2, etc. are employed only for the
expression of particular and known numbers, literal symbols as x, y, though
they may be used in the above sense are usually employed in a more
comprehensive one viz. either for the expression of any number whatever as
in the general theorems of Algebra, or for the expression of particular but
unknown numbers whose values it is sought to determine. And in either of
these latter uses they must be regarded as general symbols and considered
as subject to those laws which are derived from the very conception of
number as such. Thus whatever numbers are represented by x and y it is
universally true that
x+y=y+x
(i)1
xy =yx
(ii)
z(x+y)=zx+zy
(iii)
to which some other laws might be added connected with the use of the
symbol - (minus). If we proceed to equations, i.e. propo- lA67/1] sitions
affirming the equality of numbers whether expressed by simple symbols or
by combination of symbols other necessary laws present themselves. Thus if
x =y
and
w =z
x+w=y+z
xy = wz
(iv)
(v)
and so on. These laws constitute the foundations of Algebra. They find direct
expression in its axioms and first principles. Algebra as a developed science

XVI
[Fragment 2]
181
consists in the expression of numerical relations by general or particular
symbols of number and in the application of such laws to the solution of
problems relating to number or quantity.
From this conception of an algebra whose general symbols are supposed
to represent any numbers whatever and whose laws are therefore founded
upon the laws of number as such, we readily pass to the conception of an
Algebra whose symbols are of a more restricted character. We can for
example conceive of an Algebra of whole numbers exclusively, i.e. of an
Algebra whose general symbols x,y, etc. should be defined to represent whole
numbers generally and whose particular symbols should only represent
particular whole numbers. Consider then for a moment what would be the
laws of such an Algebra. They would constitute a system including and
comprehending the laws of the more general Algebra before considered
(because whole num- [All/2] bers must at least be subject to those laws
which are common to all numbers whatever) but also including those special
laws whatever they may be to which whole numbers alone are subject. On
the same principle we might conceive of an Algebra more restricted still, of
one for instance whose particular symbols of number should be two only, viz.
a and 1 and whose general symbols should admit of either of these
determinations but of no others. The laws of this species of algebra would by
what has been said include the laws of general Algebra together with those
which are peculiar to the numbers 0 and 1 but which at the same time are
common to those numbers.
Now that law which is peculiar to but common to the number 0 and 1 is
expressed by the equation xn = x. For if x stand either for 0 and 1 this
equation is satisfied but if x have any other value it is not satisfied. We may
therefore say that an algebra the interpretation of whose symbols of quantity
should be confined to the numbers 0 and 1 must obey the laws of ordinary
Algebra together with that additional law which is expressed by the equation
xn =x. Thus ifx, y, z etc. be its general symbols [B8/3] we must have in virtue
of the former condition
x+y =Y+X
xy =yx
z(x+Y) =zx +zy
vide (i)(ii)(iii) as also the laws expressed by (iv)(v), while in virtue of the
latter condition it must satisfy the relations
x2 =x
y2 =Y
z2 =z
Now these laws are so far as we have determined them identical in
expression with those of the symbols of Logic, vide sec....2 And a more
complete examination of the two systems shews that the identity is

182
[Various fragments, apparently late]
o
continued throughout. I desire to avoid all occasion of mistake in the
statement of this truth. Let it then be distinctly observed that the literal
symbols are different in meaning in the two cases; in the one they represent
things, in the other a particular species of numbers. Let it equally be noticed
that the operations to which the symbols are subject are not necessarily and
throughout the same. The operations denoted by the symbols + - are indeed
the same or closely analogous, those denoted by relative position as in the
expression xy are apparently wholly different in their nature. In the one case
xy denotes the product of the numbers denoted by x and y, in the other the
class whose members comprise the individuals common to the classes x and
y. Yet is it true in both [B6/1] cases that xy =yx and that xx =x. The two
systems of interpretation and expression are established on separate
conventions; and their laws are independently determined. And this having
been done it is a conclusion founded on actual comparison and which
apparently could not have been predicted, that the laws of the two systems
are identical in expression; we think of them or rather we think in them
according to the same mental formulre. This identity is the basis of the
Calculus of Logic.
To many minds and these not undisciplined by philosophy, a difficulty
will probably arise in accepting the idea which I have endeavoured to
present. It will be granted that there is a sense in which the dominion of
numbers is universal - at least as respects the material Universe. That all
things were made in measure and weight and number is to this extent a
truth not less of modern science than of ancient philosophy. But the merely
numerical element - the fact that classes consist of individuals and that
individuals are capable of being numbered is one with which we are quite
unconcerned in Logic. The validity of the syllogism
All men are mortal
[Allo/2]
Kings are Men
therefore Kings are mortal
is wholly independent of the question whether the members of the human
family and the race of Kings be many or few. All this is undoubtedly true. It
is not because classes consist of individuals capable of numeration that the
laws of thought are such as we find them to be. And therefore it is not in the
usual and ordinary sense that we can establish any connexion between the
science of Logic and that of number. But if we remember that we reason by
the aid of language and that we never can express by the signs of language
either the nature of things or the nature of number it must follow that it is
only with the forms of thought as involved in the use of those signs that our
concern lies. And there is no reason a priori why the forms of thought in
algebra or in a particular species of algebra should not be the same as those

XVI
[Fragment 3]
183
which govern the deductive process in relation to things. On the contrary the
question whether they do so or not is one possessing much speculative
interest apart from any use that may be made of its solution. Now actual
comparison shews that such a relation does exist. And though [A 11(k)/3] a
knowledge of this relation is not necessary to enable us to reason in a purely
formal manner by the aid of symbols, it is apparently necessary in order to
[achieve] the establishment of a General Method in Logic. [A11(g)/4]
[Fragment 3]
Principles of Expression
Let letters be employed to denote things or classes of, whether expressed
in ordinary language by proper names as "Peter" or by nouns substantive as
"men", or by the use of adjectives as "white things" or by descriptions or
definitions marking out the things signified from all others.
Let the collection of two letters as xy denote that class of things which is
formed by the individuals that are common to the classes denoted by x and y.
Thus if x represents sheep and y white things let xy denote white sheep.
Let the symbol + written between the expressions of two classes as x+y
denote the aggregate which is formed by adding the individuals of the classes
x and y together so as to form a whole. Thus if x represent men and y women
x+y will represent men and women.*
Let the sign - be used as the equivalent of the conjunction except, so that
x-y expresses the remainder which is left when from the class x we take
away the class [B 11/5] denoted by y. The condition of interpretability of the
expression x- y evidently is that there should exist no individuals in the
class y which are not found in the class x.
As we are at liberty to give to symbols what fixed interpretation we
please, we may employ the symbol 1 to represent the Universe or rather all
things contained in the Universe and the symbol 0 to represent Nothing. I
shall afterwards shew that there is a real ground for that interpretation. It
will follow that if x represent a particular class as "men" I-x will represent
the class "not men" for reading the symbols in order we have "All things
except men", Le. the class "not-men". In accordance with these conventions
* It is to be observed that the expression x+y is uninterpretable unless the classes x and
yare entirely distinct so as to be capable of forming parts of a whole. This may be
termed the condition of its interpretability. Such conditions of interpretability are
really implied in ordinary language. The expression "Trees and Plants" is strictly
speaking devoid of meaning unless it be understood that trees are not plants.

184
[Various fragments, apparently late]
o
the expression y(1-x) would represent those things which are in the class y
but not in the class x. The expression (1- x)(1-y) [represents] those things
which are contained neither in the class x nor in the class y. Brackets are
used in combination as a single symbol. A vinculum or bar over the
expression may be used in the same sense.
Thus x(1-y)+y(1-x) and xl - y + Y1- x would be identical in meaning.
That meaning would be "Things which are in the class x but not in the class
y together with things which are in the class y but not in the class x", or
"Things
which
are
either
but
not
both".
The
expression
z {x 1- Y + Y 1- x} [A11n/2] would on the above principles be interpreted as
follows: "Things which are common to the class z and to the class whose
members ar either x's or y's but not both."
Laws of the Symbols
It is shown (Laws of Thought Cap. II)3 that the symbols above described
satisfy the following laws viz.
xy =yx
(1)
xx = x
or
x n = x
(2)
x+y = z+x
(3)
z(x+y) = zx+zy
(4)
and to these may be added some other laws connected with the use of the
sign -. For the nature and origin of those laws the reader is directed to the
treatise to which reference has been made. As to the sense in which they are
affirmed to be true let this statement suffice. Whenever such definite
class-meanings are assigned to the symbols x, y et cetera as to make the two
members of any of the above equations (1) (2) [et cetera] interpretable, i.e.
expressive of conceptions possible to the mind, then will the individuals
grouped under one of those conceptions be identical with those grouped
under the other. I will [interpret] as an illustration the law expressed by (4).
Let then x represent trees, y flowers and z withered things in general. Then
the interpretation of the first member of (4) is "withered trees [B 165/?] and
flowers", the second member as "withered trees and withered flowers". And
the equation (4) connecting those members affirms that these two concep-
tions are identical in their comprehension, i.e. that the individual things
comprehended under the description "withered trees and flowers" are the
same as the individual things comprehended under the description "with-
ered trees and withered flowers". The mental order in which the two concep-
tions are formed is indeed different. In the one case we connect into a single
whole trees and flowers and from this whole select all the individuals to
which the term withered is applicable. In the other case we form first the

XVI
[Fragment 4]
185
conception of trees as a whole and mentally select those of the class which
are withered thus forming the conception of "withered trees", in like manner
we form the conception of "withered flowers". Now the law expressed by (4)
affirms that these different modes of forming an ultimate conception are
equivalent in the sense above explained. And all the laws which have been
noticed are of the same kind. They all affirm the possibility and the lawful-
ness of conceiving in different ways and according to a different mental order
things substantially the same. They are properly speaking laws of apprehen-
sion. [B9/4]
[Fragment 4]
And here arises a grave objection against the Aristotelian and all similar
expositions of the science of Logic. It is that while they recognise the faculty
or operation which they term Apprehension and by a special term
acknowledge in certain cases its complex character they do not attempt to
give any account of its laws. The complex does not however arise from the
simple without combination and combination is not unregulated and without
law. How the laws of Apprehension affect the form and method of the science
of Logic it is not possible agreeably to what has already been said to
determine beforehand. But it is a fact of which abundant verification will be
afforded that this influence is of a very important kind. Perhaps my meaning
will be made more clear by an illustration which I borrow from a recently
published tract of Leibnitz.* Representing since signs are arbitrary in
[B 13/5] their mere form, simple names and words descriptive of quality by
letters, as
a pro animal
b
rationale
c
mortale
d
visibile 5
he goes on to describe the expressing of terms and propositions and the laws
of the signs employed nearly as follows. 1) "Terminus est a. b. abo bed. ut:
animal,
rationale,
animal
rationale,
rationale
mortale
visibile.
Propositionem universalem affirmativam sic designo: a est b ubi a subjectum
b praedicatum. Est: copula.,,6 And then under the head Principia Calculi he
lays down among other principles the two following viz.: '(2) Transpositio
literarum in eodem termino nihil mutat ut ab coincidet cum ba seu animal
rationale et rationale animal. 3) Repetitio ejusdem literae in eodem termino
* "Addenda ad Specimen Calculi Universalis".4

186
[Various fragments, apparently late]
D
est inutilis, ut best aa, vel bb est a; homo est animal animal, vel homo homo
est animal. Sufficit enim dici b est a 7 seu homo est [B 12/6] animal." 8 [In this
passage b stands for homo and a for animal.]9
A familiar example drawn from ordinary language of the law to which
Leibnitz refers in 2 is seen in the indifference of the order in which adjectives
absolute in their significance and applied to the same subject follow each
other. The expression "white horned sheep" points out the same class of
individuals as the expression "horned white sheep". This is immediately the
consequence of a law of language but remotely and fundamentally of a law of
thought. (Laws of Thought ...)10 The same remark applies to the second law
noticed by Leibnitz. If we enquire carefully into their origin it will be found
that they have their ultimate ground in that faculty which Logicians term
Apprehension, but which modern writers on the philosophy of the mind have
usually designated as Conception. Now if these laws are contemplated
merely as isolated truths they will probably appear to be of but slight value
and importance. To a superficial gaze they will certainly appear so. But if
they form, as they do, a part of a perfectly definite system of laws relating not
to the faculty of Apprehension alone [All(d)/7] but to thought in its several
faculties of Apprehension, Judgment and Reasoning, it would be an
unwarrantable presumption to set them aside as if [of] no possible use or
interest. And taking the larger view of the question a strong prima facie
objection is seen to arise against the assumption of completeness in any
system of Logic however strong by authority or venerable by time, in which
they are actually neglected.
I shall now proceed to give some account of that scientific development of
logic to which the previous remarks have been introductory.
Now every scientific development of Logic presupposes the possibility of
separating by abstraction the material and the formal elements of language
or to use a less technical phrase of distinguishing between the office of words
and their special meaning. We are able for example to contemplate the noun
substantive as such and to study the laws to which from its very office of
representing things it is subject - laws which are independent of the nature
of the things represented. As signs moreover are in their construction
arbitrary we can replace words by letters, i.e. we can represent the things
about which we reason by letters. Aristotle habitually does this in his
Organon and all writers [B4/8] on technical Logic follow his example. The
relations connecting the things about which we reason, whether our
perception of those relations depends upon the faculty of Apprehension or of
Judgment or upon any other, we are upon the same ground permitted to
express either by symbols definite in their interpretation or by collocation or
by the union of both means. Beyond the mere substitution of symbols for
words there is nothing here which is not exemplified in every living or extinct
form of human speech. And hence the permission which is claimed is but the
further carrying out of a principle of which the earlier writers on Logic

XVI
[Fragment 5]
187
availed themselves. Now let the system of representation thus adopted be
complete and thorough-going and the processes of reasoning assumes the
character of a Grammar or a Calculus. The essential laws of thought become
transformed into the laws of a symbolical language and the form and value of
the possible science are determined accordingly. [All(e)/9J
[Fragment 5]
I
deem
it
worthy
of
especial
notice
that
the
development
(w =A+OB+AC+2D)11 is derived from those primary laws of thought to
which attention has been directed in the earlier sections of this paper - not
from a consideration of the possible relations of things or events to each
other. And yet if it were our purpose to determine the possible species of such
relations we should arrive at no others than are
involved
in the
interpretation of the coefficients of that development. Let us consider for
instance the relations among events to which these interpretations lead.
Now the events denoted by A, B, C, D, considered with reference to the event
ware represented as either 1st causally dependent upon that event to the
exclusion of all other causes or 2ndly as incompatible with it, or 3rdly as
flowing from it but not to the exclusion of other causes or 4thly as actually
determined to exist or not to exist in perfect independence of that event.* It
is easy to see in this classification the relations which have been denoted by
the terms "necessary, possible, actual" as also to see how the idea of causality
is modified by accompanying circumstances. Now considerations such as
these do not in the Logic of Kant and [A1l(h)/3] throughout the Kantian
metaphysics occupy a primary place. They constitute the logical categories of
the understanding. And it is a remarkable circumstance, and I would
commend it to the attention of all who feel an interest in the study of the
connexion between logic and metaphysics, that these categories present
themselves in the present system not as primary but as secondary elements,
not as requiring to be investigated on their own ground but as fully
determined by the form of a mathematical development itself derived from
the very laws in accordance with which alone thought is possible. [All(f)/4]
* The event D is determined not to exist in absolute independence of w. But as the events
A, B, C, & D include all possible contingencies this renders it necessary that some one
of the events A, B, C, should be determined to exist in absolute independence of w. 12

188
[Various fragments, apparently late)
[Fragment 6]
D
The possibility of reducing the Science of Logic in its technical
development under the dominion of mathematical forms, though generally
perhaps regarded with distrust has nevertheless been a frequent subject of
speculation. And there are few writers on the philosophy of the intellectual
powers at least in recent times who have not felt called upon to express some
opinion upon the question. The comprehensive mind of Leibnitz seems to
have been especially possessed with the idea. He has referred to it in various
portions of his writings and has stated in language which to those imbued
with later and juster views of the functions of Logic must appear
extravagant, his convictions of its practical importance. Some of his own
speculations on the subject first published in Erdmann's edition of his
philosophical writings (Berlin 1840) 13 which appear to have escaped the
notice of subsequent writers are remarkable and approach more nearly to
the realization of the idea of a logic de- [A7.1] veloped in mathematical forms
than any other portions of his writings. To the researcher of Euler and
Drobitsch, Plouquet and Lambert and in our own country of Professor de
Morgan it is the less necessary here to refer as they have been made the
subject of recent comment or controversy. Whatever may be thought of the
special value of the above or of any similar attempts, the fact that such
attempts have been made, by men independent in their habits of thought,
competently acquainted with one or both of the subjects which they thus
sought to bring into closer harmony and some of them eminent in general
philosophy is not without significance. It creates a presumption that this
consent is not arbitrary or accidental but that there exists either in the
constitution of the human faculties or in the nature of things an adequate
ground for the speculation.
There are indeed some plausible objections against the doctrine that the
Science of Logic admits of a mathematical development or that it can
properly be termed a mathematical science. For it is obvious to remark and
the remark has indeed often been made that Logic is conversant with things
under no limitation of kind, while mathematics is conversant with things
only as they fall under the abstractions of number and magnitude. The
answer to this objection will [A 7.2] almost entirely depend upon what we
conceive mathematics in its essential nature to be. If its subject matter can
in strict propriety be limited to the conception of Number and magnitude and
its method to an application of the rules of syllogism, the objection must be
admitted to be perfectly valid. Our conceptions however of what constituted
a Science are like almost all other human ideas subject to growth and

XVI
[Fragment 7]
189
development. The conception for instance of Astronomy must in most
educated minds have undergone a deep and fundamental change during the
lifetime of Newton, and the conception of chemistry a change scarcely less
radical in the period of transition from the era of alchemists to that of Davy
and Berzelius. Perhaps it is not too much to say that the elements of a
similar change of view have gradually been evolved in connexion with the
study of mathematics. The conceptions of Number and magnitude have
become less prominently characteristic than the laws of thought to which
these conceptions are subject - laws which certainly overstep the rules of
technical Logic. Now if we consider the Science of Mathematics as no longer
defined in its essential character by the nature of its subject matter but by
the forms and the method of its procedure (those forms and that method
having as has been said their origin in the laws of thought) the question
whether Logic is or is not a mathe- [A7.3]
[Fragment 7]
A. The laws of combinations are relations among the forms which are
possible to the human mind.
These forms are dependent upon the ideas of distribution, succession &
inversion.
All the forms which are intelligible when the interpretation of the
symbols is fixed are included in the forms of the mind - but not all the forms
which the mind can employ are intelligible for a given set of symbols. [104]
The interpretation of the symbols determines what are the laws of
combination - and also which forms are excluded, as unintelligible.
In ordinary reasoning we employ only those forms which are allowable
on both grounds.
In symbolic reasoning we exclude those which are inadmissible on the
former ground until we have got a symbolic conclusion when we exclude
those which are inadmissible on the latter.
Operations are really only connecting links between different lawful
forms just as power connects effect with cause. [C1.105]
The whole theory of symbols is included in the following propositions.
l[st] If a symbolic equation is rightly interpreted, if when interpreted it
expresses a proposition and that proposition is true, then the symbolic
[equation] is correct.
2nd. If a symbolic equation is rightly interpreted - if when so interpreted
it expresses a proposition & if this proposition is false - then the symbolic
equation is not correct.

190
[Various fragments, apparently late]
D
3rd. If the interpretation holds, the laws of combination hold.
4th. If a symbolic premiss is correct and the laws of combination hold
then the symbolic conclusion is correct.
5th. If a proposition is true then a true proposition deduced from it and
from the necessary laws of things is a conclusion.
Here by interpretation is meant the putting for each symbol of its
meaning. By an equation being correct is meant its being a lawful
consequence of some previous propositions. Thus a symbolic premiss is
correct when the proposition it represents being true and the interpretation
being fixed the given equation results. A symbolic conclusion is correct when
it follows from a symbolic premiss and the laws of combination. [C1.106]

Chapter XVII
Letters to Cayley,
Lubbock and Penrose
----------[1847, 1849 and 1855)----------
Arthur Cayley
Cayley to Boole, 2 December 1847
I was very much obliged to you for the Mathematical Analysis of Logic 1
which I received a day or two ago. I have not, as you may imagine, in a
subject so new to me, been able to master much of it yet. Is not the
proposition that all the operations of common algebra are applicable to your
symbols, p. 18, stated too generally: 2 division does not appear to me to be so;
xa = xb does not imply a = b at least as I understand your definitions.
There seems to me a prima facie objection not to the principles so much
as to the developability of the system: Your symbols are not combinable with
numerical quantities or at any rate such combinations are uninterpretable.
Has !x any meaning, and if so, how does it come to be so.
I sent to Liouville a demonstration of the formulre you sent me some time
ago for some very general definite integrals, the proof was so very much the
same as the one you give in the Irish Transactions,3 that I did not think it
worthwhile troubling you with it. [E 13.301
Boole to Cayley, 6 December 1847
I am glad to hear your objections because it gives me an opportunity of
replying to them. When I speak of the operations of common algebra being
applicable to my system, I mean of course the symbolical operations - those
I. Grattan-Guinness et al. (eds.), George Boole
© Springer Basel AG 1997

192
Letters to Cayley, Lubbock and Penrose
D
which depend upon laws of combination, not upon interpretation. Thus if
(z2_a2)u = 0 and z and a follow the laws of quantity, we have (z+a)u =
(z-a)-lO.
Ifz and a are symbols of quantity the second member is 0 but not unless.
If z were £X it would give a term involving an arbitrary constant - but so far
as operations alone are concerned we proceed with reference only to the laws
of combination. The equation x(u- v) = 0 gives u-v = x-1 0 whether the
symbols are quantitative or elective but in the former case the result is
equivalent to u-v = 0 -
in the latter to u-v = w(l-x), w being an arbitrary
elective symbol. In (75)4 you will find the general solution of any equation
.p(xy z) = O.
When you ask what is the interpretation of
~ you forget that in my
system x is not a quantity but represents a mental operation. All that we can
desire of a calculus of logic is that it should enable us to express any
proposition and to interpret any equation and to represent any [E 13.31] act
of reasoning. The equation
~ =0 is the same as x =0 (see what I have said on
the moduli in the chapter on Elective Equations s) and indicates the
proposition there are no Xs. To ask how it is that ~ + ~ = x in my system is the
same as to ask how J:j x J:j
= -1 in a system of pure quantity for
although you may interpret J:j in geometry you cannot in arithmetic.
I think that common quantity (0 x 1 excepted) had nearly the same
relation to my system that imaginaries have to the system of pure quantity
but it is not at all necessary to enter into any such questions. They have
nothing to do with the validity of the applications which I have made.
[E 13.32]
Cayley to Boole, 7 December 1847
I entirely retract my objection about division: it is worth noticing
however (I did not give it as an objection which of course it is not) that
division is quite useless, from xa =xb one deduces as you say a =b+w(1-x),
w however is not arbitrary but equal to (a-b) and then a = b+(a-b)(l-x)
which is derivable from xa = xb by addition and subtraction simply. I hardly
see how you can say that in asking for the interpretation of 2I forget that x
is not" a quantity, my objection was that 2 is a quantity and I do not
understand
the combination, nor is it an answer to tell
me what
2=0 means. The
analogous
difficulty
in
mathematics
would
be
what does
~ £Xmean but that there is no difficulty about. You say to ask how
~ + ~ =x in your system, is to ask how J:j. J:j =-1 in a system of pure
quantity. [E 13.36] To point out the want of analogy (to me) of the two
questions would lead me far away into my fundamental views of analysis
which I believe would be found materially to differ from yours but perhaps
you have the advantage of being of the orthodox system. I wonder we should

XVII
Arthur Cayley
193
never have stumbled in our previous correspondence 6 on the subject of my
utter disbelief of the
received "English" theory
of the
geometrical
interpretation of H. I would much more easily admit witchcraft on the
philosophers' stone. My own theory as far as I can express it, is that a
distance x, whether real or imaginary is an "OVTW<; ov"7 capable of being
measured (that word won't do, I admit, but capable of existing) in any
direction real or imaginary: somewhat as if beings whose space was of two
dimensions only (which I think is conceivable) had by their science of
geometry arrived at the notion of a third dimension - which e.g. the theory of
symmetrically equal triangles might give them /). Ii 8 an essential remark
however in geometry is that the real and imaginary values of a variable x are
to be considered as forming a series, and one is not to say that since
x = ex +13 H
that therefore the values of x form a double series. In fact I
should admit no distinction between real and imaginary, it is only when you
draw the figures that the difficulty arises. This is rather idiosyncratical
[E 13.39] I am afraid, and I do not expect or wish to convert you. [E 13.40]9
Boole to Cayley, 8 December 1847
I believe that you will find upon reexamination that the solution which I
sent you yesterday is perfectly correct. The equation xu = xv gives u-v = x-I
o = w(l- x), w being arbitrary. I have only supposed x to be an elective
symbol here, u and v not being necessarily so, but involving, if you please,
numerical constants also. This is the most general solution. If we suppose u
and v to be both elective symbols, the value of [E 13.32] u will be best got
from the general theorem (75).10 It is u =vx+wv(l- x) + w'(l- v)(l-x), wand
w' being arbitrary electives. This is equivalent to
u = v+ljl(v)(l-x)11
Ijl(v) being arbitrary, except as respects the condition Ijl(v)n = Ijl(v). I can show
that these forms are deducible from the one I sent before. They are
interpretable in logic.
I must still contend that you do not give a quantitative interpretation to
H . You have no right to introduce the word direction or any such word in
pure arithmetic.
As to
~ it is quite sufficient to say that its interpretation is not required.
It never occurs except in an equation and all equations are interpretable in
logic. I wish you would just consider this question. Can anything more be
required than the expression of any proposition the interpretation of any
equation and the derivation ofany results that exist?
Try any of the solutions I have given by substitution in the original
equations and you will see that the symbols which I call arbitrary are as
truly so as anything in the Diffierential] Calc[ulus].

194
Letters to Cayley, Lubbock and Penrose
o
I hope, now you have set to work to examine my principles, you will not
stop short but prove them to the bottom. I do not fear the result. I had rather
have one such reader as you than a thousand who take everything for
granted. [E 13.33]
Boole to Cayley, 10 December 1847
Since I wrote to you it has appeared to me that I might state my
principles somewhat more clearly than I have done. As respects the solution
of the equation xu = xv the arbitrariness is owing to the index law if
u =v +w(l-x) then on substitution xu =xv+wx I-x 12 but x(l-x) = x-x2 =0
by the index law, [ir]respectively of the value of w. Probably you would see
this from my last [letter] but I did not state quite in such detail. You appear
to me to have overlooked the index law.
And now for the numerical constants. They never appear in the
expression of a proposition and all the details can be accomplished without
them. Instead of taking 1 for the universe I might take u - but 1 answers
quite as well and is more simple. The equation All Ys are Xs is y = vx or on
multiplying by I-x, y(l-x) =0 of which the former is a solution and here
and in every similar case both of expression and operation, there is nothing
that cannot be interpreted. This remark applies to all that I have said in the
Chapters on Conversion, Syllogism and Hypotheticals.
In the chapter on the General Properties of Elective Functions I
proposed a different object viz. what are the properties of a function \f>(xyz) in
which xyz ... are elective symbols but the function unrestricted so as to allow
of its involving numerical constants? You will allow that this was a thing
which I was at liberty to do. The general result is that any equation
\f>(xyz)[ = 0] [E 13.34] is reducible to the form
altl +a2t2 ... +antn =0
in which aI, a2 ... an are numerical constants or 0 and tl, t2 ... tn constituent
elective functions which are interpretable in logic - and further that this
equation is resolvable into a series of equations of the form t =0, all
interpretable in logic. Prop. 2nd, p. 64f. that the numerical elements
disappear altogether from the final result. I did not anticipate this, I thought
it
exceedingly
unlikely
that
every
equation
\f>(xyz) = 0
should
be
interpretable but when I found that this was the case and that it gave us the
power of reducing the solution of equations to general theorems I accepted it
not only as a proof that the laws I had investigated were really the laws of
thought but also as a means of giving to the process of the calculus an
analytical generality and simplicity which they could not otherwise have
had.

XVII
Arthur Cayley
195
I think I now might meet your objections if they still remain by this
question. Do you think it necessary in order to our employing the symbol
H
in analysis that we should be able to interpret it? Is it not in the science
of quantity (apart from direction) sufficient to consider it as a symbol (i)
which satisfies particular laws and especially this
i2 =-1
and which disappears from the final result whenever a solution is real in
virtue of the principle that if
a + bi = 0
and a and b are real then
a=O
b=O
[E 13.35] and is not this so far as it goes analogous with what I have proved
in Prop. 2? 13 I contend for analogy in the nature of the things themselves
and I only give this as an illustration which does not at all affect the truth of
my system. [E 13.36]
Cayley to Boole, 11 December 1847
I meant to have answered your first note, and I do not think the one I
received from you this morning makes much difference in what I should have
said. Resuming the equation xu =xv from which u =v+w(1-x) -
I suppose
that if t be perfectly arbitrary, u and v-t is a symbol coextensive in
generality with w. If so, substituting for w we have
u =v+(u-v)(1-x)+t(1-x)
or
xu = xv+t(1-x)
but from the fundamental equation xu =xv:. t(l-x) =0 which is a condition
defining t or w (= u-v+t) is not perfectly arbitrary, also the equation
u = v+w(1-x) reduces itself to u = v+(u-v)(1-x), i.e. the class u equals the
class v, omitting the not-xs of v and adding the not-xs of u. A conclusion of
course which follows from the original supposition of the x's of u being
identical with the x's of v; but the equation
u =v+(u-v)(l-x)
is evidently derived by Addition and Subtraction merely without division
from xu = xv.
You remember I did not wish to found any objection on this, I merely
gave it as a remark - I quote for [E 13.40] explanation a passage in your first
note where you say "I must still contend that you do not give a quantitative
interpretation to H. You have no right to introduce the word direction or

196
Letters to Cayley, Lubbock and Penrose
D
any such word in pure arithmetic".14 I think you will find in looking at my
note that I was speaking exclusively of Geometry; what I meant to say was,
that a distance x, tho' imaginary might be conceived to exist in any given
direction (real or imaginary) just as a real distance might be conceived to
exist in the same direction - that in fact the reality or imaginariness of a
distance x, has no connection whatever with the direction in which it is to be
measured - in opposition to the theory of those who maintain that the
distances a and a R
denote distances perpendicular to each other.
[E 13.41]
Boole to Cayley, 14 December 1847
Your argument against the perfect arbitrariness of w appears to me
quite fallacious. The direct proof that w is perfectly arbitrary rests upon this,
that if we substitute u = v+w(l-x) inxu =xv the equation is satisfied quite
independently of any assumption respecting w. It does not appear to me that
you meet this in any way.
I allow your substitution of u-v +t for wand the result
and further admit
u = v +(u-v+t) I-x
to-x) =0
u =v+(u-v) I-x
(1)
(2)
(3)
but I remark that you cannot infer from (3) that u does not involve an
arbitrary element, because the value of u is expressed in terms of u - of itself.
You ought to express the value of u in terms of other symbols before you can
assert anything respecting its elements. I remark in the second place that it
does not follow that w is not perfectly arbitrary because t, a part of it, is
restricted by the condition [E 13.42] (2). Two functions that are not perfectly
arbitrary may in my system produce a function that is so. The expansion of
.p(x) is
.p(l)x + 19(0) I-x
neither of the terms of which is perfectly arbitrary in respect of x. Now the
coefficients of I-x in your value of u viz. (1) involves virtually both elements,
for by the solution of (2) we have
t = v'x
and the original solution from which you set out gives
u-v =w(l-x)

XVII
John William Lubbock
197
these together making the perfectly arbitrary coefficients of (I-x) in
equation (1).
This might be put in various other shapes but I hope what I have said
may suffice. You have I think fallen into two misconceptions - the first is
that if u =v+w(l-x) and u =v+(w-v)(I-x) therefore w =w-v; for w may
and does contain an element which vanishes on multiplication into I-x. The
second is that of inferring a property of u from an expression for u in which u
still enters. The former misconception prevailed in your previous letter, the
latter in your last. [E 13.43]
John William Lubbock
Boole to Lubbock, 16 February 1849
Let me thank you for the additional tract, which you have sent me. I
have read it with great satisfaction. With such improved faculties as now
exist, the province of the computer may certainly be separated from that of
the mathematician, - and in carrying much further the approximations of
Physical Astronomy this would, I suppose, be a point of considerable
importance.
I have tried to procure two or three of your tracts advertised on the
covers of those, which you first sent me, but am in- [1] formed that they are
either out of print, or not known. Those for which I applied were the
"Astronomical Refractions",15 the "Numerical Coefficients" and the Essay on
the "classification of the different branches of Human Knowledge",16 the
latter a subject which is to me of great interest.
Perhaps I may venture to mention to you that I have recently made a
step which appears to me to be of fundamental importance in the theory of
Probabilities. The ordinary (Laplace's) theory sets out from the assumption
that the simple events which enter into any combination that forms the
subject of experience are inde- [2] pendent and the probability of the
combination an explicit function of the probabilities of these simple events.
In general, however, we have no right to make any such assumption. The fact
of a given combination of events having a given probability, determined by
experience, is presumptive evidence that the events which are thus
associated, are not independent.
So much as to principle - now as to method. The common theory requires
that we possess just so many equations or data, as there are events, whose
independence is assumed. If there are fewer data, we can do nothing unless
we venture upon new assumptions [3] if there are more we are liable to
incongruity and contradiction. Now the theory and the method at which I
have arrived are respectively free from these objections. There is no

198
Letters to Cayley, Lubbock and Penrose
D
assumption of independence except what is warranted by the logical
connection of the premises and the estimation of this is a result of the
method. There is no restriction as to the number of equations, or even as to
the limitation of the elements of the conclusion whose probability is sought to
the range of those which have entered into the premises Le. into the
combinations of events whose probabilities are known. When the [4] question
is not determinate, the method gives the narrowest limits within which the
possibility sought must be, and it involves (in such cases) terms which
indicate the nature of that new experience, which is necessary to determine
the probability completely. In the case in which the ordinary theory is
sufficient - that in which the combination of events whose probability is
sought is, so to speak, an explicit function of those whose probabilities are
directly given, the result of my theory is the same as that of the former, but
the method is different and, I think, superior.
Perhaps the object of my researches may be better expressed in the
shape of a problem. Given the numerical probabilities of the truths of a set of
propositions, these propositions being hypothetical, disjunctive or simply
assertive, or combining these elements of formal distinction to any proposed
extent -
required the probability of the truth of any other proposition
whatever. Or the quresitum 17 of the problem may be more accurately
expressed thus. Required a formulre which shall express the numerical value
of the probability sought whenever it is determinate, and which in all other
cases shall exhibit [6] how much of that numerical value is determinate, and
shall both indicate what new data are requisite to make the determination
complete, and shew how to apply those data.
I feel that I ought to apologize for troubling you with this account. It is, I
fear, too hasty a one to be quite intelligible - yet I hope that it may so far
interest you as to induce you to forgive me if I have trespassed upon your
time. [7]
Boole to Lubbock, 22 February 1849
Since I wrote to you I have been suffering from an attack of illness which
makes it necessary for a time that I should lay aside everything [that]
requires mental effort. I hope however in a week or two to be able to get to
my books again and then it shall be my first business to furnish you with an
abstract [2] of the theory to which I adverted in my last [letter].
The best account which I am able to give you now is by saying that a
little tract on the Calculus of Logic published by me in the Cambridge
Journal 18 contains principles the extent of the application of which even to
Logic itself I did not at the time of its publication see - and that it is upon
these principles that my theory of probabilities is based. In the first place I
have found that all questions of pure Logic are reducible to the applications

XVII
John William Lubbock
199
of one general method however numerous and however complicated [3] the
premises. On applying this method to any system of propositions of which
the separate probabilities are given a result is obtained which indicates the
logical dependence of the proposition of which the separate probabilities are
given a result is obtained which indicates the logical dependence of the
proposition whose probability is sought upon those whose probability is
given. The symbols which have thus far been employed are logical; Le. their
laws are founded upon the laws of Language - but this step being reached we
are permitted in virtue of certain relations connecting the laws of thought as
exhibited in [E 13.44] Language with the laws of thought exhibited in
arithmetic to transform at once our single logical equation into a system of[4]
algebraic equations one of which expresses the value of the probability
sought in terms of a number of quantities which the other equations enable
us to determine. In general the solution of these equations will depend upon
that of a single central equation, the order of which is in some cases very
elevated. At present I have only worked out one or two examples - and these
for the elucidation of particular difficulties which have occurred to me. It is
the fmal logical equation which indicates the nature of the new experience
required when the probability is not quite determi- [5] nate, and in all such
cases there appear terms with arbitrary coefficients in the final algebraic
solution which our possession of that new experience would enable us to
evaluate and so to complete the numerical solution.
The case of life assurance to which you refer comes under the dominion
of the method.
The very simple question which I can devise as at all illustrating the
character of the solutions is the following. Ifp be the probability of its raining
at a given time, and q the probability of its both raining and [6] thundering,
required the [E 13.45] probability of its thundering. For the probability
sought I obtain the formula
q+c(1-p)
c being an arbitrary constant which may vary from 0 to 1. This giving for the
limits of the probability sought
q, & q+1-p.
It is implied by the latter that p must not be less than q as is evident
from the premises. The final logical equation employed in the process
indicates that in order to determine c we must inquire whether it ever
thunders without rain. Suppose it ascertained that if it does not rain there is
a probability r of its thundering, then putting r for c we have
q+r(1-p)
[7] for the probability sought. I suppose in the above case p to be probability
of its raining whether it thunders or not. If we set out with the hypotheses

200
Letters to Cayley, Lubbock and Penrose
D
that rain and thunder are independent phenomena, we should get the
ordinary solution fro [E 13.46] [8]
John Penrose
Boole to Penrose, 13 March 1855
You must only consider this note as containing my hasty thoughts on the
question which you propose to me.
I think that there can be no intelligible propositions about things wholly
incomprehensible and that those writers who in their zeal to exalt the divine
attributes have described them as wholly unlike what the terms by which
they are expressed imply within the compass of our present consciousness or
experience have by so doing only defeated their own object. The writings of
the pseudo-Dionysius are the most remarkable instances of the kind which I
have met with. [C9/1] But mystical writers of all ages and communions have
exemplified the same form of error. Bishop Browne's Analogy to which you
once directed my attention is tinctured with the same spirit. He quotes, I
think with approbation, from the suppositions [in the] works above
mentioned such passages as Ollie ayc.xS6c; (cnlv aXX' uTTcpayc.xSoc; 19 etc. in
reference to [1] the divine attributes.
On the other hand writers like Mill seem to me to be equally in error who
maintain openly or by implication that propositions are unmeaning unless
their terms relate to the distinctly conceived objects of individual experience.
Though we cannot distinctly conceive of infinite space, eternal duration,
perhaps of perfect goodness and purity, unchanging rectitude [C9/2] and
truth etc. it does not follow that propositions in which each terms are
employed are unmeaning or even that they are not positively and affirmative
propositions. The solution of the difficulty is I apprehend to be found in the
doctrine of the limit. It seems to be a law of human reason that we can in
various instances affirm propositions without absolute certainty of their
truth, respecting things which we can only picture or represent to ourselves
as the limits of an indefinite process of abstraction. Nearly all if not all
scientific truths are of this kind. We are not the less [C 10/3] sure that the
circle possesses such and such properties because no one ever saw and no one
ever perfectly conceived by any power of imagination, a perfect circle. And so
too in merely physical science. Nature never presents, and the mind I think
never fully realizes by any fictive or plastic power of its aim, the conditions
under which the great laws of the material universe are represented as
operating in scientific Formulae. And to come to the point which you seem to
have more immediately in view, the propositions which finite beings are able
to express and to reason upon respecting things infinite in their nature

XVII
John Penrose
201
[CI0/4] are, if true at all, true in the limit. They are propositions the terms
of which we can only represent to ourselves by commencing with the finite,
throwing back its boundaries and then supposing the analogous process to be
continued without end. This as I have said does not appear to me [2] to
render the propositions themselves less affirmative in their character. There
is it is true a difference between this application of the doctrine of the limit
and that which is exemplified in the propositions of ordinary science. But it
is if I mistake not the [C 11/5] same kind of difference as we observe between
the use of the telescope and the microscope. Both will ever be finite in their
powers, both look toward, both suggest - infinity.
You will observe that this is not the same as the question what are the
grounds which we have for believing that there exists an infinite Being. I
have only been considering in what light supposing such a Being to exist
propositions concerning this nature and essence are to be regarded - what, in
short, must be the procedure of the human mind [C 11/6] in discoursing with
itself of such a Being. And the purport of my observation is that as the object
of all pure science are things which it would baffle all our efforts to represent
by the power of imagination only and which can only be approved as the
attainable limits of thought but concerning which nevertheless the most
vigorous of all propositions can be affirmed so upon the supposition that
there exists a being possessed of infinite attributes we are not precluded by
the impossibility of adequately concerning those attributes from affirming
respecting them clear intelligible and affirmative propositions.
And now to come to your second question. As to space and time [C 12/7] I
am not able to conceive of their being bounded. With respect to the Deity I
find myself unable if I refer all existence back to him to conceive that he is in
any way restricted as to his power or other attributes from without.
Whatever limitations do exist must reside in the necessities of his own [3]
nature. It is obvious that the subject is quite above our capacities of
investigation a priori except as respects his moral attributes of the relations
of which we may form some idea, and may, nay I think must, refer them to
some necessary ground in himself. [C 12/8]
A very deep interest attaches in my opinion to those discoveries which
Science seems to be slowly unfolding respecting the plan or scheme which
the Divine Mind seems to have wrought out in the work of Creation - by
which term I do not mean a single set but the continued and still continuing
exercise of the Creative power. I allude especially to those Ideas which it
seems to have been the Divine purpose to realize in the constitutions of
different parts of the Universe e.g. in the inorganic world, in the structure of
living beings, and in the laws of the human mind. How wonderful, to take a
single instance, is that [C 12/9] constancy of reference to an archetypal form
which is displayed in the structure of vertebrated animals from the first
dawn of the existence as revealed in the ancient sandstones to the present
day! Other instances will readily occur to you.

202
Letters to Cayley, Lubbock and Penrose
D
On two or three of these points I would beg to refer you to my Laws of
Thought pp. 406-7 [and] to some passages a little further on. [C 12/10][4]

Textual Notes
Explanation of the description of the material
All texts printed here are kept in the Library of the Royal Society,
London. With one exception (two letters of Boole to John William Lubbock)
all texts of Boole's Nachlass are "catalogued" in the library of the Royal
Society under the general signature MS 782. An official identification of
single documents does not exist. The reason is not the lack of signatures; on
the contrary each editor of the Nachlass (details in §3 of the Introduction)
appears to have bequeathed his own marking system. As a rule two different
signatures are found on a manuscript, as well as the paging, and references
to research literature on Boole's Nachlass are likewise ambiguous. In
presenting the material we have made special efforts to make it identifiable.
The following elucidations attempt to show the necessity of this and to make
our solution plain.
The two Signature systems "MM" and "RS"
By examining earlier editing work kept in the archives it is possible to
differentiate between two different signature systems used in the material
presented by us. The first is to be found in a notebook R2 entitled "F.
MacMillan, Cambridge". Read from the beginning it contains a list of
signatures. The contents of the documents mentioned point these to the work
of Isaac Todhunter in his rendering of Boole 1865a. As we are not dealing
with this area of the Boole Nachlass, this list does not interest us further.
However, if the notebook is turned round and read from the back, there is a
second list of which a separate one in handwriting with the signature R3
exists. It is to this list we refer as the MacMillan Signature System or
MM-Signature for short. Documents are listed there in telegram style, for
instance as "bundle of loose papers" or, rather more helpfully, with a title or
heading. The page number of the document is usually also given. No further
assistance on the identification of documents is available.
Alicia Boole and H. J. Falk, who prepared a new edition of LT, not only
sorted the material (see again Introduction §3), but also earned gratitude by
documenting the various sections. We refer to these "notes upon the
re-arrangement of the manuscripts of the late Professor George Boole", filed

204
Textual Notes
with typescripts in MS
782,
as Royal Society Signature System
or
RS-Signature for short. These Notes lack any information as to contents or
scope. They only record the parcel a document was in when handed over in
1889 and the parcel in which it can now be found. A description at the
beginning of the list, which covers six pages of typescript, is here reproduced
in full (the division lines are the original).
The Boole/Falk List of 1896
Description of the Parcel issued by the Roy. Soc. October 17th 1889.
There were nine parcels lettered A, B, C, E, R, S, T, U, W. The papers
inside each parcel were numbered in pencil consecutively e.g. A 1,
A 2. Only a single letter and Number e.g. A 88, S 7 was applied to
any set of Papers fastened together or to any Manuscript Book.
Upon investigation it was discovered that the majority of these
papers were in great disorder. Many of the separate sheets belonged
to those which had been fastened together, and many sheets which
had been fastened together did not belong to each other.
After inspection and consideration it was found convenient to divide
the whole of the Manuscripts into three classes.
Istly. M.S. Books bound or in paper covers.
2ndly. Unbound papers upon Mathematics.
3rdly. Unbound papers upon Logic including Mathematical Logic;
and Papers upon General Subjects.
Class 1 - Consisting of legible and consecutive writings remains
unchanged. One of the most valuable Documents in this Class is the
bound Copy (marked S. 7) of the author's "Mathematical Analysis of
Logic", which is interleaved and contains a very large number of
Notes by the Author.
Class 2. The Mathematical Papers were considered by the late Mr.
Todhunter, though it is very improbable that all of them were in good
order or that he was able fully to consider those which were not. It is
certain that he did fully consider the Papers in Parcels R, T, W, most
of which were published by him in the Supplementary Volume to
"BooIe's Differential Equations".
The Papers of this Class have received no special treatment. They
remain intact in the Parcels as Lettered by the Royal Society, those
in Parcels A, B, C, E, having been separated from the Logical Papers
in the same Parcels and combined (still under their original Letters)
in a Parcel lettered M.

The Boole/Falk List of 1896
205
Class 3. The Logical Papers received some consideration from the
late Mr. De Morgan, but as so many of them were actually stitched
together in great disorder, it seems at least improbable that he had a
proper opportunity of estimating them.
These and the Papers on General Subjects have been exhaustively
analysed and rearranged. Nevertheless, it is quite possible that some
of the still unplaced fragments might be connected by even more
minute enquiry. But a number of complete and consecutive Papers
and Treatises have fortunately been compiled.
The Papers of this third Class have, with very few exceptions, been
removed from their original parcels and arranged in three new
Parcels Lettered X, Y, z.
Parcel X contains fragments which it has been impossible to connect,
or to connect more than partially.
Parcel Y contains Papers and Treatises judged to be anterior in time
to the Author's "Laws of Thought".
Parcel Z contains Papers and Treatises judged to be later than the
"Laws of Thought".
Some of these Papers [in parcels Y and Z] still exhibit a few lacunre,
but they are slight.
Based on the information we can take it the archive material under
MS 782 is here described in full. According to the list at the end the collection
comprises 402 papers or manuscript books. In addition there are 27
typescripts which Boole/Falk had produced in the meantime. A hundred
years after BoolelFalk returned nine parcels to the Royal Society in 1896, not
even all sets of papers are available and whether what is found in those that
are to hand was originally where it is today is uncertain. The original
organisation has been kept in nine cardboard boxes which today form the
whole collection (with the exception of the manuscript books). However,
amongst these boxes parts of the material have often been interchanged
undocumented.
From the description by Boole/Falk we may suppose that they gave the
documents signatures referring to parcel and storage position ignoring the
fact that signatures were already to hand. One reason for this could have
been that the two systems contained in Notebook R2 do not tally. (These
systems came into being before 1889; Notebook R2 and Manuscript R3 are
mentioned in the BoolelFalk list.) So it comes about that the signature "B"
once marks "21 pages marked in red ink" (this in the list in R2 not considered
here) and once "On the nature of Thought, 50 pages" (in the second R2 list,
used here). Boole/Falk marked "On the nature of Thought" with signatures
"W4" and "C43", as the first 48 pages apparently came to light in Parcel Win

206
Textual Notes
the fourth position but the remaining two pages in Parcel C in 43rd position.
The fact that both letter Wand C from earlier editing have already been used
to mark two different documents each, shows very clearly the problems to be
faced when attempts are made today to work with a single signature
reference. It is not unusual that several documents (or single sheets) fit to
one single signature; which, then, is meant?
Details on individual documents
It is therefore necessary to identify signatures oneself. Because precision
is lacking, circumstantial evidence becomes all important but does not
always suffice. Therefore we give also the dimension in centimetres and the
number of pages (sheets) of each manuscript. The dimensions of the
typescripts are uniform (33,0 x 20,3). We also state whether a document is a
manuscript ("MS") or a Typescript ("TS"). This is necessary if only because
Boole/Falk simply placed on the typescripts just the signatures shown on the
basic manuscript. Notebooks are marked "NB".
From Table 1 it is possible to discern in which of the Parcels X, Y, Z a
document is filed, which gives an indication of the dating. However, due to
the uncertain identification, caution should be exercised in this respect. (As
regards the MM signature, brackets show that the placement of the
document in respect of BoolelFalk parcels X, Y, Z is done by means of the
corresponding RS signature.)
The compilation should also make it easier to tell whether a certain
document mentioned in research literature is contained herein and in which
Chapter it might be found.
In the text the original pagination is given according to a system
explained below. We mark always the end of a page, putting the pagination
in square brackets. So "[C57.22l" shows where page 22 of Document "C5T'
ends. Whether "C5T' refers to a typescript or a manuscript is made clear in
the textual notes where the signature of the source to which reference is
made is given in italics (e.g. "TS RS C57" vs. "MS RS C5T').
A dot in the signature separates the signature proper from the
pagination. For example the specification "MM J.l-J.25" refers to the
Macmillan signature "J" ranging from page 1 to page 25. Whereas the
MM-signature incorporates the pagination in the way described and is given
as a unit in the right upper corner of every manuscript page, the
RS-signature is found only once in a document on the left upper comer of the
front page (but caution: a "document" could also be a single page). The
combination of the RS-signature proper with the original pagination in the
form "RS C42.1-C42.48" is done here for sake of uniformity.
Dating on documents in the text is substantiated in the Notes. This
substantiation is in most cases all too scanty and only shows how
hypothetical the dating is. Despite this and since experience shows that a

Details on individual documents
207
Signature or
Type of
System of
Boole/Falk
Printed in or
main part of it
document
signature
arrangement
as Chapter
a
MS
MM
(X)
XIV
A7
MS
RS
X
XVI
All
MS
RS
X
XVI
A67
MS
RS
X
XVI
A88
MS, TS
RS
Y
I
A89
MS
RS
Y
II
A90
MS, TS
RS
Y
II
A91
MS, TS
RS
Z
X
A92
MS, TS
RS
Z
VI
A94
MS, TS
RS
Z
IV
B2
MS, TS
RS
Z
V
B3
MS
RS
Y
III
B4
MS
RS
X
XVI
B6
MS
RS
X
XVI
B7
MS
RS
X
XVI
B8
MS
RS
X
XVI
B9
MS
RS
X
XVI
Bll
MS
RS
X
XVI
B12
MS
RS
X
XVI
B13
MS
RS
X
XVI
B77
MS
?
-
XIII
B123
MS, TS
RS
Z
XV
B164
MS, TS
RS
X
XIV
B165
MS
RS
X
XVI
C
MS
MM
(Z)
IX
Cl
NB
RS
0
XVI
C9-C12
MS, TS
?
-
XVII
C24
MS, TS
RS
Z
IX
C26
MS, TS
RS
Y
II
C42
MS
RS
Z
V
C57
MS, TS
RS
Z
XI
C59
MS, TS
RS
Z
VII
e
MS
MM
(Z)
IV
E
MS
MM
(Z)
XI
E3
MS, TS
?
-
XII
E13
NB
RS
0
XVII
F
MS
MM
(Z)
VIII
G
MS
MM
(Z)
V
h
MS
MM
(Z)
XV
H
MS
MM
(Z)
V
I
MS
MM
(Y)
I
j
MS
MM
(Z)
X
J
MS
MM
(Y)
II
k
MS
MM
(Z)
VI
M
MS
MM
(Y)
II
N
MS
MM
(Y)
III
R
MS
MM
(Y)
II
U
MS
MM
(Z)
VII
W3
MS, TS
RS
Z
VIII
Table 1: Ordering of documents (signatures) to individual chapters

208
Textual Notes
chronological ordering of material facilitates a first approach, we wanted to
give at least an informed supposition. On this theme see "Part 3: Remarks on
dating and editing the manuscripts" on page Iviii.
We also note when passages have been transcribed in Rhees 1952a or
Hesse 1952a.
Notes
on the individual chapters
Chapter I: The Nature of Logic
The text is based on TS RS A88, a transcription of MS RS A88 = MM
1.1-1.25 (22,9 x 18,7; 25 pages). On p. 5 "1848" is called "this present year".
BoolelFalk classified MS A88 as being earlier than LT.
On the paper ribbon which holds together the pages of the manuscript
someone wrote: "publish".
1 This person is also mentioned in chapter II on p. 14.
2 Whately 1856a. This essay "on instinct" had first appeared earlier as a newspaper
article, which presumably Boole had not seen.
Chapter II: Elementary Treatise on Logic
This text consists of two parts. The basis of the first part is MS RS A89 =
MM M.1-M.37 (22,6 x 18,5; 36 pages), a transcription in neat handwriting of
MS RS C26 = MM J.1-J.17 (23,0 x 19,2; 17 pages). According to a note on the
first page of MS C26, the transcription was made by a person named M.
Lilly. This person probably also wrote MS RS E3 (see chapter XII.) Although
with TS RS C26 there exists a transcription of MS A89 we follow the
manuscript of M. Lilly which has been corrected and expanded by Boole
himself. Because usually reference is made to a typescript if one exists, also
the pagination of the typescript is given. On the back of the first side of MS
C26 someone wrote: "probably before 1849".
The second part of the text is based on TS RS A90 which goes back to MS
A90 = MM R.1-R.22 (22,7 x 18,2; 22 pages).
BoolelFalk classified MS A89, MS A90 and MS C26 as being prior to the
"Laws of Thought".
On the paper ribbon which holds together MSS A89, A90 and C26 is
written: "Publish".
1 This person is also mentioned above in chapter I on p. 1.
2 This is the dictum de omni et nullo.
3 Boole obviously speaks about the first four forms of primary propositions enumerated
here on page 19.

Chapter III: [Extracts from a notebookl
209
4 Axiomata.
5 In the manuscript this large note extends over seven pages and is separated from the
main body of the text by a horizontal stroke. Thus in the manuscript the note does not,
as in the typescript, separate the two sentences here printed directly before and after
the note, i.e. "This question does not belong however either to Logic properly so called
or to geometry" and "The successive steps in the demonstrations of geometry are
usually syllogistic ...".
6 Book 1.
7 Newton I707a.
8 In the manuscript the expression "modern Algebra" is replaced by "the science".
9 In the manuscript the expression "Calculus" is replaced by "science".
Chapter III: [Extracts from a notebook]
These are the extracts from a suite of short essays mentioned in §8 as
written in a notebook and then taken out by Boole. They come from MS RS
B3 = MM N.1 - N.30 (22,7 x 18,7; 79 pages) Boole/Falk classified this
manuscript as being prior to LT. Their content relates closely to "Sketch"
published by Rhees in Boole 1952a, 141-166, which dates the text at around
1849. For discussion of this point and its context, see Panteki 1992a,
540-552, who first drew attention to these essays.
The chosen passages, which are separated by a line of stars *, come from
respectively folios 1, 8v, 9, lOv-14, 15-16v and 17-18; the continuous line in
the sixth extract is Boole's own. The rest of the manuscript up to N.30
includes essays or notes on primary and secondary propositions, and on elim-
ination.
1 Boole is referring to his three basic algebraic laws (6.1-3).
2 Dirichlet 1839a.
3 After writing and modifying these notes, Boole imposed a numbering by clauses onto
them which partly overrode some original numbering and somewhat changed the order
of material. We follow this latter order, and eliminate the old numberings which seem
to have been replaced. Despite this housework, the text is still a little untidy.
4 Four unreadable words here.
Chapter IV: Prolegomena
The text is based on TS RS A94, a transcription of MS RS A94 = MM
e.1- e.20, numbered backwards (first four pages 32,5 x 20,1, remaining pages
33,5
x
20,6; 20 pages in all). The unusual dimensions and other
characteristics of the manuscript are very similar to the "Preparatory Notes"
(chapter
IV).
These
were
classified
by
Rhees
as preparations
for
"Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Logic" (chapter V). Judging
solely by the appearance of the manuscript, the "Prolegomena" could
therefore also be preparatory to this work. The first editors of the Nachlass
were evidently also of this opinion; compare note 12 to chapter V.

210
Textual Notes
Boole/Falk classified MS A94 as being later than LT. This is justified by
the fact that Boole makes a reference to this work on p. 6l.
Hesse 1952a takes a citation out of this text.
In a first attempt BooIe described "except" as a conjunction, then he changed it into
"preposition".
2 The typescript corrects a mistake of Boole. He used here the property "chew the cud"
instead of "divide the hoof'.
Chapter V: On the Foundations of Logic
This text consists of two parts. The first part is based on TS RS B2, a
transcription of MS RS B2 = MM G.I-G.39 (23,0 x 19,0; 48 pages), in neat
handwriting. The second part of the text is based on MS RS C42 = MM
H.I-H.46 (23,0 x 19,0; 47 pages), neat handwriting. The originals for MSS
B2 and C42 - a bundle of around 60 pages in various sizes, some of them
stuck together - are also to be found in the archives.
LT is mentioned in the first sentence of MS B2 as being published "about
two years ago". On the back of MS C42 Mary Boole wrote "later than 1855"
(the year of her marriage). Both manuscripts have been classified by
BoolelFalk as being later than LT.
Rhees published some extracts in 1952a, 230-246 as chapter vii and
some of the material he used in his "Note on Editing" of the same work. This
comes to about one third of the whole. Hesse 1952a cites seven short pas-
sages which amount to at most a tenth of the text.
1 Boole 1857a.
2 Charles Hughes Terrot (1790-1872) studied at Trinity College Cambridge, where he
was an associate of William Whewell and George Peacock. A good mathematician, he
was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, contributing many papers. On the
point mentioned by Boole here, he expressed himself in Terrot 1857a.
3 Boole 1857a.
4 "He logike", means "the logic".
5 "Hypostasis", here in the meaning of "subsistence", The stoic difference between
existence and subsistence referred to here by Boole, is to be understood as analogous to
the theory of Alexius Meinong. Here Boole muses on "the notion in the concrete
individual existence" as opposed to the notion in the condition of subsistence. The
"subjective unity" of which Boole speaks in this connection is the unity of the subject
and has nothing to do with subjectivity in its modern sense.
6 "Noeton", means an "intelligible".
7 "Aistheton", means a "sensible". The sentence reads in English: "... it is an intelligible
rather than a sensible."
8 In this footnote Boole first alludes to Hamilton's famous review 1833a on Whately; in
the reprint which Boole probably read, see 1852a, 137n and 158-159. His citation of
Suarez's Metaphysica C1605a, vol. 2, 516-518) on second intentions is a remarkable
example of his willingness to go back to old sources and moreover on a topic which was

Chapter VI: [Preparatory Notes]
211
less well understood in Boole's time than in Suarez's. An edition of Suarez's Opera
omnia was in progress in Boole's lifetime, but Metaphysica came out only in 1877, as
volume 25.
9 It is not clear to which edition of Whately 1826a Boole refers here. In the first edition a
possible reference is found on p. 88. See Introduction §5 for a conunent on this passage.
10 Hamilton 1833a, 134.
11 The original of MS B2 has here room only for a later reference, no brackets. The first
editors of the Nachlass completed the brackets in their transcription with the reference
"A7". The first three pages of this manuscript are reproduced here as Fragment 6 of
Chapter XVI.
12 The phrase "introductory portion of this paper" has been changed in transcription in a
reference to a "Cpo A.94". This makes Chapter IV "Prolegomena" (= RS A94) an
introduction to the present Chapter V. The theme "Abstraction" is dealt with in
Chapter IV in page 58.
13 R. G. Latham (1812-1888), ethnologist and philologist, wrote a volume 1847a on the
First notions of Logic which Boole praised in footnotes in MAL, 5 and LT, 40 but
criticised in MAL, 59. Boole wrote to him on 22 May 1855 on the forms of plurals in
language (copy at MS RS C 7-8; transcribed in Panteki 1992a, 544).
14 Boole probably had in mind a passage in De Morgan such as 1847a, 67-69.
15 This seems to indicate a reference to some other work by its section number. The
obvious candidate is LT: if so, the appropriate sections would be 7 -II.
16 Reference in empty brackets supplied according to Boole 1952a.
17 The number of the equations (1) and (2) and all later cross-reference by this number to
this equation is supplemented by Boole 1952a.
18 Between the pages originally numbered 23 and 26 there is only a single page numbered
24(+25). The pagination incorporated in the MM-signature is false too: between page
11 and 13 there are two pages 12 and 12'. Because of these two faults, the last page of
the manuscript is in one counted p. 48 and in the other p. 46, the exact number of pages
being 47.
19 Addition of the equation in Boole 1952a, 243. Originally there was only a pair of empty
brackets '( )'.
20 This is written on a small piece of paper stuck on the back of C42.36. There is no
reference explicit or implicit, to the texts ofC42. 36 or C42.37. Perhaps Boole stuck this
note wrongly on the back of C42.36 instead of C42.37 where it would be directly
opposite to the text here.
Chapter VI:
[Preparatory Notes]
The text is based on TS RS A92, a transcription of MS RS A92 = MM
k.l - k.9 (33,5 x 21,1; 9 pages). BoolelFalk classified this manuscript as being
later than LT. This work is mentioned by Boole twice on p. 110.
According to a remark on the last page of the manuscript this last page
was probably originally the first page and then sewn up wrongly. We
therefore bring p. 11 first.
The title given comes from Rush Rhees. In Boole 1952a, 246 Rhees uses
a short citation from what he declares to be "preparatory notes" for "On the
Mathematical Theory of Logic" which is printed here as chapter Chapter V.

212
Textual Notes
If Rhees is correct, then MS A92 must be earlier than MS B2 and MS C42,
written in 1856.
The division lines in the text are the original.
1 A note on the top of this page says: "This page sewn last in MS is probably the first."
2 This is the first sentence on the top of p. 1 of MS A82, placed before the title
"Definitions of Conception, Judgment and Reasoning".
3 In MS A92 the paragraph "Analysis of conceptions" which follows here on the next page
faces this passage. The paragraph is written on a separate sheet and stuck on the verso
of the preceding page. It seems that it should be read as an addendum to this passage.
4 Compare note 3.
5 In the manuscript there is at this place a big gap of 12 lines, probably for the insertion
of a title.
6 This and the next two paragraphs up to "... among the different sciences." are in MS
A92 found on the back of the preceding page. Compare note 3.
Chapter VII: General Summary
The text is based on TS RS C59, a transcription of MS RS C59-C65
MM U.1-U.12 (23,2 x 18,6; 12 +1 pages). The manuscript is a complete
fascicle, the title is written on the frontpage, which contains no other text;
and the last page is empty.
Boole/Falk classified this manuscript as being later than LT. This work
is mentioned on pp. 113 and 115.
Chapter VIII:
[Preface]
The text is based on TS RS W3, a transcription of MS RS W3 = MM
F.1-F.5 (23,0 x 18,8; 5 pages), neat handwriting. Boole/Falk classified this
manuscript as being later than LT. This work is mentioned on p. 119.
Hesse 1952a takes two short citations from the preface. She refers to the
work simply as "a sequel to LT".
The division lines in the text are the original.
As a part of MS RS C27 =MM b.3-b.43 there exists another "Preface"
for a sequel of LT in the archives. It covers the first four pages of the manu-
script C27, then the text was struck out.
This note is written in pencil by Boole at the top of MS W3.1 without a reference into
the text. "Mr. M." is presumably MacMillan, publisher of LT. It could be Daniel
MacMillan (died 1857) or his younger brother Alexander.
2 This paragraph (written in pencil) comes after the end of the main text (written in ink),
separated from it by a line.

Chapter IX: Table of Contents
213
Chapter IX: Table of Contents
The text is based on TS RS CU, a transcription of MS RS C24 = MM
C.1-C.5 (22,9 x 18,1; 5 pages). Boole/Falk classified this manuscript as being
later than LT. This work is mentioned on p. 122.
Hesse 1952a gives the titles and a condensation of the description of the
content. She thinks that the text is part of the planned sequel to LT.
1 Quite likely Mansel 1860a. (Compare his praise in the manuscript published in Boole
1952a, 212.) This note is found on the back of the (empty) front page of MS A91.
2 The word is hardly legible. In TS C24 is written "present" and later added in square
brackets "parent?".
Chapter X:
The Philosophy of Reasoning
This text is based on TS RS A91, a transcription of MS RS A91 = MM
j.1-j.4 (32,5 x 20,5; 4 pages). On the back of the single sheets are notes on
geometrical problems. Boole/Falk classified this manuscript as being later
than LT. This work is mentioned twice on pp. 123f. On p. 124 LT is called a
"predecessor" of the planned work.
Hesse 1952a cites a passage from this work which is described by her as
"unfinished paper which may have been intended to be the introductory
chapter."
There is another manuscript in the archives which bears the title "The
Philosophy of Reasoning". It bears the signature MS RS E 10, also marked
A1-All.
1 Hamilton 1833a, Whately 1826a.
2 The second half of this paragraph is our construction from a messy and altered text.
Left loose is the clause "permits such glimpses only as serve to awaken curiosity". If its
implied subject is "introspection", as the context suggests, then we have before us here
an important statement of scepticism by BooIe.
Chapter XI: Logic
The text is based on TS RS C57, a transcription of MS RS C57 = MM
E.1-E.52 (28 x 19; 54 pages of varying sizes, partly stuck together). On the
back of page 16 of the manuscript is written "Later than 1855", which is
probably a note of Mary Boole. In any case Boole/Falk classified this
manuscript as being later than LT.
Concerning the dating of the manuscript Daniel D. Merrill points out
(private communication) that a controversy between Boole and De Morgan
which appears here on page 140 seems also to reappear in the correspon-

214
Textual Notes
dence between them. In a letter dated 13 July 1860 De Morgan replies to
Boole: "I agree with you that the explanation of (.) and) ( is not down at the
bottom." This might echo Boole's point that De Morgan's interpretation of
these symbols comes from his rules of inference and not from the inherent
meaning of his symbolism. The corresponding letter of Boole is not in Smith
1982a so this assumption cannot be checked.
Boole's representation of De Morgan's symbolism makes the impression
that he had oriented himself to his article on "Logic" in the English
Cyclopedia (J860a, 260f.). In the letter mentioned above De Morgan refers
himself to his 1860a. Boole replied by return, that "I have not seen and fear
that I shall not see here the English Cyclopedia", but "if ever I do get access
to the work I will not fail to turn first to your paper" (Smith 1982a, 80). If De
Morgan sent him an extra copy thereafter is not known. But it is interesting
that in the formulation of De Morgan's second rule of notation (page 139)
Boole uses the opposite pair "total/partial", as Merrill points out. In De
Morgan 1850a, 35-37 -
another possible source for Boole -
the pair
"universal/particular" is used instead.
We cannot represent De Morgan's system here but we give passages of
his 1850a and 1860a where he made statements to which Boole may have
referred.
In Boole 1952a and Hesse 1952a there are short citations which amount
to 17% of the whole text. Hesse calls MS C57 a "draft of a chapter which
seems to be almost complete and which covers the ground of I in the Table of
Contents. It is therefore almost certainly intended to be the first chapter of
the book."
1 "Logos", means "word, thought, reason".
2 This is obviously a reference to the first article of the paper. As the further references
show, where the number of the article is not yet inserted, Boole obviously planned to
number the paragraphs later.
3 Boole cites the first edition of Hamilton 1852a from a section of"Appendix II. Logical"
which defends the form "Some Xs are not some Ys" against criticism by De Morgan. The
passage cited reads (1852a, 640*, 1853a, 695):
Whatever is operative in thought, must be taken into account, and consequently
be overtly expressible in logic; for logic must be, as to be it professes, an unexclu-
sive reflex of thought, not merely an arbitrary selection - a series of elegant
extracts, out of the forms of thinking.
4 Baynes 1850a, 74; Boole is quoting him, from "a negative" to the end of the sentence.
5 In the original and its transcription the second rule of notation comes before the first
one. This shows the hasty character of the manuscript. The person who made the
transcription was obviously not acquainted with De Morgan's notation. The obvious
corrections have here been made without remark.
6 De Morgan 1860a, 261. Compare De Morgan 1850a, 31: "Let the inclosing parenthesis,
as in X) or iX, denote that the name-symbol X, which would be inclosed if the oval were
completed, enters universally. Let an excluding parenthesis, as in )Y or X(, signify that
the name-symbol enters particularly."
7 De Morgan 1860a, 261.
8 Compare De Morgan 1850a, 35f.

Chapter XII: On Belief in Its Relation to the Understanding
215
9 De Morgan 1850a, 31: "... the canon of the inference, when there is one, is,-Erase the
symbols of the middle term, the remaining symbols shew the inference."
10 De Morgan 1850a, 35f. and 1860a, 123.
11 Daniel D. Merrill defends De Morgan against Boole's reproach that the symbols are not
interpreted by a rule "deduced from the interpretation of the symbols". Merrill says
(private communication): "In fact, De Morgan provides just such an interpretation.
Thus, the rule is deduced from De Morgan's interpretation of the symbols. In 1850a,
36-37 De Morgan provides technical definitions of the 'universal/particular' and
'affirmation/negation" distinctions, as he does in the 1860a article, where the former
distinction becomes the 'total/partial' distinction U860a, 260-261)." Starting from these
characterizations Merrill shows that "De Morgan has a systematic theory from which
these interpretations follow. This theory is prior to his rule of transformation, let alone
his syllogistic cancellation rule."
12 In the original there are two variants of this sentence melted into one and the sentence
ends with "... the error of a too narrow definition is seen."
13 We read "connecting" in MS C57, TS C57 has "converting".
14 The text breaks off here. The last word is illegible.
Chapter XII: On Belief in Its Relation to the Understanding
The text is based on TS E3, a transcription of MS E3 (22,8 x 18,4; 14
pages), in neat handwriting. The transcriber was probably the same person
who wrote out MS RS A89 (i.e. the first part of chapter II "Elementary
Treatise on Logic")
Boole/Falk classified a manuscript "E 3" as fragmentary or impossible to
connect to others more than partially. But the manuscript here seems to be
complete (compared with others). Therefore we do not count the signature
"E3" as the RS signature.
The manuscript has a note on it written in pencil: "Should be published".
At the back of the manuscript is written: "Belief in relation to the
understanding, New forms of Syllogisms, De Morgan etc." Because
syllogisms and De Morgan are not mentioned in the present text we could
here have a fragment of a larger work (or the manuscript was bundled
together with others).
Chapter XIII: The Philosophical Idea of Freedom
This text is based on MS B 77 (23,0 x 19,2, 3 pages), not paginated. If the
first sentence on the frontpage [B 77.1] could be read as a headnote, as we
have assumed, then the text should be complete and not fragmentary.
It is uncertain if the signature corresponds
to
the
Boole/Falk
arrangement because according to this list "B 77" has been classified as a
mathematical paper. But the present text does not contain any formulre at
all. "B 77" is therefore not an RS-signature.

216
Textual Notes
The division lines in the text are the original.
"Cosmoprea" (or "Cosmopreia") is Greek for "creation".
Chapter XIV: Note [to Aristotle]
This text is based on TS RS B 164, a transcription of MS RS B 164 =MM
a.1 - a.6 (23,7 x 19,0; 6 pages). Boole/Falk classified this manuscript as
fragmentary or impossible to connect to others more than partially.
There is no indication of the date of creation. Boole 1854a, 49 cites
exactly this passage, but the context is different.
Old numbering. The book r (= Gamma, i.e. the third letter of the alphabet), from which
the quotation comes, is today called the fourth book. The reason for this is that Book A
(= Alpha, i.e. the first letter of the alphabet) counts today as two books.
2 Boole notes as textual variant: "The inquiry concerning these axioms also would belong
to one who considers ..."
3 "And physics also are a kind of philosophy, but not the first." The remark was made by
Boole on the verso of the foregoing page without direct reference into the text, but
situated at the same height as the text to which the note is here attached.
4 Addition made by Boole.
Chapter XV: Philosophy of Mathematics
The text is based on TS RS B123, a transcription of MS RS B123 =MM
h.1-h.37 (17,0 x 20,5; 37 pages). Boole/Falk classified MS B123 as being
later than LT. The division lines in the text are the original. Hesse 1952a
takes four short citations out of this text.
1 Barrow 1683a.
2 Boole quotes here Hallam 1829a, 369. We have rendered the text exactly as in the
original; Boole was accurate apart from a few details of punctuation. The exception is
"circle (sphere)", where the second word is Boole's correction of Hallam's slip in
conception. Boole cited p. 309 of this volume in MAL, 33 over an issue concerning the
history of syllogisms. Henry Hallam (1777-1859) was a well-known cultural historian
whose writings certainly deserve revival.
3 Eutheia gramme estin, hetis ex isou tois eph' heautes semeiois keitai. This is the
original Greek of Boole's citation "A straight line ".".
4 Gap in the manuscript (between the last word on h.30 and the first word on h.31).
5 Ex isou, means "evenly".
6 Kai ta epharmozonta ep' allela isa aIIelois estin. This is the original Greek of Boole's
citation "Magnitudes which coincide "."
7 Euclid Elements.
8 Aitemata.
9 Koinai ennoiai.

Chapter XVI: [Various fragments, apparently latel
Chapter XVI:
[Various fragments, apparently late]
217
The seven fragments united in this chapter are taken from three
different works or sources. We discuss each work or source separately.
The basis of the first five fragments of this text are a selection of five
bundles of manuscripts (22,0 x 18,2; 20 = 2+7+4+5+2 pages) in the same
neat handwriting which also distinguishes other papers. They seem to
belong to a single, fairly advanced work. Boole himself seems to have
scattered the manuscript - this would give an explanation as to why the
signatures on the single pages do not give a coherent picture. This is true for
the signatures on the top left side and the independent pagination on the top
right side none of which has a logical order.
To show this we give here an overview and note the signature and the
pagination of a page as a pair divided by "f'. Fragment 1: All(b)11; B7/2.
Fragment 2: A67/1; All/2; B813; B6/1; Allo/2; All(k)13; All(g)14. Frag-
ment 3: Bll 15; Allnl2; B1651[illegible]; B914. Fragment 4: B1315; B1216;
All(d)/7; B4/8; All(e) 19. Fragment 5: All(h)13; All(f)14. It seems that the
extensive BoolelFalk re-arrangement came here to its limits. We count the
signatures "All(b)" etc. as RS signatures with some reservation, supposing
that the small Latin letters "(bY' etc. were later additions.
Probably Boole split his work into parts in a new attempt to write a
successor of LT. For example, the last two lines of fragment 3 have been cut
off and may lie somewhere else. Maybe a part of the whole work ended as
scrap paper. The result is that most fragments are too small to have
independent value. We selected some which are relatively complete. In
fragment 1 we only suppressed the last paragraph and left out the first in
fragment 4.
In three of the manuscripts reference is made to LT; on fragment 2 Mary
Boole wrote "Later than 1855". Only fragment 5 is without textual evidence
of the date of its origin.
Hesse 1952a has citations from fragment 1 and 4.
Fragment 6 is taken from MS RS A7, a bundle of 12 pages with varying
dimensions (23,0 x 17,4 to 18,6), numbered 1-3, 5, 8, 20, 22-25, 38-39.
BoolelFalk classified this manuscript as fragmentary or impossible to
connect to others more than partially.
The philosophical groundwork is laid in the first pages. We bring the
first three pages only. Unfortunately page 4, where Boole apparently
analyses the important question "whether Logic is or is. not a mathematical

218
Textual Notes
[science]" is missing. There must have been something relevant on it as page
5 starts with the statement: "This is the question which I propose to
endeavour to cover in the present essay." On p. 20 the system of Notation is
explained, pp. 22ff. deal with the conditions of interpretability and pp. 38£.
consider the method of development and the name "Dual Algebra" is
mentioned.
The first page of the sixth fragment bears in the left upper corner the
note: "All this is written by G. Boole on the backs of paper copied by me (and
no longer wanted).... it is all later (probably much later) than our marriage
in 1855. M. Boole". On the back are hasty calculations. Obviously Mary Boole
found these more important than the text she once copied.
The neat handwriting of fragment 6 seems to be the same as that on the
first five fragments. But the paper is different - blue instead of white - and
the first five fragments have no writing on the back.
Fragment 7 was originally in a notebook bearing the signature RS CI,
and also marked as "6 Logic" (23,6 x 19,0). A similar marking, by the way, is
to be found on other notebooks, the signatures "2 Logic" (RS E5), "3 Logic"
(RS E1) and "5 Logic" eRS C66) being in existence.
The particular one mentioned has a marble-patterned cardboard cover
and is not paginated, margin notes referring to personal numbering. It
contains densely-packed entries on the most widely different questions of
logic. A copy of the original page can be seen above p. lxi.
Hesse 1952a, 74£., expands on that part of Notebook 6 from which our
fragment comes. For a first analysis we refer to these detailed discussions.
They concern three statements therein called Boole's 'three axioms' for
"symbolic methods" which are found, with others, on pp. 87-90 of the
notebook. There Boole is trying to research the logical dependencies between
certain statements through symbolic derivation. The letters of his logical
equations represent the following: p = real premiss, p' = symbolic premiss,
i = interpretation, I = laws of combination, y' symbolic conclusion, y = real
conclusion. Or: p = proposed relation is true, i = symbols are rightly
interpreted, s = symbolic proposition is true. Evidently Boole is dealing with
the bridging between reality and symbols.
The statements looked at in this part of the notebook are neither
commented upon nor reasoned out by Boole. They simply stand there as a
starting point or translation of lettered equations. The theme is merely
indicated with a short heading. By "Reasoning" stands: "If premises are true
and if reasoning is correct the conclusions are true." [87) (= Axiom I in
Hesse.) Under "Language" there is the proviso: "If a proposed relation among
things is true, and if the symbols by which that relation is expressed are
rightly interpreted, then the symbolic proposition which expresses that
relation is true." [89) (= Axiom 2 in Hesse). The long calculating out that

Chapter XVI: [Various fragments, apparently latel
219
follows apparently failed to reach its target for Boole crossed it all out and
began anew with: "If a symbolic proposition is true and if it is rightly
interpreted then thus the relation among things holds." (= Axiom 3 in
Hesse).
Paragraphs on "Parallel Reasoning in different languages" [92] and
"Symbolic
Reasoning"
[93]
follow
the
paragraphs
"Reasoning"
and
"Language". After several pages stuffed with calculations fragment 7, which
we print here, appears. In it Boole first concerns himself with the problem of
unintelligible symbols. After this he leaves about half a page empty (here
shown by a dividing line) to begin at the top of a new page with "The whole
theory of symbols ...".
After fragment 7 there are around three pages of formulas, and then the
entries stop.
The roman numerals in the references in brackets on this and the next page are
supplied by the editors.
2 Reference missing.
3 Number of the chapter supplied by the editors.
4 Leibniz 1681a.
5 "a for animal, b for rational, c for mortal, d for visible."
In the manuscript d stands for "possibile", but in the following example Boole uses d for
"visibile". For this reason the text has been adapted by the editors.
6 "Terms are a, b, ab, bed, for example: animal, rational, animal rational, rational mortal
visible. A universal affirmative proposition I designate as follows: a is b, where a is
subject, b predicate. Is: copula."
The citation of Leibniz is adapted by Boole. The full text of Leibniz is: "Terminus est a.
b. abo bed ut: homo, animal, animal rationale, rationale mortale visibile. Propositionem
universalem affirmativam sic designo: a est b, seu (omnis) homo est animal, semper
enim hic signum universalitatis intelligi volo, ubi a subjectum et b praedicatum. Est:
copula."
7 The citation of Leibniz is adapted by Boole. Leibniz wrote, "Bufficit enim dici a est b ..."
8 "2) Transposition of letters within the same term doesn't change anything, e.g. ab
which coincides with ba or animal rational and rational animal. 3) Repetition of the
same letter within the same term is useless, e.g. b is aa, or bb is a; man is animal
animal, or man man is animal. For it is sufficient to say b is a or man is animaL"
9 Addition and square brackets by Boole.
10 Reference left empty. Probably to chapter II, see esp. LT p. 30.
11 In the manuscript there is only one pair of brackets left empty for later reference. The
formula is supplied by the editors. To reconstruct the development of which Boole may
speak here compare this fragment with the specific interpretation of the coefficients of
a development on p. 99 above. There Boole brings the coefficients into connection with
the categories "existent, nonexistent, indefinite, impossible". In LT p.92 a fully
developed formula is generally given as"w =A+OB+8C+aD". To fit the description
which Boole gives in this fragment one has to exchange in this formula the last two
coefficients and thus write the category of the indefinite at the end, as Boole did in
Ch. V, p. 98 above.
12 To avoid an open contradiction with what is said about the independence of the event D
in the text, the note could be read as a hypothesis leading to a reductio ad absurdum.
13 Leibniz 1840a.

220
Textual Notes
Chapter XVII:
Letters to Cayley, Lubbock and Penrose
The original of the seven letters exchanged between Arthur Cayley and
George Boole is a copy in neat handwriting in Notebook RS E 13 (24,6 x
20,0), which contains also the copies of letters to Lubbock (see below). The
sheet of the notebook with pages 37 (front) and 38 (back) seems to have been
cut out before the text was written down; the text runs without interruption
from page 36 to page 39. The letter of December 7th 1847 is wrongly placed
between the letters of December 10th and 11th respectively. Boole sent his
letters from Lincoln, Cayley probably from London.
Of the two letters of Boole to John William Lubbock we have not only the
copies but also the originals in the Library of the Royal Society, London. The
original letter of Feb. 16th 1849 bears the signature LUB.B362 (18,6 x 11,2)
and the original letter of Feb. 22nd 1849 the signature LUB.B363 (18,2 x
11,2). In Notebook E 13 Boole made copies of these letters following the
letters to Cayley. The copy of the second letter is not complete; we follow the
selection of Boole and leave out some of the introductory remarks and the
postscriptum. They concern the difficulties of obtaining books and offer
solutions. The copy in NB E 13 begins with "The best account which I am able
to give you now ...". It was published by Jourdain using a copy in the lost
Harley volume of letters (l91Oa, 335-336).
The simple pagination in the text [1], [2], etc. refers to the letters
LUB.B362 and LUB.B363. The pagination [E 13.44] - [E 13.46] refers to
Boole's transcription. In both cases Boole sent his letters from Lincoln.
The basis of the letter to John Penrose is TS C9-12, a transcription of
MS C9-12 (19,0 x 11,6; 10 pages). The typescript has no original signature;
someone has added later in pencil the signature "C 9-12". Each page of the
manuscript is numbered on the right side at the top consecutively from 1 to
10 and each sheet (containing 2 to 4 pages) is numbered on the left side
consecutively from C9 to C 12. We give both signatures and the paginations
of the manuscript divided by "I". A single number refers to the typescript
C9-12. Boole sent this letter from Cork.
Boole/Falk classified some MSS C9 - C12 as fragmentary or impossible
to connect more than partially. This classification can hardly be true of the
letters concerned and thus the signature does not belong to the RS system in
our sense.
1 MAL.
2 At MAL, 18 only direct processes are mentioned. Boole says there that "... all the direct
processes of common algebra are applicable to the present system". This leaves open
the possibility to consider division as an inverse operation.
3 Cayley was referring to Boole 1848b; our date is that of the title page of the journal, but
obviously this part was out earlier. Cayley 1848a commented in Liouville's journal on
Boole's note 1848c on this theme.

Chapter XVII: Letters to Cayley, Lubbock and Penrose
221
4 Prop. (75) in MAL, 73.
5 MAL,60ff.
6 MacHale 1985a, 55ff. gives excerpts from the Cayley-Boole correspondence in the years
1844 and 1845, now in the Library of the University of Cambridge.
7 "OntOs on" means "a real being" (verbally "a being being").
8 The meaning of the two triangles is not clear. It is also puzzling that they do not
separate two sentences: the following word starts with a lower-ease letter.
9 Page 40 of notebook E13 continues with the letter from Cayley to Boole of December
11th 1847.
10 See note 4 above.
11 The manuscript has w instead of u as first term of the equation, i.e. w = v +'l'(v)(I-x).
12 The manuscript has as first term of the equation only x, i.e. x = xv +wx ~.
13 MAL, 64.
14 Obviously Boole to Cayley on December 8th 1847, above p. 193. But it is unclear why
Cayley calls this letter the first note of Boole
15 Lubbock J850a. [?]
16 Lubbock J838a.
17 I.e. the object of investigation.
18 Boole 1848a.
19 "auk agathos estin all' hyperagathos", means verbally "he is not good but more than
good". The negation in this sentence expresses in this context that he [god?] is not a
possible object for the predication of "good", i.e. it is equally true that he is not not-good.

Bibliography
A full bibliography of Boole's published writings is contained in MacHale
1985a: that in Smith 1982a has few gaps. Regarding historical literature,
this bibliography includes the most notable contributions but excludes the
repetitive scribbles that all famous names attract, and also the surveys in
general histories of logic, mathematics or philosophy that are often
satisfactory in their contexts but do not contain original views.
If more than one edition of a work is listed, then "t" marks the one to
which page numbers in the text are given. Works cited by Boole in the texts
published in this edition are prefaced by "*".
Anonymous 1865a: "The Late Professor Boole", The Canadian Journal 10, 44-45.
* Aristotle: Metaphysics.
Auroux, S. 1981a: "Condillac ou la vertu des signes", in Condillac, La langue des calculs
(1798), ed. and intr. Auroux and A.-M. Chouillet, Presses Universitaires, Lille, i-xxxviii.
* Barrow, 1. 1683a: Lectiones Mathematic<£, London.
* Baynes, T. S. 1850a: An Essay on the New Analytic of Logical Forms, Sutherland and
Knox, Edinburgh.
Blakey, R. 1851a: Historical Sketch of Logic, From the Earliest Times to the Present Day.
Nichols, Edinburgh.
* Boole, G. 1835a: An Address on the Genius and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton (Delivered
on Thursday, Feb. 5, 1835), Gazette Office, Lincoln.
-
1844a: "On a General Method in Analysis", Philosophical Transactions of the Royal So-
ciety of London 134, 225-282.
1847a [cited as MAL): The Mathematical Analysis of Logic, Being an Essay Towards a
Calculus of Deductive Reasoning, Macmillan, Barclay & Macmillan, Cambridge and
Bell, Londont. Reprinted Blackwell, Oxford; and Philosophical Library, New York,
1948. Also in 1952a, 49-124 [original pagination marked, and used herel. French trans!.
"Analyse Mathematique de la Logique" in: Algebre et logique d'apres les textes originaux
de G. Boole et W. S. Jevons avec les plans de la machine logique, trans. F. Gillot, Blan-
chard, Paris 1962, 13-88. Italian transl. L'analisi matematica della logica, Boringhieri,
Torino 1993.
*-
1848a: "The Calculus of Logic", in The Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal 3,
183-198. Also in 1952a, 125-140.
1848b: "On a Certain Multiple Definite Integral", in Transactions of the Royal Irish
Academy 21, 140-149.
-
1848c: "Theoreme general concernant I'inregration definie", Journal des mathemati-
ques pures et appliquees (1) 13, 111-112.
-
1848d: "MM. [sic) Boole's Theory of the Mathematical Basis of Logic", Mechanics Mag-
azine 49, 254-255.

Bibliography
223
1851a: "On the Theory of Probabilities, And in Particular on Mitchell's Problem of the
Distribution of Fixed Stars", Philosophical Magazine (4) 1, 521-530. Also in 1952a,
247-259t.
*-
1854a [cited as LTl: An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on which are Founded the
Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities, MacMillan, Cambridge and Walton
& Maberly, Londont. [Reprinted Dover, New York, 1958. 2nd ed., ed. P. E. B. Jourdain,
Open Court, Chicago, 1916, repro 1940 and 1952. French trans.: Les lois de la pensee,
trans. S. B. Diagne, Vrin, Paris, 1994. Italian trans!. Indagine sulle leggi del pensiero,
Einaudi, Torino 1976.]
*-
1857a: "On the Application of the Theory of Probabilities to the Question of the Combi-
nation of Testimonies or Judgments", in Transactions of the Royal Society ofEdinburgh
21,597-652. Also in 1952a, 308-385. (Read 1857.)
-
1859a: A Treatise on Differential Equations, MacMillan, Cambridge and London. [Later
editions by I. Todhunter 1865 (see Boole 1865a), 1872, 1877t.]
-
1860a: A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences, MacMillan, Cambridge and Lon-
don. [Later editions by J. F. Moulton, 1872 and 1880 German trans.: Die Grundlehren
der endlichen Differenzen- und Summenrechnung, trans. by C. H. Schnuse, Leibrod,
Braunschweig 1867.]
-
1865a:
Treatise on Differential Equations - Supplementary Volume,
ed.
Isaac
Todhunter, Macmillan, Cambridge.
-
1868a: "Of Propositions Numerically Definite", in Transactions of the Cambridge Philo-
sophical Society 11, 1871, 396-411. Also in 1952a, 167-186. (Read posthumously by De
Morgan 1868.)
-
1952a: Studies in Logic and Probability, ed. Rush Rhees, Open Court, La Salle, Ill. and
Watts, London.
Boole, M. 1931a: Collected Works, 4 vols., ed. E. M. Cobham and E. S. Dummer, Daniels,
London.
Bornet, G. 1995a: "George Boole's Linguistic Turn and the Origins of Analytical Philoso-
phy", The British Tradition in 20th Century Philosophy, ed. J. Hintikka and K Puhl,
Holder-Pichler-Tempsky, Wien, 236-248.
-
1995b: "Booles (Zeichen-)Modell des Geistes - Die metaphorische Wurzel der algebrai-
schen Logik", Metapher und Innovation, ed. L. Danneberg, A. Graeser and K. Petrus,
Haupt, Bern, 246-267.
Brock, W. H. 1967a: (Ed.) The Atomic Debates, Leicester University Press, Leicester.
Bryant, S. 1888a: "On the Nature and Functions of a Complete Symbolic Language", Mind
13, 188-207.
Buickerood, J. G. 1985a: "The Natural History of the Mind: Locke and the Rise of Faculta-
tive Logic in the Eighteenth Century", History and Philosophy ofLogic 6, 157-190.
Cayley, A. 1848a: "Demonstration d'une theoreme de M. Boole concernant les inMgrales
multiples", in Journal des mathematiques pures et appliquees (1) 13, 243-248. Also in
The Collected Mathematical Papers, Cambridge at the University Press, vol. 1, 1889,
384-387.
-
1853a: "Note on a Question in the Theory of Probabilities", in Philosophical Magazine
(4) 6, 1853, 259. Also in The Collected Mathematical Papers, Cambridge at the Univer-
sity Press, vol. 2, 1889, 103-104t.
-
1862a: "On a Question in the Theory of Probabilities", in Philosophical Magazine (4) 23,
1862, 361-365. Also in The Collected Mathematical Papers, Cambridge at the Univer-
sity Press, vol. 5, 1892, 80-84t.
Corcoran, J. 1986a: "Correspondence without Communication", History and Philosophy of
Logic 7,65-75. [Review of Smith 1982a.]

224
Bibliography
Corcoran, J. and Wood, S. 1980a: "Boole's Criteria of Validity and Invalidity", Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, 21, 609-638.
Couturat, L. 1901a: La Logique de Leibniz d'apres des documents inUits, Alcan, Paris.
[Repr. Olms, Hildesheim, 1985.]
-
1903a: Opuscules et fragments inedits de Leibniz, Alcan, Paris.
Deakin, M. 1996a: "Boole's Mathematical Blindness", The Mathematical Gazette, to ap-
pear.
De Morgan, A. 1836a: "Calculus of Functions", Encyclopaedia Metropolitana, vol. 2,
305-392. [Date of offprint; volume carries "1845".]
1847a:Formal Logic, Walton and Maberly, London. [2nd. ed., ed. A. E. Taylor, Open
Court, La Salle, 1926.]
1850a: "On the Symbols of Logic, the Theory of the Syllogism, and in Particular of the
Copula, and the Application of the Theory of Probabilities to some questions of Evi-
dence", in Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 9, Part 1, 1851, 79-127.
(Read 1850). Partly (without pages 116-125) as "On the Syllogism: II." also in 1966a,
22-68t.
1858a: "On the Syllogism, No. III, and on Logic in General", in Transactions of the
Cambridge Philosophical Society 10, 1864, 173-230. (Read 1858.) Also in 1966a, 74-146.
1860a: "Logic", in English Cyclopedia (Arts and Sciences), vol. 5, 150-154. Partly also in
1966a, 247-270t.
1867a: "A Note on Professor Boole's Papers", dated November 30th 1867, typescript R.1
(part of MS 782) in the Library of the Royal Society.
-
1966a: On the Syllogism and other Logical Writings, ed. P. Heath, Routledge & Kegan
Paul, London.
Dessi, P. 1988a: "Editor's Introduction", in Whately 1826a, reprint, x-xxix.
Diagne, S. B. 1989a: Boole - L'oiseau de nuit en plein jour, Berlin, Paris. [Illustrated biog-
raphy.]
Dirichlet, J. P. G. 1839a: "Sur une nouvelle methode pour la determination des integrales
multiples", Comptes rendus de I'Academie des Sciences 8, 156-160. Also in Gesammelte
Werke, ed. L. Fuchs and L. Kronecker, vol. I, Reimer, Berlin 1889; repro Chelsea, New
York, 1969, 375-380t.
Dudman, V. H. 1976a: "From Boole to Frege", in Studien zu Frege - Studies on Frege,
vol. 1, (ed.) Schirn, M., Fromman-Holzboog, 109-138.
Durand, M.-J. 1990a: "Genese de I'algebre symbolique en Angleterre: une influence possi-
ble de J. Locke", Revue d'histoire des sciences 48, 129-180.
Edwards, A. W. F. 1989a: "Venn Diagrams for Many Sets", The New Scientist 7, January,
51-56.
Ellis, R. L. 1863a: "Notes on Boole's Laws of Thought", in his The Mathematical and other
Writings, ed. W. Walton, Deighton, Bell, Cambridge, 391-394. Also in Reports of the
British Association for the Advancement of Science, 1870 (publ. 1871), 12-14.
* Euclid: Elements. [Boole probably used a standard edition of his time. On page 177 he cites
the edition by Francois Peyrard: Les (Euvres d'Euclide, 3 vols., 1814-18, Patris, Paris.]
Feys, R. 1956a: "Boole as a Logician" and "Boole's Methods of Development and Interpre-
tation", Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy 57, 97-112.
Frege, G. 1879a: Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des
reinen Denkens, Nebert, Halle a. S. [Translated in van Heijenoort, J. (ed.), From Frege
to GOdel - A Source Book in Mathematical Logic 1879·1931, Cambridge Mass., 1-82.
1880-81a: "Booles rechnende Logik und die Begriffsschrift", Nachgelassene Schriften -
Erster Band, H. Hermes, F. Kambartel, F. Kaulbach (eds.), Meiner, Hamburg 1969,
9-59. [Translation by P. Long and R. White in Posthumous Writings, Basil Blackwell,
Oxford 1979.t]

Bibliography
225
1884a: Grundlagen der Arithmetik, Koebner, Breslau. [Translated by Austin, J. L., The
Foundations of Arithmetic: A Logico·mathematical Enquiry into the Concept of Num·
ber, Blackwell, Oxford 1950; also Harper, New York 1960.]
-
1918-19a, "Der Gedanke - Eine logische Untersuchung", Beitrage zur Philosophie des
deutschen Idealismus 1,58-77. [Translated by A. M. and M. Quinton "The Thought: A
Logical Inquiry", Mind 61, 1956, 289-311, also in P. F. Strawson (ed.), Philosophical
Logic, Oxford University Press, London 1967, 17·38.]
Gratry, A. J. A. 1944a: Logic, trans. and into by H. and M. Singer, Open Court, La Salle. [Of
5th ed. (1868) of Philosophie -
Logique.]
Grattan-Guinness, I. 1977a: "The Gergonne Relations and the Intuitive Use of Euler and
Venn Diagrams", International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and
Technology 8, 23-30.
-
1982a: "Psychology in the Foundations of Logic and Mathematics: the Cases of Boole,
Cantor and Brouwer", History and Philosophy of Logic 3, 33-53. Also in Psicoanalisi e
storia della scienza, Olschki, Florence, 1983, 93·121.
-
1988a: "Living Together and Living Apart: on the Interactions Between Mathematics
and Logics from the French Revolution to the First World War", South African Journal
of Philosophy 7, no. 2, 73-82.
-
1990a: Convolutions in French Mathematics, 1800-1840. From the Calculus and
Mechanics to Mathematical Analysis and Mathematical Physics, 3 vols., Birkhiiuser,
Basel; and Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften, Berlin.
-
1991a: "The Correspondence between George Boole and Stanley Jevons, 1863-1864", in
History and Philosophy of Logic 12, 15-35.
-
1992a: "Charles Babbage as an Algorithmic Thinker", Annals of the History of Comput-
ing 14, no. 3,34-48.
Gregory, D. F. 1839a: "On the Solution of Linear Differential Equations with Constant Co-
efficients", The Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal 1, 22-32, 378. Also in
1865a, 14-27.
-
1839b: "On the Elementary Principles of the Application of Algebraic Symbols to Ge-
ometry", The Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal 2, 1-9. Also in 1865a,
150-162.
-
1865a: The Mathematical and other Writings, ed. W. Walton, Deighton, Cambridge.
Hailperin, T. 1981a: "Boole's Algebra Isn't Boolean Algebra", Mathematics Magazine 54,
172-184.
-
1984a, "Boole's Abandoned Propositional Calculus", History and Philosophy of Logic 5,
39-48.
-
1986a: Boole's Logic and Probability, 2nd ed. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Hallam, H. 1829a: Introduction to the Literature ofEurope, in the Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and
Seventeenth Centuries, 2nd ed., vol. 3, John Murray, London.
Halsted, G. B. 1878a: "Boole's Logical Method", Journal of Speculative Philosophy 12,
81-91.
-
1878b: "Professor Jevons's Criticism of Boole's Logical System", Mind 3, 134-137.
Hamilton, W. 1830a: "Philosophy of Perception", Edinburgh Review 52, 158-207. Also in
1852a, 39-98. [Discussion of (Euvres Completes de Thomas Reid.]
*-
1833a: "Logic, in Reference to the Recent English Treatises on that Science", in Edin-
burgh Review 4,260-277. Also in 1852a, 117-173t.
*-
1852a: Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Education and University Reform,
Longmans etc., London [2nd ed. 1853, 3rd ed. 1866tl.
Hamilton, W. R. 1837a: "Theory of Conjugate Functions", Transactions of the Royal Irish
Academy 17, 291-423. Also in Mathematical Papers, vol. 1, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1931, 3-96.

226
Bibliography
Harley, R. 1866a: "George Boole, F.R.S.", in British Quarterly Review 44, 141-181. Also in
Boole 1952a, 425-472t. [Obituary, signed R. H.)
1867a: "George Boole", in Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 15, vi-xi. [Obitu-
ary, anonymous)
1867b: "Remarks on Boole's Mathematical Analysis of Logic", Reports of the British As-
sociation for the Advancement of Science, (1866), pt. 2, 3-6.
-
1871a: "On Boole's Laws of Thought", Reports of the British Association for the Ad·
vancement of Science, (1870), pt. 2, 14-15.
Heath, P. 1966a: "Introduction", in De Morgan 1966a, vii-xxxi.
Hesse, M. 1952a: "Boole's Philosophy of Logic", in Annals of Science 8, 61-81.
Hooley, J. 1966a: "Boole's Method for Solving Logical Equations", The Mathematical Ga-
zette 50, 114-118.
Hughlings, I. P. 1869a: The Logic of Names - An Introduction to Boole's Laws of Thought,
James Walton, London. [Despite its title Boole is not the main theme of this book.)
Husserl, E. 1891a: "Besprechung von E. Schroder, Vorlesungen tiber die Algebra der
Logik", Gottingsche gelehrte Anzeigen, 243-278. Also in Aufsatze und Rezensionen
(1890-1910) (= Husserliana XXII), Nijhoff, The Hague, Boston, London 1979, 3-43t.
Johnson, W. E. 1892a: "The Logical Calculus", Mind n.s. 1, 3-30, 235-250, 340-357.
Jourdain, P. E. B. 191Oa: "The Development of the Theories of Mathematical Logic and the
Principles of Mathematics", part 1, Quarterly Journal of Pure and Applied Mathemat-
ics 41, 324-352. Repr. in Selected Essays on the History of Set Theory and Logics
(1906-1918), ed. I. Grattan-Guinness, CLUEB, Bologna, 1991, 104-132. [Articles on
Leibniz and Boole.)
Kant, I. 1787a: Critik der reinen Vernunft, 2nd ed., Hartknoch, Riga.
Kempe, A. B. 1886a: "A Memoir on the Theory of Mathematical Form", Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society ofLondon 177, 1-70.
Kneale, W. 1948a: "Boole and the Revival of Logic", Mind n.S. 57, 149-175.
Laita, L. 1977a: "The Influence of Boole's Search for a Universal Method in Analysis on the
Creation of his Logic", Annals of Science 34, 163-176.
-
1979a: "Influences on Boole's Logic: the Controversy between William Hamilton and
Augustus De Morgan", Annals of Science 36, 45-65.
-
1980a: "Boolean Algebra and its Extra-logical Sources: the Testimony of Mary Everest
Boole", History and Philosophy of Logic I, 37-60.
Latham, R. G. 1847a: First Outlines ofLogic Applied to Grammar and Etymology, London.
[Pamphlet)
* Leibniz, G. W. 1840a: God. Guil. Leibnitii opera philosophica quae exstant Latina Gallica
Germanica omnia, Part. 1. (Ed.) J. E. Erdmann, Eichler, Berlin 1840.
*-
1681a: "Addenda ad specimen calculi universalis", in Leibniz 1840a, 98-99t.
Liard, L. 1877a: "La logique algebrique de Boole", Revue philosophique 4, 285-317.
-
1878a: Les logiciens anglais contemporains, Bailliere, Paris.
Lotze, R. H. 1880a: "Anmerkung tiber logischen Calctil", Logik, 2. ed., Leipzig, 256-269
[Eng\. transl. Oxford, 2nd ed. 1888, page 2771.
* Lubbock, J. W. 1838a: Remarks on the Classification of the Different Branches of Human
Knowledge, London.
*-
1838b: "On the Divergence of the Numerical Coefficients of Certain Inequalities of Lon-
gitude in the Lunar Theory", in Philosophical Magazine (3) 12, 168-172.
*-
1840a: "On the Heat of Vapours and on Astronomical Refraction", in Philosophical
Magazine (3) 16, 434-441, 510-514, 562-569; 17272-280,467-473,488-507.
Lubbock, J. W. and Bethune, J. E. Drinkwater 1830a: A Treatise on Probabilities, London.
Reprinted 1844. (Library of Useful Knowledge.)

Bibliography
227
MacColl, H. 1877a: "The Calculus of Equivalent Statements and Integration Limits", Pro-
ceedings of the London Mathematical Society (1) 9, 9-20.
Macfarlane, A. 1879a: Principles of the Algebra of Logic, with Examples, Douglas, Edin-
burgh.
MacHale, D. 1985a: George Boole. His Life and Work, Boole Press, Dublin.
* Mansel, H. L. 1860a: Prolegomena Logica: An Inquiry into the Psychological Character of
Logical Processes 2nd ed., H. Hammans, Oxford 1860.
Merrill, D. D. 1990a: Augustus De Morgan and the Logic of Relations, Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Moore, G. H. 1993a: "Introduction", in The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell Vol. 3,
Routledge, London, xiii-xlviii.
Neil, S. 1865a: "Modern Logicians - The Late George Boole", The British Controversialist
and Literary Magazine, n.s. 80, 81-94, 161-174.
Newton, I. 1707a: Arithmetica universalis sive de compositione et resolutione arithmetica
liber, ed. W. Whiston, 1st. ed. Cambridge. English trans\. J. Raphson, 1st. ed. London
1720. [Written in lecture form in the period 1673-1683.]
0hrstrl'lhm, P. 1985a: "W. R. Hamilton's View of Algebra as the Science of Pure Time and
His Revision of This View", Historia Mathematica 12, 45-55.
Olson, R. 1975a: Scottish Philosophy and British Physics 1750-1880, Princeton University
Press, Princeton.
Panteki, M. 1992a: Relationships between Algebra, Differential Equations and Logic in En-
gland 1800-1860, Council for National Academic Awards (London), Dissertation.
-
1993a: "Thomas Solly (1816-1875): an Unknown Pioneer of the Mathematicization of
Logic in England, 1839", History and Philosophy of Logic 14, 133-169.
Parshall, K. H. 1989a: "Towards a History of Nineteenth-Century Invariant Theory", in
History of Modern Mathematics, vo\. 1, ed. D. Rowe and J. McCleary, Academic Press,
New York, 157-208.
Peacock, G. 1834a: "Report on the Recent Progress and Actual State of Certain Branches of
Analysis", Reports of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, (1833),
185-332.
Peckhaus, V. 1995a: Hermann Ulrici (1806-1884). Die Hallesche Philosophie und die engli-
sche Algebra der Logik, Hallescher Verlag, Halle.
-
1996a: "Leibniz und die britischen Logiker des 19. Jahrhunderts", in Leibniz und Eu-
ropa, ed. H. Breger, Steiner, Stuttgart, to appear.
Peirce, Ch. S. 1880a: "On the Algebra of Logic", American Journal of Mathematics 3, 15-57.
Also in Writings of Charles S. Peirce - Volume 4 (1879-1884), Ch. Kloesel (ed.), Indiana
University Press, Bloomington and Indianapolis 1986, 163-209.
Prior, A. N. 1949a: "Categoricals and Hypotheticals in George Boole and his Successors",
Australian Journal of Philosophy 27, 171-196.
Rhees, R. see also Boole 1952a.
-
1952a: "Note in Editing", in Boole 1952a, 9-43.
-
1955a, "George Boole as Student and Teacher - By some of his Friends and Pupils",
Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy 57 (1954-1956), sec. A., 74-78.
Rice, A. 1996a: "Augustus De Morgan: Historian of Science", History of Science 34,
201-240.
Richards, J. 1980a: "Boole and Mill: Differing Perspectives on Logical Psychologism", His-
tory and Philosophy of Logic 1, 19-36.
-
1980b: "The Art and the Science of British Algebra: A Study in the Perception of Math-
ematical Truth", Historia Mathematica 7, 343-365.
Ross, G. R. T. 1905a: "On Verb·functions, With Notes on the Solution of Equations by Op-
erative Division", Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy 25, sec. A, 31-76.

228
Bibliography
Royal Society 1893a: Minutes of the Council ofthe Royal Society from October 30th, 1884 to
June 30th, 1892, Harrison, London.
-
1899a: Minutes of the Council ofthe Royal Society from October 30th, 1892 to June 30th,
1898, Harrison, London.
Russell, B. 1901a, "Recent Work on the Principles of Mathematics", International Monthly
4. 1901. 83-101. Also in The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell Vol. 3. G. H. Moore
(ed.), Routledge, London 1993, 366-379t.
-
1903a: The Principles of Mathematics, Cambridge University Press [2nd. ed. George
Allen & Unwin, London, 1938)
Ryall. J. 1865a: "Obituary notice (George Boole)". in Illustrated London News 21, January.
59.61.
Scanlan. M. J. 1991a: "Who were the American Postulate Theorists?". The Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic 56. 981-1002.
Skidelsky, R. 1983a: John Maynard Keynes, vol. 1, MacMillan. London.
Smee. A. 1851a: The Process of Thought Adapted to Words and Language - Together with
a Description of the Relational and Differential Machines. Longman, Brown, Green,
and Longmans. London.
Smith, G. C. 1982a: (Ed.) The Boole - De Morgan Correspondence 1842-1864. Clarendon
Press. Oxford.
-
1983a: "Boole's Annotations on 'The Mathematical Analysis of Logic'", History and Phi-
losophy ofLogic 4. 27-38.
Styazhkin. N. 1. 1969a: History of Mathematical Logic from Leibniz to Peano. MIT Press.
Cambridge, Mass.
* Suarez, F. 1605a: Metaphysica disputationum .... 2 vols. Baltharus Lippsius. Moguntiae
[= Mainz).
Terrot. Ch. H. 1857a: "On the Possibility of Combining Two or More Probabilities of the
Same Event. so as to Form One Definite Probability". in Transactions of the Royal Soci·
ety of Edinburgh 21. 369-376. Also in Boole 1952a. 487·496.
van Evra, J. 1977a: "A Reassessment of George Boole's Theory of Logic". Notre Dame Jour·
nal of Formal Logic 18, 363-377.
-
1984a: "Richard Whately and the Rise of Modern Logic". History and Philosophy of
Logic 5, 1-18.
Ulrici. H. 1855a: [Review of Boole 1854a]. Zeitschrift fur Philosophie und philosophische
Kritik N.F. 27. 273·291. Also in Peckhaus 1995a. 87-104.
Vassallo. Nicla 1995a: La Depsicologizzazione della Logica - Un confronto tra Boole e
Frege. FrancoAngeli.
Venn. J. 1881a: Symbolic Logic. London [2nd ed. revised and rewritten 1894)
Vercelloni, L. 1989a: Filosofia delle strutture, La Nuova Italia Editrice. Florence.
Whately, R. 1823a: "Logic", in Encyclop:edia metropolitana, vol. 1, 193-240.
*-
1826a: Elements of Logic Comprising the Substance of the Article in the Encyclop:edia
Metropolitana with Additions, &c.• Mawman, London 1826. [Reprinted with intro-
duction by P. Dessi, Cooperativa Libraria Universitaria Editrice Bologna, Bologna,
1988.]
*-
1856a: Reviews "On Instinct". in Miscellaneous Lectures and reviews, Parker. Son and
Brown, London. 60-84.
Wood. S. 1976a: George Boole's Theory of Propositional Forms. State University of New
York at Buffalo. Dissertation.
Young, G. P. 1865a: "Remarks on Professor Boole's Mathematical Theory of the Laws of
Thought", The Canadian Journal 10, 161-182.

Index of Names
Anselm, of Canterbury
163
Arbogast, Louis Francois Antoine
xxvii,
Ixii-Ixiii
Aristotle
xliii, 14, 53, 71, 127, 133,
135-136,140, 143, 166, 168,179,
185-186
Babbage, Charles
xliv
Bachli, Andreas
Ix
Bacon, Francis
42
Barrow, Isaac
168
Baynes, Spencer
137
Bentham, George
xxvii
Berkeley, George
107
Berzelius, Jons Jacob
189
Birch, Una
lxii
Blackwell, Kenneth
Ix
Boole, Alicia
xix-xxi, xxiii-xxv, lviii, lxii,
203,205-206,208-213,215-217,220
Boole, John
xiv
Boole, Mary Ann
xiv
Boole, Mary Ellen
xxv
Boole, Mary Everest
xvi, xix-xxiii, Iix,
lxii-lxiii, 210, 213, 217-218
Bridgman, Laura
1
Brodie, Benjamin Collins
xlv
Browne, Peter
200
Bryant, Sophie
xlvi
Cantor, Georg
xxxiii
Carnap, Rudolf
xlviii
Cayley, Arthur
xxvii, xxxii, xlii, lvii,
191-196, 220-221
Child, J. M.
xxiv
Clarke, Samuel
xvi
Condillac, Abbe
xli
Couturat, Louis
xxii-xxiv
Davy, Humphry
189
De Morgan, Augustus
xix-xx, XXIII, xxv,
xxvii, xxxix-xli, xliv-xlvi, lxiii, 81, 133,
138-141, 188, 205, 213-215
De Morgan, Elizabeth Alice
Ixiii
Descartes, Rene
38
Dirichlet, Peter Gustav Lejeune-
xlii, 45
Drobisch, Moritz Wilhelm
133, 188
Ellis, Robert Leslie
xliii
Erdmann, Johann Eduard
xliii
Euclid
xl, 35-36, 171-178
Euler, Leonhard
xlvi, lxiv, 188
Everest, George
xvi
Everest, Thomas
xvi
Falk, H. J.
xx, xxii, xxv, lviii, lx, 203,
205-206, 208-213, 215-217, 220
Falk, Oswald Toynbee
xx, xxii, Ixii
Frege, Gottlob
xlviii-liii, lxiv
Grassmann, Hermann
xlvi
Grassmann, Robert
xlvi
Gratry, Alphonse
xxiii, lxii-Ixiii
Graves, Charles
xxx
Graves, John
Ixiii
Gregory, Duncan Farquharson
xiv, xxvii,
lxiii
Hallam, Henry
173,216
Halsted, George Bruce
xlvi
Hamilton, William
xxvii, xxxix-xl, lxiii,
65, 68, 73, 82, 125, 133, 136-141, 149,
210
Hamilton, William Rowan
xiv, xxxv, liv
Harley, Robert
xvii, xxiv, 220
Heath, A. E.
xxiv
Heraclitus
165
Herschel, John
lxiii
Hesse, Mary
xxiv, 214
Hobbes, Thomas
169
Hoppus, John
Ixiii
Hughlings, 1. P.
Iiv
Husserl, Edmund
Iii, lxiv
Jevons, William Stanley
xxiii, xlv-xlvi,
lvii,lxiii

230
Index of Names
Johnson, W. E.
xlvi
Jourdain, Philip
xxiv, 220
Kant, Immanuel
liv, 108, 187
Kempe, Alfred Bray
lxiv
Keynes, John Maynard
Ixii
Lagrange, Joseph Louis
xxvii, xliv
Lambert, Johann Heinrich
121, 133, 135,
188
Laplace, Pierre Simon
197
Larken, Edmund
lxiii
Latham, Robert Gordon
79, 211
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm
xxii-xxiii,
xxix, xliii, 133, 179, 185-186, 188, 219
Lerf, Elaine
Ix
Liard, Louis
xlvi
Lilly, M.
208
Liouville, Joseph
191
Locke, John
xxvi, xxxviii, xli, xliv, 106,
179
Lotze, Rudolf Hermann
Ivii
Lubbock, John William
xxxiv, 197-198,
203,220
MacColI, Hugh
xlvi, Ixii
MacFarlane, Alexander
xlvi
MacHale, Desmond
xviii, xxiv, lx, !xii
MacMillan, Alexander
212
MacMillan, Daniel
212
Mansel, Henry Longueville
121
Maurice, Frederick Denison
xvi, xviii,
xlvii
Meinong, A1exius
210
Merrill, Daniel D.
Ix, 213-215
Mill, John Stuart
xxxi-xxxii, I, 200
Morgan, R. Campbell
Ixiii
Neil, Samuel
xvii, Ixii
Newton, Isaac
xliii, 37, 189
Panteki, Maria
xxiv, lviii, !x
Peacock, George
xliii-xliv, 210
Peano, Guiseppe
xxxiv, xliii, xlvi
Peckhaus, Volker
Ix
Peirce, Charles Sanders
xlvi, liv, Ixiv
Penrose, John
lviii, 200, 220
Peyrard, Francois
177
Plato
168-169
Ploucquet, Gottfried
188
Poretskii, Platon Sergeyevich
xlvi
Pythagoras
167
Rhees, Rush
xxiv-xxv, xxxiv, xxxvii, lxiii,
209-211
Rice, Adrian
Ix
Richards, Joan L.
liii
Robertson, G. Croom
Ixiii
Rollett, John
Ix
Royce, Josiah
!xiv
Russell, Bertrand
xx, xxii-xxiv, xxxiii,
xlvi, xlviii, Ixii-Ixiv
Schroder, Ernst
xlvi, Ixiv
Servois, Francis Joseph
Ixiii
Smee, Alfred
Iiv
Spinoza, Benedict
xvi
Spottiswoode, William
xix
Stott, Walter
xx, xxiv, Ixii
Suarez, Franciscus
68, 210-211
Sylvester, James Joseph
xxvii
Terrot, Charles Hughes
64, 210
Todhunter, Isaac
xix-xx, 203-204
Tracy, Destutt de
Ixiii
Ulrici, Hermann
xlvi
Venn, John
xlv,lxiv
Whately, Richard
xxvi-xxvii, xxx,
xxxiii-xxxiv, xxxviii, xl, lxiii, 1,68,72,
125, 210
Whewell, William
210
Whitehead, Alfred North
xx, xlvi, !xii
Wittgenstein, Ludwig
xlviii
Wood, Susan Bauer
xxiv
Wundt, Wilhelm
xlix

Index of Subjects
0, and 1
10, 89, 91, 93, 113-114, 116, 122,
181, 183
a priori 45, 53, 73, 108, 110, 123, 129, 183,
201
"a", and "an" 16
abstraction 3,58,67-69,71,75-76,79-80,
86,88,93,99,106-107,130,174-175,
186, 188, 200
actual 187
addition 61, 74-76, 80, 85-88,90,93, 107
adjective 5, 15, 34, 47, 57, 79, 183, 186
affirmative, quality 16, 18, 24; subject 19;
term 18
aggregate 183
aggregation 55-56, 112-113, 131
aistheton 68
algebra 36-39, 41, 48, 86-88, 90, 120, 128,
143-146, 168, 170, 177, 180-182, 191;
dual 91, 94-95, 98, 104
all-things, class 100
analogical 53, 55, 99
analogue 76
analogy 31, 46, 65, 83, 95, 99, 110, 119-120,
143, 163; formal 113, 116
analysis 32, 122, 170-171; principle of 93,
166
analytical 97, 164; and synthetical 108
"and" 7,29,55,72,74, 131
antecedent, and consequent 30
appellative 15
apprehension 65, 185-186
"are" 47, 81-82, 150, 158-160
aristotelian, figure 178; logic 133, 136, 140,
185; method 133; school 127; theory
135-136, 140
Aristotle, dictum of 53, 135
arithmetic 36-37, 54,66, 110, 113-114,
180, 192-193, 196; universal 37
art 36, 65--66, 124, 136
article 5; indefinite 16
attribute 2, 13, 79, 138
attributive 5, 7
axiom 25, 33-34, 36-37, 90, 113, 115, 121,
164-167,169,171-173,175-178,180
axiomatic principle 171
"be" 158
being 164
belief 157-160
calculus 187, 194; oflogic 182; symbolical
97-98, 103
categorical 108; assertion 42; logic of 153;
proposition 81,89,96-97, 100, 115;
syllogism 121
category 98, 100-101, 111, 115, 122, 151,
153; logical 99-100, 187; prime 122
class 2-3, 6, 10-12, 66--69, 71, 74, 82-83,
88, 116, 127-130, 143, 148-150, 153,
182; co-extensive 136; constituent of 17
coefficient 99-100, 187
combination 36-37, 44-45, 47, 54-55, 60,
70,87,107,112-113,131, 144, 185,
189-190, 192
comparison 54, 67--68, 130; medium of 25,
130
composition 58, 75-76, 78-80, 85-86, 88,
90, 93-94, 99-100; mediate and
immediate 78
comprehension 107, 184
concept 54-55, 57, 60--61,65,67--68, 74,
77-80,83-84,86,88, 104; intelligible 72;
logical 54; pictorial 70; privative 108;
regulative 111
conception 2-4, 6, 11, 34, 41, 43, 51--61,
64-66,69,73-74,76,82-83,87,89-90,
93, 105-107, 109, 112-115, 125,
127-128, 131-132, 142, 147-149,
158-160, 174, 184, 186; genesis of 56;
law of 92, 114, 122, 148; limit of 111;
privative 138-139, 141; simple and
complex 112
conceptualist 70-71

232
Index of Subjects
conclusion 20, 65, 95, 102, 115, 122, 127,
130, 151, 153; symbolic 189-190
conjunction 7,29,48,55, 72, 74, 131, 183;
adverbial 57; copulative 6
consciousness 34,51, 53-54, 62, 157, 179,
200; facts of 52-53, 70; internal 65, 106;
testimony of 53
consequent 30
consistency 160
consistent 161
constituent 17-18
contingent judgment 108
contradiction 160; law of 60; principle of
51-52,56,60,109,113-115,121-122,
141-142, 149-150, 153
contradictory 160-161
conventional 131
conversion 21, 121
copula 14-15, 81-82, 113, 121, 138, 150,
158-159
copular relation 160
decomposition 107
deduction 12, 20, 32, 36, 46, 73, 93, 123,
169, 172
deductive process 183
definition 5,33,55-57,59,169,172-173,
175, 183; indirect 58; nominal 33,84
denial 32, 108
description 15, 183-184
development 93, 97, 100, 187
wchotomy 17, 166
dictum de omni et nullo 121, 133-135, 137,
142
differential calculus 38-40, 43, 168, 193
dilemma, simple constructive 31
disjunctive, argument 36; assertion 42;
proposition 32, 198; syllogism 31
Divine Mind 201
division 17-18,55-56, 191-192, 195
"either" 29-30, 48
elimination 96-97, 100, 103, 150
emotion 157, 162, 179
empirical 53, 108
enthymeme 28, 178
equal 25, 82, 89
equality 34, 37, 42, 66, 83, 128, 144-145
equation 192; symbolic 189
"except" 57, 74, 183
excluded middle, formula of 142; law of 60;
principle of 51-52, 56, 109, 113-115,
121-122, 141-142, 149-150, 153
existence 10, 96, 100, Ill, 114-116, 122,
139, 149, 153, 157-158, 164-165, 174;
primary 164
existent, things 99
existing 193
experience 106
expression 62, 129, 182-183, 193
extension 68, 74, 107, 114, 138
false 14, 189
falsehood 29-30, 59, 153
figure 32,173-174,177-178
finite 201
form 1,4, 13-15, 18-21, 27-32, 35-37,40,
43-44,46,53,58,61-62,65,67,71-72,
74-75, 77, 79, 81-82, 84-85,89,95-98,
100, 103-104, 106, 109, 114-115, 119,
122, 126-133, 136, 139, 141-142, 145,
152-153,161,175-176,186-189;of
thought 182; of Truth 68; symbolical 95;
unintelligible 189; uninterpretable 43
formal 23, 41, 56, 67-68, 73, 82-83, 85-86,
88,91-92,94,96,98,107,111, 113-114,
116, 133, 142, 145, 149, 153, 183; and
material 68-69, 95, 186; law 3D, 68,
70-72,83,86-91, 94-95, 97,99,
103-104, 106, 110-111, 113-115, 120,
131, 145-148, 150, 153; procedure
147-149
freedom 162
function 40
general, and particular 128, 178
generalization 68
genus 107, 164-165; and differentia 82;
and species 66-69, 71, 115, 127-128,
133-134, 178
geometry 32, 37-38,41,66,167,169-178,
192, 196
God 158-159
grammar 187
hypostasis 68
hypothetical 31, 44, 108, 194; assertion 42;
logic of 153; proposition 30-31, 96, 100,
108, 198
idea 130, 201; abstract 54, 114
identical 184

Index of Subjects
233
identity 66, 81-83, 108, 113; formal 94,
104; principle of 51-52, 109, 121,
141-142, 149, 153, 169
"if' 30, 48
illative conversion 21
image 130
imaginary 192-193, 196
imagination 4, 12, 68, 106-107, 158,
174-175,200-201
impossibility 100; category of 102, 115
impossible, category of 151-153; thing
99-100
impression 3,70-71, 106
incompatible, logically 161
inconsistency 161
indefinite 108; (v) 108; aggregate 89;
category of 151-153; class 89; extent
75-76; function 43; operation 109; part
20; portion 60, 75, 82, 99; remainder 58,
98, 102, 152; result 43; term 15; thing
99-100
indefiniteness 100; category of 102
index law 194
individual 15, 66~7, 69, 107, 129
induction 36, 42, 123-124
inference 20,65,127,130, 133, 141,
150-151, 160-161; immediate 52;
syllogistic 24-25
infinite 39, 162,200; attribute 201; Being
201
infinity 8, 39,93,99, 201
insight, faculty of 129
integral calculus 37-38, 40
integral, definite 191
integration 40
intelligible 161
intension 74-75, 114, 138
intention, second 68
interpretability, condition of 72, 91, 183
interpretable 194
interpretation 8, 41, 43, 47, 72, 100, 106,
110-111, 130-131, 139, 148, 182-183,
186, 189-190, 192-193, 195; analogical
99; sphere of 95
introspection 125, 179
"is" 14,47,81, 113, 150, 158-160
judgment 51-53, 64-66, 69, 73, 81, 105,
108, 121-122, 125, 132, 136, 142, 186;
a priori 98, 122; necessary 108, 114-115
language 2, 11, 47, 62, 65, 70, 105, 110, 115,
124, 127, 129-131, 136, 152, 157, 168,
170, 182-183, 186, 199; of symbols 124;
symbolical 95, 126, 187
liberty 161
limit 38-39,111,174-175,200-201;
doctrine of 201
limitation 20, 102, 122, 153
logic I, 51-52, 66~7, 82, 88, 90, 95, 98,
104-105, 114, 120, 126-127, 132, 143,
178,181, 186, 188, 193-194; ars artium
66; as art 13-14, 105, 119; as noetic
science 72; as ostensive science 72; as
science 13, 65, 105, 119; calculus of 192,
198; deductive 42; formal 42, 54, 66~7,
74,81,83,96-97, 112; general 146;
higher 129, 143, 145; of class 129;
philosophy of 70, 121; practical 69; pure
110, 121; scholastic 82; science of 4,
52-53,64,66,68-71,73,119-120,
123-124, 129, 133, 141, 143, 185, 188;
scientific development of 186;
speculative 69; universal 51
logical relation 67
logician, formal 66
magnitude 10, 13, 32, 41, 44, 63, 66, 126,
177-178, 188-189
mathematical 63, 161; analysis 41; science
121, 168, 188
mathematician 197
mathematics 13,17,37,120,123,126,146,
167-171, 189; of Logic 45
meaning 20, 33,48,61, 70-72, 78, 86, 95,
97-99, 101, 113-114, 130-131, 138, 143,
149, 157-159, 171, 182, 186,191;
equivalence in 34; extent of 16, 18;
identical in 184; primary 76; real 22
mental, act 5, 76-78, 136, 157, 159;
addition 62, 75-77; attribution 79;
concept 71; discipline 64, 160; effort 198;
element 68; faculty 77; formula 182;
image 174-175; impression 70; law 148;
operation 5-6, 13, 34, 47, 57~0, 69, 71,
76, 113, 192; order 184; origin 71;
phenomena 71; philosophy 67; picture
68, 71, 106; procedure 71; process 59, 61,
67, 150, 158; regard 70; representation
54,68, 70; selection 58-59, 75, 78-79,
185; state 70, 163; subtraction 62, 76-78;
suggestion 128; type 54; world 65

234
Index of Subjects
mentally, combine 44, 127; distinguished
159; fix the regard 78; performing 17;
realise 56
metaphysic 46, 187
metaphysical 51,68, 76, 109, 116, 120, 125,
167-170
metaphysician 173
method 53, 60, 63~4, 73, 94, 96-98,
102-103, 120-123, 139, 141, 143, 148,
150-153, 170-171, 185, 188-189,
197-198; analytical 86, 95, 149;
cartesian 38; deductive 126; general 29,
46,52,54,96,115,166, 183, 199;inlo~c
132-133; mathematical 133; of algebra
38,144-146; of analysis 67, 96;
of composition 79; of demonstration 36;
of development 98, 100, 103-104; of dual
algebra 98; of elimination 103;
of indeterminate multipliers 43;
of induction 123; of proof 40; of synthesis
67,96; of the dual algebra 94; symbolical
94, 104, 113, 168; synthetical 86, 95, 149;
system of 53, 69
mind 2-4, 16,33-34, 70, 94, 111-112, 125,
128, 136, 157-158, 166, 174, 176, 179,
189, 201
multiplication 8-9, 37-38, 41, 87-88, 90,
94, 113, 144
name 15, 18, 33, 47, 96, 127, 130; common
2, 15, 44; contrary 3, 16-17; descriptive
15; general 2, 15,20,67,95; many
worded 15; opposite 17; proper 2,15-16,
183; unmeaning 160
necessary 34, 129, 145, 187, 201; form of
judgment 98; judgment 101
necessity 33, 163; mechanical 161
negation 32; category of 115
negative 59, 108, 121, 139; particle 16, 60;
premiss 135, 140; quality 24, 137;
subject 19; term 18
no individuals, concept of 79
noetic element 69
noeton 68
nominalist 70-71
non-existence 96, 100, 103, 114-116, 122,
149, 153; category of 102; of a class 92,
103
nonexistent thing 99
non-existent, category of 151-153
"not" 16, 47, 60
notation 86, 120, 138
nothing 10, 39,60, 79, 89, 92, 99-103, 111,
113-114, 183
nothingness 100
notion 47, 54, 68, 109; abstract 69, 71;
common 177; general 66, 86, 107;
scientific 67~8
noun 183, 186
number 13,36,38,41-42, 44, 54, 63, 66, 87,
116,120, 126,128, 143-144, 167, 175,
177, 180-182, 188-189
operation; definite 109; direct 3-4, 37,
107-108, 122; indefinite 109; inverse
3-4,37,45,57,59,74,107,109-110,
112, 122; law of 109; primary 112;
symbolical 191
"or" 29-30, 48
organic 33, 71, 131, 143
particular 128-129
possible 187
postulate 169, 172, 176-177
potentiality, category of 115
predicate, always particular 18
predication 81-83, 108
premiss 20, 130; major and minor 134; real
41; symbolic 41, 190
preposition 48, 57
principle, first 14, 51, 66, 180
probability 124, 197-199
pronoun, indefinite 82; relative 57
property 2, 11, 58, 82, 138, 159, 165, 172
proposition 1-2,4,12,14,18,56,65,81,83,
108, 121-122, 137, 149, 153, 157-158,
160, 192; conditional 30, 32; contrary 30;
elementary 138; general 127;
hypothetical 30; identical 82; inferred
65; inteni~ble 160, 200-201; necessary
14,97,99, 102, 115, 122, 141-142,
150-151, 153; numerically definite 108;
particular 20; primary 14-15, 29; real
159; reflex 29; secondary 29, 32;
self-contradictory 161; single 104;
trifling 108; uninteni~ble 160; universal
20; unmeaning 200; verbal 158-159
quality 13, 16, 106, 111, 114, 127, 159-160,
165; contrary 165-166
quantification of the predicate 82, 108, 137
quantity 42, 45, 48, 113, 177, 181, 192;
ima~nary 168; universal and particular
137

Index of Subjects
235
rational 128
real 161, 193
realist 71
reality 158-159, 173-174, 196
reason 47, 140,182
reasoning 1,4, 11-12, 14,20,32,52-53,
64-66, 69-70, 73, 83, 95, 108, 110-111,
115, 121, 124-125, 127-130, 132,
141-142, 146-147, 150, 165, 168,
170-171, 175, 179, 186, 192; analytical
95, 98, 108-109; art of 105; by signs 1,
13, 36; first philosophy of 94; formal 114;
fundamental law of 83; logical form
of 40; mathematical 13, 124; syllogistic
142; symbolic 41, 189; synthetical 95,
108
reductio ad absurdum 35, 135
reduction 97
removal 107
representation 45, 62, 69, 106, 129;
abstract 146; symbolical 86
scholastic 178
science 46, 53, 73, 110, 119, 123, 126, 136,
142-143, 149, 159-161, 166, 188, 201
segregation 113
self-consistent 160-161
self-contradictory 160-161
self-evidence 171
sematology 70
sensual image 107
sign 1, 13-14,47,54, 69-71, 106, 126,
129-132, 143, 145-146, 182
"some" 15-16, 82
sometimes 32
sorites 28, 41
space 13, 32, 38,66, 126, 173-178, 201
structure 78, 131, 136, 144, 201
subject, and object 179; and predicate 14;
and quality 55
substance 68, 116
substantive 5, 15,47,57,183, 186
substitution 106, 130, 186; direct 85; law of
87, 109; principle of 66--67, 84-86, 95,
101
substratum 116
subtraction 57,60,62,74-77, 86,88,
92-93, 107
sufficient reason, principle of 51-52, 121,
142
syllogism 23, 51-52, 73, 85, 130, 132-133,
135, 137-140, 150, 169, 178,182, 188;
constructive hypothetical 31; destructive
31; figure of 134; of pure thought 141;
rhetorical 178
symbol 7, 54, 86, 88, 124, 126, 183-184,
189; elective 7, 10, 44-45, 192-194;
general 36, 95; literal 47, 91, 114, 180,
182; of algebra 38; particular 36;
quantitative 192; verbal 58-59
synthesis 122
synthetical judgment 108
system 87-88, 122, 143, 147, 162; dual
92-93; elective 8, 10; logical 82, 91;
of Algebra 86; of dual Algebra 91-92;
of elective symbols 44-45; of Geometry
178; oflogic 91, 123, 186; of magnitude
10; of marks 144; of notation 86, 90, 93,
138; of number 8, 87; of numerical
magnitude 44; of ordinary Algebra 180;
of pure quantity 192; of reasoning 36,
171; of representation 187; of signs 11,
69-70, 126; of symbols 148; of thought
86; philosophical 64
term 14, 99, 121, 150, 158; affirmative 16;
extreme 23, 130, 139; general 127, 149;
middle 23, 130, 139; negative 16, 18;
particular 15-16, 18; privative 140;
quality of 16; quantity of 15-16; singular
16; universal 15-16, 18
theology 159-160; scientific 161
thought 47, 65,105,110, 125-127,
129-131, 136, 141-143, 145, 147, 153,
161, 167-168, 173, 175, 179, 186, 199;
category of 97; object of 65; principle
of 51; science of 105
time 38, 201
totality 100
transposition, law of 47
true 14, 41, 189; in the limit 201
truth 29-30, 52, 59, 68, 120, 128-129, 142,
144,153,163-164, In, 176-177, 179,
186, 200; a priori 124; axiomatic 161,
165; familiar 22; first 33; fonnal 142;
fundamental 177; general 127; material
62, 141; necessary 30, 33-34, 124, 128,
168, 178; primary 120, 167, 170;
scientific 161, 200; self-evident 33;
trifling 179; universal 36

236
Index of Subjects
understanding 157-159, 174, 187
uninterpretable 43-44, 183
unit 45
unity 44, 53, 99, 116, 142-143; speculative
169
universal 111, 129, 164; category of
151-153
universality, category of 115
universe 10, 16, 44, 89, 93, 99-103, 111,
113-114, 127, 143, 167, 183, 201;
material 38, 40, 125-126, 163, 182; of
discourse 4-5, 10, 12,47; of thought 138
unlimited, thing 100
valid 13, 52-54, 60, 73, 130, 132-133, 149,
177
validity 132-133, 182
verb 15, 48; substantive 48, 158
whole, and part 55, 121, 127, 131
whole, or unity 44
will 161; and emotion 179; freedom of 162
word 47, 54, 70, 72, 126, 160, 186
world 2; of experience 147; of things
146-147

