  
The Goal of Language Understanding
Chapter 2: Psycholinguistics and Neuroscience
John F. Sowa
VivoMind Research, LLC
1 July 2015

 
2
The Goal of Language Understanding
The Goal of Language Understanding
Outline:
1. Problems and challenges   (goal.pdf)
2. Psycholinguistics and neuroscience
3. Semantics of natural languages   (goal3.pdf)
4. Wittgenstein’s early and later philosophy  (goal4.pdf)
5. Dynamics of language and reasoning   (goal5.pdf)
6. Analogy and case-based reasoning   (goal 6.pdf)
7. Learning by reading   (goal7.pdf)
Each chapter is in a separate file.  Later chapters make occasional references to 
earlier chapters, but they can be read independently.

 
3
2. Psycholinguistics and Neuroscience  
2. Psycholinguistics and Neuroscience  
Language is a late development in evolutionary time.
Systems of perception and action were highly developed long 
before some early hominin began to talk.
People and higher mammals use the mechanisms of perception 
and action as the basis for mental models and reasoning.
Language understanding and generation use those mechanisms.
Logic and mathematics are based on abstractions from language 
that use the same systems of perception and action.
Language can express logic, but it does not depend on logic.
Language is situated, embodied, distributed, and dynamic.

Controversies About Language
Ten linguists and philosophers who span the range of ideas:
● Noam Chomsky:  Generative syntax is the essence of language.
● Roman Jakobson:  Syntax without semantics is meaningless.
● Michael Halliday:  Language is social semiotic.
● Jerry Fodor:  Speech is generated from a language of thought.
● Sydney Lamb:  Knowledge consists of connections in a network.
● Richard Montague:  Any natural logic must be a formal logic.
● Ludwig Wittgenstein:  Games (Sprachspiele) are the foundation.
● Yorick Wilks:  Wittgenstein was right, but more detail is needed.
● Roger Schank:  Background knowledge is essential.
● Fred Jelinek:  Statistics is key to all language processing.
Can their insights tell us what kind of reasoning is natural?
What combinations would be the most natural?   Computable?

 
5
Classical Natural Language Processing
Assumptions about language that led to this approach:
● Frege’s principle of compositionality.
● Chomsky’s distinction between competence and performance.
● Tarski-Kripke-Montague’s model-theoretic semantics.
● A formal ontology that defines all word senses.
● A linear flow of information from phonology to semantics.
This method can “understand” a restricted or controlled 
natural language, but not the usual unrestricted language.

 
6
Psycholinguistic Studies
Everything at every stage can and does interact with everything else.
Informal methods that use background knowledge at an early stage 
have been promising (Schank 1982, Wilks & Fass 1992).
But they require better tools for acquiring and using knowledge.

 
7
Symmetry Hypothesis
This diagram, adapted from a version by Jackendoff (2002), 
connects all language modules, but it is too symmetric.
Neural evidence shows that speech understanding and generation 
use different mechanisms in different areas of the brain.

 
8
Evolutionary View of Cognition
All human cognition except language is at the chimpanzee level.
Language is supported by and integrated with that level.
The symbols of language are mapped to and from the world by 
ape-like mechanisms of perception, action, and feelings.

 
9
Origins of Language
When did humans begin to use language?
Note the sudden jump in brain size about 2 million years ago:
● Early hominins began to walk on two legs around 6 mya.
● But from 6 mya to 3 mya, there was almost no change in brain size.
● At 2 mya, a sudden jump occurred with Homo habilis.  Why?
Terrence Deacon:  “co-evolution of language and the brain.”

 
10
Evolution of the Vocal Tract
The human vocal tract changed as language developed. *
● Conscious control of breathing rate and vocalization.
● Vowels:  Better control of resonant cavities and frequencies.
● Consonants:  More flexible tongue and more options for control.
● But greater danger of choking on food and drink ‒ strong evidence                 
  that the benefits of language are worth the risk.
* See Verhaegen & Vaneechoutte, Speech origins:  a comparative approach.

 
Evolution of Communication
Chimpanzees, bonobos, gorillas, and orangutans communicate 
complex information in social interactions.
● Their gestures are more expressive than their vocalization.
● They can coordinate social activities in hunting and fighting.
● They often understanding human “body language” better than              
  humans – because they are not misled by the spoken language.
● And they can use subsets of human sign language to communicate     
  with humans and among themselves.
Unlike discrete human words, ape vocalizations are graded – 
they are continuously variable in tone, volume, and frequency.
● But apes can correctly interpret the topic and referents from the           
  vocal sounds alone, even when they can’t see the participants.
Empathy and shared intentionality are critical for understanding.
● Social skills evolve with advances in cognitive ability.
References:  Frans de Wall (2005), de Wall & Pollick (2012), Greenspan & Shanker (2004), 
Katie Slocombe (2012), Michael Tomasello (2008), Tomasello & Carpenter (2007). 

 
12
The Human Brain
The human cerebral cortex is huge. *
But the brain stem and cerebellum are similar to a chimpanzee’s.
The increase in the size of the cerebral cortex results from “the       
co-evolution of language and the brain” (Deacon 1997).
* For more detail on neuropsychology, see http://webspace.ship.edu/cgboer/genpsy.html 

 
13
Association Areas in the Cortex
The shaded areas are the primary projection areas for sensory 
and motor neurons.  Association areas are in white.
The relative size of the association areas and the complexity of 
the interconnections are strongly correlated with intelligence.
Diagram adapted from Lamb (2011).

 
14
Cognitive Complexity
Each level inherits the abilities of all previous levels.
The fish already has complex perception and action.
Mammals have a much larger cerebral cortex.
Larger association areas and more complex connections 
support more complex thought and methods of reasoning.

 
15
Language Areas in the Left Hemisphere
Broca’s area and Wernicke’s area are critical for language.
Lesions in Broca’s area disrupt syntax in speech generation.
Lesions in Wernicke’s area disrupt language understanding.
Diagram adapted from Wikipedia.

 
16
A Picture for Diagnosing Aphasia
This is a diagnostic test picture shown to patients with aphasia.
The patients’ descriptions of the scene help diagnose the effects 
of lesions caused by wound, stroke, tumor, or infection.
Diagram adapted from Goodglass & Kaplan (1972).

 
17
Lesions in Broca’s Area
Patients can understand language, they can respond correctly  
to questions and requests, but their speech has no syntax.
The patient B.L. is unable to describe the picture, but he can 
correctly express nouns in short answers to questions:
B.L.:  Wife is dry dishes.  Water down!  Oh boy!  Okay Awright.  Okay …   
Cookie is down... fall, and girl, okay, girl... boy... um...
Examiner:  What is the boy doing?
B.L.:  Cookie is... um... catch
Examiner:  Who is getting the cookies?
B.L.:  Girl, girl
Examiner:  Who is about to fall down?
B.L.:  Boy... fall down!
Patients with Broca’s aphasia also have some impairment in 
understanding complex syntax – especially with verbs.

 
18
Lesions in Wernicke’s Area
Patients have difficulty understanding language, their speech is 
wrong, irrelevant, or nonsensical, but it has syntactic structure.
The patient H.W. is trying to describe the same picture as B.L.:
H.W.:  First of all this is falling down, just about, and is gonna fall down and 
they're both getting something to eat... but the trouble is this is gonna let go 
and they're both gonna fall down... but already then... I can't see well enough 
but I believe that either she or will have some food that's not good for you 
and she's to get some for her too... 
Examiner: That's not real clear.   What do you think she's doing?
H.W.: But, oh, I know.  She's waiting for this!
Examiner: No, I meant right here with her hand, right where you can't figure 
out what she's doing with that hand.
H.W.: Oh, I think she's saying I want two or three, I want one, I think, I think 
so, and so, so she's gonna get this one for sure it's gonna fall down there or 
whatever, she's gonna get that one and, and there...
Note almost no nouns, but many verbs and pronouns.

 
19
Conduction Aphasia
A disruption or break in the neural pathway between the areas.
With Wernicke’s area intact, patients can understand language.
With Broca’s area intact, their speech has fluent syntax.
But the disruption of information transmission causes patients 
to make occasional errors reminiscent of Wernicke’s aphasia.
A German patient, asked to repeat the word Rosenkranz, shows 
the characteristic difficulty in repeating what he hears:
“rosenbrau... rosenbrauch... rosengrau... bro... grosenbrau... grossenlau... 
rosenkranz... kranz... rosenkranz”
Patients can hear what they say and try to correct their errors;  
one patient found an alternate pathway by spelling the word:
“I came into the hospital for some tecs... some secs... some... tesk...             
 T E S... tests.”

 
20
Motor Control Areas for Producing Speech
Broca’s area overlaps Broadmann’s areas BA44 and BA45.
BA44:  active in controlling the mouth for speech and eating.
BA45:  active in both spoken and signed languages.
BA47:  time-ordered patterns in speech, music, and gestures.
See MacNeilage (2008), Horwitz et al. (2003), Levitin (2012), Abrams et al. (2013).

 
21
Spoken and Signed Language
The same neural mechanisms are used to produce and interpret 
spoken and signed languages.  (Petitto 2005) *
Studies of bilingual infants of parents with different languages:
● All pairs of four languages:  English, French, American Sign                  
  Language (ASL), and Langue des Signes Québécoise (LSQ). 
● Monolingual and bilingual babies go through the same stages and       
  at the same ages for both spoken and signed languages.
● Hearing babies born to profoundly deaf parents babble with their         
  hands, but not vocally.
● Babies bilingual in a spoken and a signed language babble in both      
  modalities – vocally and with their hands.
● And they express themselves with equal fluency in their spoken and    
  signed language at every stage of development.
Petitto’s conclusion:  Any hypothesis about a Language 
Acquisition Device (LAD) must be independent of modality.
* For publications by Laura-Ann Petitto, see http://petitto.net/pubs/published/ 

 
22
American Sign Language
The order of signs in ASL is similar to English word order.
But many syntactic features are absent; others are different.
Diagram adapted from Lou Fant (1983) The American Sign Language Phrase Boook.

 
23
Spatio-Temporal Syntax
Signed and spoken languages have a time-ordered sequence. 
But signed languages can also take advantage of 3-D space:
● For anything visible, pointing serves the role of pronouns.
● But references to people and things that left the scene are also             
  possible by pointing to where they had been.
● The signer can also introduce new characters and things, place them  
   in fixed locations in the air, and refer to them by pointing.
● For spatial relations, signing is more “natural” than spoken language.
Observation:  The index finger is the most natural indexical.
Some theoretical questions:
● Must a language of thought include geometry of the environment?
● If so, should it still be called a “language” of thought?
● A better term might be “cognitive map” or “mental model.”

 
24
Arcuate Fasciculus
The arcuate fasciculus is a bundle of fibers that connect 
Broca’s area and Wernicke’s area in the human brain.
The corresponding (homologous) connections in the 
chimpanzee and macaque brains are simpler and sparser.
Diagram adapted from Lamb (2011).

 
25
Brain Stem
The cerebral cortex is essential for all 
complex reasoning and language.
The cerebellum learns and controls fine 
tuned, but automatically executed skills.
But the brain stem controls all basic 
functions necessary for maintaining life.
It also integrates all inputs and outputs   
to and from the cerebral cortex.
The superior colliculus integrates vision 
with eye movements and head position.
It also relates vision to the auditory inputs 
processed by the inferior colliculus.
A stable, panoramic image in the visual cortex is assembled from 
the fragmentary glimpses at every motion of the head and eyes.
Diagram adapted from Wikipedia, Gray719.png

 
26
Basal Ganglia
At the center of the brain, the basal ganglia support the dynamic 
processes in conscious action, cognition, and language.
If Broca’s area or Wernicke’s area is damaged, other areas of the 
cortex can learn to perform all or most of the same functions.
But damage to the basal ganglia cannot be repaired. 
Diagram adapted from Wikipedia, Basal_Ganglia_and_Related_Structure.svg.

 
27
The Visual System
Rich connections between the brain stem and the visual cortex.
They relate vision to other sensory and motor modalities.
Even people who are blind from birth use the visual cortex to maintain 
“views” of their body and its relationship to the environment.

 
28
Corpus Callosum
A thick bundle of fibers that connect the left and right hemispheres.
Each area of LH has a direct connection to its mirror image in RH.
The connections relate and integrate operations in both hemispheres.
Diagram from Wikipedia, Gray720.png

 
29
Angular Gyrus
A cross-modal hub for all cognition (in the parietal lobe, BA 39). *
● Relates percepts to concepts, reasoning, calculation, and action.
● Involved in goal-directed reasoning, planning, and execution. **
● Critical for attention, intention, motivation, and social relationships.
* Seghier (2013).   ** Zwosta, Ruge, Wolfensteller (2015).   Diagram from Wikipedia.

 
30
Role of Right Hemisphere in Language
Aspects for which RH is more active than LH:
●Grouping members of the same category:  table, bed, sofa. 
●Recognizing metaphors and polysemy:  foot as body part vs. foot as 
unit of measure.
In Japanese subjects,
●RH is better at reading kanji (Chinese characters).
●LH is better at reading kana (syllabic symbols). 
Coarse-grained vs. fine-grained encoding:
●RH is better at coarse encodings for a broad range of patterns. 
●LH is better at fine-grained encodings for precise distinctions.
●Precision is necessary for phonology, morphology, and logic.
But RH can partially compensate for some lesions in LH.
For the complex phenomena observed with “split-brain” patients, see  
http://www.nature.com/news/the-split-brain-a-tale-of-two-halves-1.10213 

 
31
Action and Perception
Frontal lobes control action, process, sequence, and planning:
● Contain the primary projection areas for the motor neurons,
● Control reasoning about the contents in all other lobes,
● Use Broca’s area to generate spoken, signed, and written language.
Occipital lobes recognize and generate visual images:
● Contain the primary projection areas for vision,
● Maintain a panoramic view of the current situation,
● Create mental models under the control of the frontal lobes.
Temporal lobes recognize sounds and relate them to words:
● Contain the auditory projection areas and Wernicke’s area, 
● Relate nouns to objects recognized by the sensory areas.
 Parietal lobes integrate information from all sources:
● Contain cognitive maps, frames, or schemata,
● Relate different sensory modalities – e.g., hand-eye coordination,
● Essential for mathematical reasoning.

 
32
Frontal Lobes
Control conscious attention, reasoning, and action:
● Projection areas for motor neurons.
● Motor schemata for patterns of actions.
● Direct search and attention to relevant information.
Inferior frontal junction (IFJ):
● Supports short-term working memory.
● Directs attention to specific categories of objects. *
Conscious vs automatic responses:
● Frontal lobes control complex novel actions.
● Cerebellum controls the details of precise, highly trained procedures   
  in gymnastics, musical performance, and daily life.
● For routine operations, the brain stem and cerebellum can operate       
  without conscious control.
* See http://newsoffice.mit.edu/2014/how-brain-pays-attention 

 
33
Symbols, Chunks, and Serial Order
Zoosemiotics:  All animals recognize and respond to signs:
● Icons (images), indexes (links), symbols (habits and associations).
● Objection:  a “homunculus” would be needed to decode symbols.
● Peirce’s hypothesis:  all sign tokens are perceived in the same way.
● A symbol has a perceptible image, which is linked to association areas     
  of the brain by the same kinds of mechanisms as any other image.
Chunks, maps, groups, schemata, and hierarchies:
● Tolman (1948):  “Cognitive maps in rats and men.”
● Perceptual and behavioral patterns form chunks of arbitrary size.
● Miller (1956):  Short-term memory holds about seven chunks.
Time-dependent serial order in all animal behavior:
● Order in walking, flying, hunting, feeding, courting, and nest building.
● Lashley (1951):  Action schemata instead of stimulus-response chains.
● Rhythm seems to be controlled by LH and melody by RH, but the neural    
  mechanisms and interconnections are poorly understood.

 
Areas Involved in Language Processing
Many areas of the brain are involved in language and reasoning:
● Nouns and adjectives are represented in the temporal lobe.
● Frames, maps, and semantic schemata are in the parietal lobe.
● Verb patterns are closer to the motor areas of the frontal lobe.
● Reasoning is controlled by the frontal lobes, but involves all other lobes.

 
Integrated Processing
Different areas of the brain are specialized for different tasks.
But all parts work together in all complex processes: *
● Brain stem relates, organizes, and transmits inputs and outputs to          
  and from the cerebral cortex.
● Cerebellum controls the details of actions and procedures.
● Projection areas of the cortex interpret sensory patterns.
● Parietal lobes relate multiple modalities in concepts and maps.
● For language, the circuit that connects Broca’s area, Wernicke’s area,     
  and Geschwind’s area (inferior parietal cortex, BA 39 & 40) is critical.
● RH is more active than LH for intonation and emphasis (prosody).
● Frontal lobes control all time-ordered sequences, not just language:       
  reasoning, music, dancing, sports, and manual skills.
Mind and Hand (Mens et Manus) are intimately connected.
* Steinmann & Mulert (2012) Functional relevance of interhemispheric fiber tracts in speech processing.    
   Abrams et al. (2013) http://daniellevitin.com/levitinlab/articles/2013-Cereb-Cortex-Abrams-1703-14.pdf 

 
36
Neurocognitive Network for the Word 'fork'
Network of locations in the LH, adapted from Lamb (2011):
● C:     Concept of a fork in the parietal lobe links to all other areas.
● V:      Visual recognition in the temporal lobe links to the visual cortex.
● T:      Tactile feel of a fork in the somatosensory cortex.
● M:     Motor schemata for manipulating a fork in the motor area.
● PR:   Phonology for recognizing the word 'fork' in Wernicke’s area.
● PA:   Phonology for the sound /fork/ in the primary auditory cortex.
● PP:   Phonology for producing the articulation of /fork/ in Broca’s area.

 
37
Neurocognitive Networks
Every word has a concept node C in the parietal lobe.
C has links to PR, PA, and PP nodes for phonology.
For nouns, C links to a node in the temporal lobe.
● For a word such as 'fork', the node V has links to the occipital lobes,         
  which have visual percepts and patterns for recognizing the object.
● Nouns that refer to sounds have links to auditory patterns.
For verbs, the node C has a link to the frontal lobes.
● The verb 'bite' links to motor schemata for the mouth.
● The verb 'kick' links to motor schemata for the legs and feet.
Abstract terms are based on metaphors:
● The stock market goes up or down.
● Justice is served or thwarted.
● Hydrogen plus oxygen yields water.
● Schemata for astract concepts are derived from concrete schemata.

 
38
Information Flow in Speech Generation
Information from multiple areas is assembled in Broca’s area.
But there is no “language of thought” prior to Broca’s area.
Diagram adapted from MacNeilage (2008).  The colors are keyed to the brain areas. 

 
39
Localization and Distribution
Is knowledge in the brain localized or distributed?
● Memories can survive damage to large parts of the brain.
● Neurons can die without destroying a concept or association.
● But most areas of the brain are highly specialized.
Lamb’s hypothesis: *
● Each node is a column in the cortex with about 100 neurons. **
● If one neuron is lost, some associations may be lost, but other          
  neurons in the column can recover most or all of the function.
● Neighboring columns represent related concepts that can recover     
  many of the associations, even if an entire column is lost.
● The complete information for a concept, including words and            
  images, is distributed in multiple nodes across both hemispheres.
● Even damage to a large area of the brain won’t destroy all the            
  information associated with the concept.
* For a review, see http://www.mq.edu.au/pubstatic/public/download/?id=42590                             
** For more detail, see DeFelipe, Markram, & Rockland (2012) The neocortical column and 
http://www.physics.drexel.edu/~ccruz/publications/2005_Cruz_JNM_Monkeys.pdf 

 
Hub and Spoke Model
Similar to Lamb’s neurocognitive networks:
● Spokes are dedicated to specific sensory-motor modalities.
● Hubs relate deeper conceptual patterns to all modalities.
● Any system with multiple hubs is a network.
Evidence concerning the anterior temporal lobes (ATLs): *
● In monkeys, ATLs are active when learning associations.
● In humans, semantic dementia (SD) is caused by atrophy of ATLs.
● SD patients have deficits in learning and using semantic patterns.
Comparison with neurocognitive networks:
● Lamb assumed concept hubs in the parietal lobe.
● But the left temporal lobe has hubs for nouns and adjectives.
● A network can have many kinds of hubs and spokes.
● Various aspects of a concept can be distributed among them.
* Hoffmann, Evans, & Ralph (2013) http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010945213002517 

 
41
Situated Simulation
Neural and psychological research by Lawrence Barsalou: *
● Mental simulation is the re-enactment of perceptual, motor and                   
  introspective states acquired during experience.
● Unconscious re-enactments occur during memory and reasoning.
● Conscious re-enactments are usually called mental imagery.
Cognition is grounded in perception, action, and internal states.
● Simulations can re-enact social interactions in situations.
● Simulated imagery can stimulate the same emotions as perception.
Mirror neurons promote learning and social understanding:
● The neurons used in performing an action are also activated in seeing       
  another person perform the same action.
● Simulations in motor and emotional systems are critical to empathy,          
  social understanding, and successful cooperation.
* See http://www.psychology.emory.edu/cognition/barsalou/onlinepapers.html 

 
42
Mental Maps, Images, and Models 
Quotation by the neuroscientist Antonio Damasio (2010):
“The distinctive feature of brains such as the one we own is their 
uncanny ability to create maps...  But when brains make maps, they  
are also creating images, the main currency of our minds.  Ultimately 
consciousness allows us to experience maps as images, to  
manipulate those images, and to apply reasoning to them.”
The maps and images form mental models of the real world or  
of the imaginary worlds in our hopes, fears, plans, and desires.
Words and phrases of language can be generated from them.
They provide a “model theoretic” semantics for language that 
uses perception and action for testing models against reality.
Like Tarski’s models, they define the criteria for truth, but they 
are flexible, dynamic, and situated in the daily drama of life.

 
43
Feelings and Emotions
Damasio and Carvalho (2013),
● “Feelings are mental experiences of body states.”
● “They signify physiological need, tissue injury, optimal function,            
    threats to the organism, or specific social interactions.”
● “Feelings constitute a crucial component of the mechanisms of life       
    regulation, from simple to complex.”
● “Their neural substrates can be found at all levels of the nervous           
     system, from individual neurons to subcortical nuclei and cortical       
    regions.”
Damasio (2014), *
● “I’m ready to give the very teeny brain of an insect – provided it has      
    the possibility of representing its body states – the possibility of          
    having feelings.”
● “Of course, what flies don’t have is all the intellect around those            
    feelings that could make use of them:  to found a religious order,         
    or develop an art form, or write a poem.”
* Interview,  http://www.technologyreview.com/qa/528151/the-importance-of-feelings/ 

 
44
Consciousness
Damasio (2010) proposed a 3-level theory of consciousness.
The foundation is a protoself maintained by the brain stem:
● Brain stem integrates and relates all sensory inputs and motor outputs.
● For a frog, the superior colliculus is the primary control center for                
  jumping on a lily pad and catching flies.
● For a person talking on a cell phone, the superior colliculus can bypass     
  the cortex and enable the cerebellum to control walking without thinking.
The core self integrates the protoself with the body image:
● All sensory and motor areas process information about the body.
● An infant learns to relate the body to images of the self and others.
● The core self is the protoself intimately aligned with the body image.
The autobiographical self can think and talk about the core self:
● Contains all the thoughts and memories about the self throughout a            
  lifetime – what people call their mind.
● Language casts the self as the protagonist of a narrative.

 
45
Signatures of Consciousness
Dehaene (2014) * clarified the role of introspection:
● He agrees with the behaviorists that people cannot perceive the inner        
  workings of their own brains.
● But their introspective reports are data about their experiences.
● Those reports enable neuroscientists to interpret the correlated patterns   
  of neural activity that they observe in brain scans.
● He calls those patterns signatures of consciousness.
● “These signatures are remarkably stable and can be observed in a great   
   variety of visual, auditory, tactile, and cognitive stimulations.”   (p. 13)
Example:  signatures for numbers and computation:
● Mathematicians treat numbers and arithmetic as a unified system.
● But people learn and use numbers in a variety of ways with different          
  associations:  verbal, procedural, magnitude, spatial, and temporal.
● Brain scans and brain lesions show that the signatures for different           
  ways of using numbers are located in different areas.
* Stanislas Dehaene (2014) Consciousness and the Brain, New York: Viking. 

 
Consciousness in the Universe
Continuity from physical to biological to mental processes:
● Logicians Peirce and Whitehead claimed a continuity from physical      
  processes to living things to the most sophisticated ways of thinking.
● Peirce maintained that semiosis – the generation and interpretation     
  of signs is prior to and essential for life.
● Whitehead maintained that precursors of “feelings” and “occasions     
  of experience” occur in physical processes.
Penrose and Hameroff * relate their Orch OR events to
● Whitehead’s occasions of experience,
● Gamma synchrony of EEG waves at 30 to 90 Hz,
● Buddhist “conscious moments” estimated at 75Hz,
● Chinese Buddhist “thoughts” estimated at 50Hz.
These are highly speculative, but testable hypotheses.
* Penrose & Hameroff (2011) http://journalofcosmology.com/Consciousness160.html         
Hameroff & Penrose (2014) http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1571064513001188 

 
47
Basis for Cognitive Architectures
Neurocognitive networks are not a “language of thought”:
● They link nodes in the sensory, motor, and association areas.
● Some nodes are associated with images, sounds, feelings, and actions.
● Other nodes and patterns of nodes, which may be called concepts and         
  schemata, have indirect links to the sensory and motor nodes.
● Some of those nodes and patterns are associated with language.
● But they don’t form a language-like representation.    
Learning is a process of modifying links and forming patterns:
● The basic mechanisms form, strengthen, weaken, and inhibit links.
● The resulting patterns can be mapped to images and to language. 
Mental models determine the semantics of language and thought:
● Frontal lobes are actively involved in generating mental imagery.
● But the images themselves are located in the primary sensory areas.
● Words and sentences map to and from images and sequences of images.
● Perception and action relate the images to the world.

 
48
Boyd’s OODA Loop  
John Boyd drew a four-step diagram for training    
fighter pilots to observe and respond rapidly.
The first two steps – Observe and Orient –  involve      
the occipital, parietal, and temporal lobes.
The next two steps – Decide and Act – involve the    
frontal lobes for reasoning and motor control.
The four steps and the associated brain areas:
1. Observe:  Visual input goes to the primary visual cortex (occipital             
    lobes), but object recognition and naming involves the temporal lobes.
2. Orient:  Parietal cortex relates vision and touch in “cognitive maps.”
3. Decide:  Reasoning is under the control of the frontal lobes, but other      
    lobes are also involved.
4. Act:  “Action schemata” are patterns in the premotor cortex.  Signals       
    from the primary motor cortex go to the muscles.
Each step can be traversed in milliseconds for rapid response.
Language and logic would be too slow to control this kind of reasoning.

 
49
Extended OODA Loop  
Over the years, Boyd added more detail to the OODA Loop.
He applied it to decision-making processes of any kind.
Long-term cycles may include many cycles within cycles.
Diagram adapted from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OODA_loop

 
50
Albus Cognitive Architecture
Colors in the diagram are keyed to the colors in the drawing of the brain.
The neural locations and operations are consistent with the OODA loop.
See James Albus (2010), http://www.james-albus.org/docs/ModelofComputation.pdf 

 
Albus Cognitive Architecture
● Two tightly integrated hierarchies support the cognitive cycle.
● But much more research is necessary to understand all the boxes.
Diagram from Figure 6 of  http://www.james-albus.org/docs/ModelofComputation.pdf 

 
52
Neural Theory of Language (NTL)
A cognitive architecture that relates language to neuroscience:
● The mind is inherently embodied.
● Thought is mostly unconscious.
● Abstract concepts are largely metaphorical.
● Construction grammars relate neural patterns to language patterns. 
References:
The NTL project at UC Berkeley:  https://ntl.icsi.berkeley.edu/ntl/ 
George Lakoff & Mark Johnson (1999) Philosophy in the Flesh:  The Embodied Mind.
Jerome Feldman (2006) From Molecule to Metaphor:  A Neural Theory of Language.
A review of Philosophy in the Flesh:  http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/lakoff.htm 

 
53
Learning:  Deep, Active, and Cognitive
Geoffrey Hinton, a leader in the development of artificial neural 
nets, showed that multiple levels of nets are better. *
● Nets at the early levels learn low-level features.
● Later levels learn combinations of the lower-level features.
● The multilevel version that he called deep learning can learn complex        
  patterns more quickly and accurately than a single, larger net. 
Other researchers claim that active learning is better. **
● Different aspects of a pattern are signficant for different purposes.
● Animals constantly shift their attention from one aspect to another.
● Active learning requires feedback from other cognitive processes. 
But pattern recognition is just one aspect of learning.
● Truly intelligent systems must support the full cognitive cycle.
● Learning and reasoning must be integrated with perception and action.
* http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~hinton/
** http://burrsettles.com/pub/settles.activelearning.pdf 

 
54
Simulating Language Understanding
People relate patterns in language to patterns in mental models.
Simulating exactly what people do is impossible today:
● Nobody knows exactly how the brain works.
● Even with a good theory of the brain, the total amount of detail would  
  overwhelm the fastest supercomputers.
● A faithful simulation would also require a detailed model of the body   
  with all its methods of perception, action, and feelings. 
But efficient approximations to human patterns are possible: 
● Graphs can specify good approximations to continuous models.
● They can serve as the logical notation for a dynamic model theory.
● And they can support a high-speed associative memory.
An engineering approach is influenced by, but is not identical to 
the cognitive organization and processing in the human brain.

 
55
What is Language Understanding?
Understanding a text in some language does not require a 
translation to a language of thought or a logical form.
Instead, it requires an interpreter – human or robot – to relate   
the text to his, her, or its context, knowledge, and goals:
● That process changes the interpreter’s background knowledge.
● But the kind of change depends critically on the context, goals,          
  and available knowledge. 
● No two interpreters understand a text in exactly the same way.
● With different contexts, goals, or knowledge, the same interpreter      
  may understand a text in different ways. 
The evidence of understanding is an appropriate response to  
a text by an interpreter in a given situation.
If a robot responds appropriately to a command, does it 
understand?  What if it explains how and why it responded?

 
Related Readings  
Future directions for semantic systems,
      http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/futures.pdf 
From existential graphs to conceptual graphs,
      http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/eg2cg.pdf 
Role of Logic and Ontology in Language and Reasoning,
      http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/rolelog.pdf 
Fads and Fallacies About Logic,
      http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/fflogic.pdf
Conceptual Graphs for Representing Conceptual Structures,
      http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/cg4cs.pdf
Peirce’s tutorial on existential graphs,
      http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/egtut.pdf 
ISO/IEC standard 24707 for Common Logic,
      http://standards.iso.org/ittf/PubliclyAvailableStandards/c039175_ISO_IEC_24707_2007(E).zip

 
References
For more information about the VivoMind software:
Majumdar, Arun K., John F. Sowa, & John Stewart (2008) Pursuing the goal of language understanding,  
http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/pursuing.pdf
Majumdar, Arun K., & John F. Sowa (2009) Two paradigms are better than one and multiple paradigms are 
even better,   http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/paradigm.pdf   
Sowa, John F. (2002) Architectures for intelligent systems,  http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/arch.htm 
Sowa, John F., & Arun K. Majumdar (2003) Analogical reasoning,  http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/analog.htm  
Sowa, John F. (2003) Laws, facts, and contexts, http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/laws.htm 
Sowa, John F. (2005) The challenge of knowledge soup, http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/challenge.pdf 
Sowa, John F. (2006) Worlds, models, and descriptions,  http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/worlds.pdf   
Sowa, John F. (2011) Cognitive architectures for conceptual structures,  http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/ca4cs.pdf 
Related references:
Johnson-Laird, Philip N. (2002) Peirce, logic diagrams, and the elementary processes of reasoning,    
Thinking and Reasoning 8:2, 69-95.  http://mentalmodels.princeton.edu/papers/2002peirce.pdf 
Lamb, Sydney M. (2011) Neurolinguistics, Class Notes for Linguistics 411, Rice University.  
http://www.owlnet.rice.edu/~ling411
Harrison, Colin James (2000) PureNet: A modeling program for neurocognitive linguistics, 
http://scholarship.rice.edu/bitstream/handle/1911/19501/9969261.PDF 
For other references, see the combined bibliography for this site: 
http://www.jfsowa.com/bib.htm    

